SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES IN ACT.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Government Revenue Bond Delegation Authority Act of 1994''.
References in Act.--Whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of the District of Columbia Self-Government and Governmental Reorganization Act.
REVENUE BONDS AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS ON BEHALF OF DISTRICT ENTITIES AND OTHER QUALIFIED APPLICANTS.
Authority To Issue Bonds.--Section 490(a)(1) (D.C. Code, sec.
47-334(a)(1)) is amended by striking the first sentence and inserting the following: ``(a)(1) The Council may by act authorize the issuance of revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations (including refunding bonds, notes, or other obligations) to borrow money to finance, to refinance, or to assist in the financing or refinancing of undertakings by District agencies or authorities which operate pursuant to any enterprise fund and other qualified applicants in the areas of housing, health facilities, transit and utility facilities, sports and entertainment complexes, recreational facilities, parking facilities and convention facilities, elementary, secondary, college and university facilities, college and university programs which provide loans for the payment of educational expenses for or on behalf of students, pollution control facilities, and industrial and commercial development.''.
Payments on Bonds.--Section 490(a)(3) (D.C. Code, sec.
47- 334)(a)(3)) is amended by striking the second sentence and inserting the following: ``Subject to subsection (c) of this section, any act of the Council authorizing the issuance of such bond, note, or other obligation may provide for (A) the payments of such bond, note, or other obligation from any available revenues, including enterprise fund revenues, assets, property, or designated taxes and (B) the securing of such bond, note, or other obligation by the mortgage of real property or the creation of any security interest in available revenues, including enterprise fund revenues, assets, other property or designated taxes.''.
Authorization To Delegate Authority.--Section 490 (D.C. Code, sec.
47-334) is amended by adding a new subsection (h) as follows: ``(h)(1) The Council may delegate to any agency or instrumentality of the District government established by it (whether established before or after the date of the enactment of this subsection) the authority of the Council under subsection (a) of this section to issue taxable or tax-exempt revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations to borrow money to finance or assist in the financing of under-takings in the areas specified in subsection (a) of this section.
The Council shall define for the purposes of this subsection what undertakings constitute undertakings in the areas specified in subsection (a) of this section.
An agency or instrumentality of the District government may exercise authority delegated to it by the Council as described in the first sentence of this paragraph (whether such delegation is made before or after the date of the enactment of this subsection) only in accordance with this subsection.
Revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by an agency or instrumentality of the District government under a delegation of authority described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be issued by resolution of that entity and any such resolution shall not be considered to be an act of the Council.
The fourth sentence of section 446 shall not apply to-- ``(A) any amount (including the amount of any accrued interest or premium) obligated or expended from the proceeds of the sale of any revenue bond, note, or other obligation issued under paragraph (1) of this subsection, ``(B) any amount obligated or expended for the payment of the principal of, interest on, or any premium for any revenue bond, note, or other obligation issued under paragraph (1) of this subsection, and ``(C) any amount obligated or expended to secure any revenue bond, note, or other obligation issued under paragraph (1) of this subsection.''.
SECURITY INTERESTS IN CERTAIN DISTRICT REVENUES.
Authorization To Create Security Interest.--Section 467 (D.C. Code, sec.
47-326.1) is amended by adding a new subsection (a-1) thereto as follows: ``(a-1) Revenue bonds or other obligations issued by an agency or instrumentality of the District government pursuant to section 490(h) consistent with authority delegated by the Council, may create a security interest in certain District revenues, including but not limited to designated taxes, as additional security for the payment of bonds authorized by such act.''.
Obligation of the District.--Section 490(c) (D.C. Code, sec.
47-334(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Except to the extend permitted by section 467(a-1), any and all such revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations shall not be general obligations of the District and shall not be a pledge of or involve the faith and credit or taxing power of the District, and shall not constitute a debt of the District, and shall not constitute lending of the public credit for private undertakings as contained in section 602(a)(2).''.
Section 467(d) (D.C. Code, sec.
47-326.1(d)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) The fourth sentence of section 446 shall not apply to any obligation or expenditure of any District revenues to secure any general obligation bond under subsection (a) of this section or any revenue bond or other obligation under subsection (a-1) of this section.''.
The fourth sentence of section 446 (D.C. Code, sec.
47-304) is amended as follows: ``Except as provided in section 467(d), section 471(c), section 472(d)(2), section 483(d), and section 490(f), (g)(3), and (h)(3), no amount may be obligated or expended by any officer or employee of the District of Columbia government unless such amount has been approved by Act of Congress, and then only according to such Act.''.
EXCLUSION OF PLEDGED REVENUES.
Section 603(b)(3)(A) (D.C. Code, sec.
47-313(b)(3)(A)) is amended by inserting the phrase ``or securing'' after the word ``servicing''.
CONGRESSIONAL AUTHORITY AND REVIEW.
(1) Section 461 (D.C. Code, sec.
47-321) is amended by adding a new subsection (c) as follows: ``(c) Notwithstanding section 602(c)(1) (D.C. Code, sec.
233(c)(1)) any act of the Council authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds under subsection (a) of this section may take effect on the date of enactment of such act.''.
Section 471 (D.C. Code, sec.
47-327) is amended by adding a new subsection (b-1) as follows: ``(b-1) Notwithstanding section 602(c)(1) (D.C. Code, sec.
233(c)(1)), any act of the Council authorizing the issuance of general obligation notes under subsection (a) of this section may take effect on the date of the enactment of such act.''.
Section 490 (D.C. Code, sec.
47-334) is amended by adding a new subsection (i) as follows: ``(i) Notwithstanding section 602(c)(1) (D.C. Code, sec.
233(c)(1)), any act of the Council authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations under subsection (a) of this section may take effect on the date of enactment of such act.