This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Fair Treatment Act of 1995''.
The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
TITLE I--REGULATORY SIMPLIFICATION AND VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE Sec.
TITLE II--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS Sec.
Grace period for correction of violations of Environmental Protection Agency regulations.
Waiver of punitive fines for small entities.
TITLE I--REGULATORY SIMPLIFICATION AND VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE SEC.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Compliance guide.--The term ``compliance guide'' means a publication made by a covered agency under section 102(a).
Covered agency.--The term ``covered agency'' means any agency that, on the date of enactment of this Act, has promulgated any rule for which a regulatory flexibility analysis was required under section 605 of title 5, United States Code, and any other agency that promulgates any such rule, as of the date of enactment of this Act.
No action letter.--The term ``no action letter'' means a written determination from a covered agency stating that, based on a no action request submitted to the agency by a small entity, the agency will not take enforcement action against the small entity under the rules of the covered agency.
No action request.--The term ``no action request'' means a written correspondence submitted by a small entity to a covered agency-- (A) stating a set of facts; and (B) requesting a determination by the agency of whether the agency would take an enforcement action against the small entity based on such facts and the application of any rule of the agency.
Rule.--The term ``rule'' has the same meaning as in section 601(2) of title 5, United States Code.
Small entity.--The term ``small entity'' has the same meaning as in section 601(6) of title 5, United States Code.
Small business concern.--The term ``small business concern'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Small Business Act.
Voluntary self-audit.--The term ``voluntary self- audit'' means an audit, assessment, or review of any operation, practice, or condition of a small entity that-- (A) is initiated by an officer, employee, or agent of the small entity; and (B) is not required by law.
Compliance Guide.-- (1) Publication.--If a covered agency is required to prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis for a rule or group of related rules under section 603 of title 5, United States Code, the agency shall publish a compliance guide for such rule or group of related rules.
Requirements.--Each compliance guide published under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) contain a summary description of the rule or group of related rules; (B) contain a citation to the location of the complete rule or group of related rules in the Federal Register; (C) provide notice to small entities of the requirements under the rule or group of related rules and explain the actions that a small entity is required to take to comply with the rule or group of related rules; (D) be written in a manner to be understood by the average owner or manager of a small entity; and (E) be updated as required to reflect changes in the rule.
Dissemination.-- (1) In general.--Each covered agency shall establish a system to ensure that compliance guides required under this section are published, disseminated, and made easily available to small entities.
Small business development centers.--In carrying out this subsection, each covered agency shall provide sufficient numbers of compliance guides to small business development centers for distribution to small businesses concerns.
Limitation on Enforcement.-- (1) In general.--No covered agency may bring an enforcement action in any Federal court or in any Federal administrative proceeding against a small entity to enforce a rule for which a compliance guide is not published and disseminated by the covered agency as required under this section.
Effective dates.--This subsection shall take effect-- (A) 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act with regard to a final regulation in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) on the date of the enactment of this Act with regard to a regulation that takes effect as a final regulation after such date of enactment.
Application.--This section applies to all covered agencies, except-- (1) the Federal Trade Commission; (2) the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; and (3) the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Issuance of No Action Letter.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which a covered agency receives a no action request, the agency shall-- (1) make a determination regarding whether to grant the no action request, deny the no action request, or seek further information regarding the no action request; and (2) if the agency makes a determination under paragraph (1) to grant the no action request, issue a no action letter and transmit the letter to the requesting small entity.
Reliance on No Action Letter or Compliance Guide.--In any enforcement action brought by a covered agency in any Federal court or Federal administrative proceeding against a small entity, the small entity shall have a complete defense to any allegation of noncompliance or violation of a rule if the small entity affirmatively pleads and proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the act or omission constituting the alleged noncompliance or violation was taken in good faith with and in reliance on-- (1) a no action letter from that agency; or (2) a compliance guide of the applicable rule published by the agency under section 102(a).
Procedures.--Each agency shall establish voluntary self-audit procedures for small entities regulated by the agency.
Inadmissibility of Evidence and Limitation on Discovery.--If action to address a violation is taken not later than 180 days after the date on which a voluntary self-audit is concluded, the evidence described in subsection (c)-- (1) shall not be admissible, unless agreed to by the small entity, in any enforcement action brought against a small entity by a Federal agency in any Federal-- (A) court; or (B) administrative proceeding; and (2) may not be the subject of discovery in any enforcement action brought against a small entity by a Federal agency in any Federal-- (A) court; or (B) administrative proceeding.
Application.--For purposes of subsection (b), the evidence described in this subsection is-- (1) a voluntary self-audit made in good faith; and (2) any report, finding, opinion, or any other oral or written communication made in good faith relating to such voluntary self-audit.
Exceptions.--Subsection (b) shall not apply if-- (1) the act or omission that forms the basis of the enforcement action is a violation of criminal law; or (2) the voluntary self-audit or the report, finding, opinion, or other oral or written communication was prepared for the purpose of avoiding disclosure of information required for an investigative, administrative, or judicial proceeding that, at the time of preparation, was imminent or in progress.
TITLE II--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS SEC.
No covered agency shall establish or enforce agency personnel practices that reward agency employees, directly or indirectly, based on the number of contacts made with small entities in pursuit of enforcement actions or on the amount of fines levied against small entities to enforce agency regulations.
GRACE PERIOD FOR CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REGULATIONS.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), for violations of regulations identified on or after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall afford small entities 180 days after the date on which the violation is identified to correct such violation.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply-- (1) if the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency determines that there is an imminent risk to public health or worker safety; or (2) to a violation of a regulation for which criminal liability may be imposed.
WAIVER OF PUNITIVE FINES FOR SMALL ENTITIES.
Notwithstanding any other law, policy, or practice, a covered agency may waive all or part of a punitive fine that would otherwise be imposed on a small entity if-- (1) the fine is for a first time violation of a law or regulation; and (2) the small entity acts quickly and in good faith to correct the violation.