This Act may be cited as the ``Livestock Ownership Fairness Act of 2002''.
TITLE I--LIVESTOCK OWNERSHIP AND FEEDING PROHIBITION SEC.
PROHIBITION ON PACKERS OWNING OR FEEDING LIVESTOCK FOR EXTENDED PERIOD.
Prohibition; Exceptions.--The Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921, is amended by inserting after section 202 (7 United States Code 192) the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITION ON PACKERS OWNING OR FEEDING LIVESTOCK FOR EXTENDED PERIOD.
Prohibition.--It shall be unlawful for any packer with respect to livestock, meats, meat food products, or livestock products in unmanufactured form to own or feed livestock intended for slaughter for more than 14 days prior to slaughter.
The prohibition applies regardless of whether the ownership or feeding of the livestock is by the packer directly or through a subsidiary or an arrangement described in subsection (b).
Covered Arrangements.--The arrangements referred to in subsection (a) mean arrangements that give a packer operational, managerial, or supervisory control over livestock or over a farming operation that produces livestock to such an extent that the actual producer of the livestock is no longer materially participating (as such term is defined in section 469(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) in the management of the farming operation with respect to the production of the livestock.
Exceptions.--Subsection (a) does not apply to the following: ``(1) Forward contracting arrangements, executed in advance of slaughter and used by packers for the purchase of livestock, so long as the producer retains operational, managerial, and supervisory control over the livestock until their delivery for slaughter and over the farming operation that produces the livestock.
A cooperative, if a majority of the ownership interest in the cooperative is held by active cooperative members that-- ``(A) own or feed livestock; and ``(B) provide the livestock to the cooperative for slaughter.
A packer that is owned or controlled by producers of a type of livestock, if, during the previous calendar year, the packer slaughtered less than 2 percent of the total number of that type of livestock slaughtered in the United States.
Conspiracy.--It shall also be unlawful for any packer to conspire, combine, agree, or arrange with any other person to do, or aid or abet the doing of, any act made unlawful by subsection (a).''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), section 202A of the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921, as added by subsection (a), takes effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Transition rules.--In the case of a packer that, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, owns or feeds livestock in violation of section 202A of the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921, the prohibitions in subsections (a) and (d) of such section shall apply to the packer-- (A) in the case of a packer of swine, beginning 540 days after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) in the case of a packer of any other type of livestock, beginning as soon as practicable, but not later than 180 days, after the date of the enactment of this Act, as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture.
TITLE II--AGRICULTURAL ANTITRUST PROVISIONS SEC.
Notice.--Whenever a person in the business of purchasing livestock, poultry, or a basic agricultural commodity for wholesale resale either unprocessed or processed, files a notification under section 7A of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 18a), such person shall file simultaneously with the Secretary a notice in accordance with rules issued by the Secretary, that such person has filed such notification.
Public Comments.--The Secretary shall-- (1) publish promptly in the Federal Register a copy of each notice received under subsection (a), (2) accept public comments on the proposed merger described in such notice, and (3) consider as part of the review required by subsection (c), such comments timely received.
Review.--Not later than 30 days after receiving a notice filed under subsection (a), the Secretary shall-- (1) review the proposed acquisition described in such notice; (2) determine-- (A) the probable effects such acquisition would have on the prices paid to producers of any livestock, poultry, or basic agricultural commodities who sell to, buy from, or bargain with 1 or more of the persons involved in the proposed acquisition; and (B) whether such acquisition would-- (i) result in significantly increased market power for any of such persons; and (ii) increase the potential for anticompetitive or predatory pricing conduct by any of such persons; (3) prepare a report containing-- (A) the detailed findings made by the Secretary as a result of such review and such determination; and (B) an economic analysis of the Secretary regarding whether such acquisition may substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly; and (4) transmit to the Office of Special Counsel for Agriculture, and shall publish in the Federal Register, simultaneously, a copy of such report.
SPECIAL COUNSEL FOR AGRICULTURE.
Establishment of Office.--The Attorney General shall establish in the Department of Justice an Office of Special Counsel for Agriculture that shall handle agricultural antitrust issues and related matters, as determined by the Attorney General.
Appointment.--The Special Counsel for Agriculture may be appointed by the Attorney General only after the expiration of the 30- day period beginning on the date the Attorney General publishes in the Federal Register the name of the individual proposed to be appointed and requests public comment with respect to the appointment of such individual.
For purposes of this title-- (1) the term ``antitrust laws'' has the meaning given such term in subsection (a) of the 1st section of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 12(a)), (2) the term ``basic agricultural commodity'' means corn, wheat, or soybeans, (3) the term ``livestock'' means cattle, sheep, goats, swine, or equine animals used for food or in the production of food, (4) the term ``person'' has the meaning given such term in subsection (a) of the 1st section of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 12(a)), (5) the term ``poultry'' means chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, or other domestic fowl used for food or in the production of food, and (6) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.