This Act may be cited as the ``Surviving Spouses and Dependents Outreach Enhancement and Veterans Casework Improvement Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Department of Veterans Affairs by law provides benefits not only to veterans of service in the Armed Forces but also to eligible surviving spouses and dependents of deceased veterans.
There are over 600,000 surviving spouses and dependents receiving dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) or death pensions from the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Presently, the Department of Veterans Affairs does not target this population with specific outreach efforts, nor does it provide program outreach coordinators designated at each regional office of the Department to assist this population and other survivors who may be eligible for benefits from the Department.
Approximately 1,600 veterans die daily, many survived by widows and dependents who may not be fully informed as to their eligibility for benefits under laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
There is no formal program for coordination of benefits for surviving spouses and dependents at any level within the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Due to insufficient outreach efforts, informational updates targeted specifically to surviving spouses and dependents are not provided.
Outreach efforts to provide information concerning changes in service-connection for disabilities presumed associated with exposure to herbicides and ionizing radiation and former prisoners of war have been insufficient to inform survivors of benefits to which they may now be entitled.
NATIONAL GOAL TO FULLY INFORM AND ASSIST SURVIVING SPOUSES AND DEPENDENTS REGARDING ELIGIBILITY FOR BENEFITS AND HEALTH CARE SERVICES.
National Goal.--Congress hereby declares it to be a national goal to fully inform surviving spouses and dependents regarding their eligibility for benefits and health care services under laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Cooperative Efforts Encouraged.--Congress hereby encourages all elements within the Department of Veterans Affairs and private and public sector entities (including veterans service organizations and veterans widows organizations) to work cooperatively to fully inform the surviving spouses and dependents of veterans regarding their eligibility for benefits and health care services under laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
REQUIREMENT FOR OUTREACH EFFORTS AND DEDICATED STAFF AT EACH REGIONAL OFFICE.
Findings.--Congress and the Department of Veterans Affairs have historically targeted certain specific populations for outreach efforts concerning benefits under laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Groups currently targeted for such outreach efforts and for which program outreach coordinators have been designated at each regional office of the Department of Veterans Affairs are the following: (1) Former prisoners of war.
Eligible Dependent Defined.--Paragraph (2) of section 7721(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(2) the term `eligible dependent' means a spouse, surviving spouse (whether or not remarried), child (regardless of age or marital status), or parent of a person who served in the active military, naval, or air service.''.
Improved Outreach Program.--(1) Subchapter II of chapter 77 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Outreach for eligible dependents ``(a) In carrying out this subchapter, the Secretary shall ensure that the needs of eligible dependents are fully addressed.
(1) In order to carry out subsection (a), the Secretary shall assign such employees of the Veterans Benefits Administration as the Secretary considers appropriate to conduct outreach programs and provide outreach services for eligible dependents.
In areas where the number of eligible dependents warrant doing so, the Secretary shall assign at least one employee in the Veterans Benefits Administration regional office to serve as a full-time coordinator of outreach programs and services for eligible dependents in that region.
Responsibilities of employees assigned to outreach functions under paragraph (1) shall include providing eligible dependents with (A) information about benefits under laws administered by the Secretary, (B) assistance in claims preparation and inquiry resolution, and (C) in the case of a dependent of a deceased veteran for whom necessary records are incomplete, assistance in obtaining such records and other necessary information concerning the veteran.
Whenever an eligible dependent first applies for any benefit under laws administered by the Secretary, the Secretary shall provide to the dependent information concerning eligibility for benefits and health care services under programs administered by the Secretary.
For purposes of this paragraph, a request for burial or related benefits, including an application for life insurance proceeds, shall be treated by the Secretary as an initial application for benefits.
(1) Information provided an eligible dependent under this section shall include information on how to apply for benefits for which the dependent may be eligible, including information about assistance available under subsection (b) and section 7722(d) of this title.
In the case of eligible dependents who are members of distinct beneficiary populations (such as survivors of deceased veterans), the Secretary shall ensure that information provided under this section includes specific information about benefits relating to that population.
For any geographic area in which there is a significant population of eligible dependents whose primary language is a language other than English, the Secretary shall make information provided under this subsection available to those dependents in the dominant language in that area (in addition to English).
Outreach services and assistance shall be provided for eligible dependents through the same means that are used for other specially targeted groups.
The Secretary shall ensure that the availability of outreach services and assistance for eligible dependents under this subchapter is made known through a variety of means, including the Internet, correspondence of the Department, announcements in veterans publications, announcements to the media, telephone directories, direct correspondence to congressional offices, military bases public affairs offices, military retiree affairs offices, and United States embassies.
The Secretary shall support the Department's periodic evaluation under section 527 of this title concerning the Department's efforts to address the needs of eligible dependents.
The Secretary shall submit to Congress an annual report on the programs of the Department addressing the information and assistance needs of eligible dependents.
The Secretary shall include in each such report the following: ``(1) Information about expenditures, costs, and workload under the program of the Department directed towards the information and assistance needs of eligible dependents.
Information about outreach efforts directed toward eligible dependents.
Information about emerging needs within the program that relate to other provisions of law, including section 7725 of this title with respect to language needs of eligible dependents.
Information as to the timeline for implementation of improvements to meet existing and emerging needs of eligible dependents in addition to those specified in this section.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7726 the following new item: ``7727.
Outreach for eligible dependents.