This Act may be cited as the ``Independence Hall Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Two hundred years ago, in 1793, George Washington was sworn in to his second term as President of the United States of America in the Senate chamber of Congress Hall in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; (2) For 150 years, the historic buildings in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, known as Congress Hall, the Old City Hall, and Independence Hall (which housed the Liberty Bell, the symbol of the heritage of free people in the United States) were under the occasional care of local government units.
Later, the Federal Government, through the National Park Service, assumed responsibility for the preservation and maintenance of these and other related historic sites for present and future generations of Americans.
In recent years, financial exigencies and the increased responsibilities of the National Park Service have prevented the Federal Government from meeting the capital needs of these historic sites.
The minting and issuance of a United States coin is an appropriate way to commemorate these historic buildings and to aid in funding their necessary maintenance and preservation.
One Dollar Silver Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 1,000,000 $1 coins, which shall weigh 26.73 grams, have a diameter of 1.500 inches, and shall contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of the coins issued under this Act shall be emblematic of the national shrines of liberty and shall show the Liberty Bell on one side and Independence Hall on the other side.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1994'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
The design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts.
As required by section 5135 of title 31, United States Code, the design shall also be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
ISSUANCE OF THE COINS.
Quality of Coins.--The coins authorized under this Act may be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Not more than 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period of Authority.--The coins authorized under this Act may be minted beginning 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act and for a period of not more than 1 year after such date.
SALE OF THE COINS.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins, and the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins authorized under this Act prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharge Required.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $7 per coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
No provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Nothing in this section shall relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
Of the total surcharges collected by the Secretary from the sale of the coins issued under this Act-- (1) 50 percent shall be returned to the United States Treasury for purposes of reducing the national debt; and (2) 50 percent shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Independence Hall Preservation Fund to assist the Fund's efforts to-- (A) create an endowment fund to finance capital improvements in Independence National Historic Park; (B) fund capital replacement projects for the buildings in Independence National Historic Park; and (C) meet such other needs as the Directors of the Independence Hall Preservation Fund deem appropriate to foster and increase respect and admiration for Independence National Historic Park.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Independence Hall Preservation Fund as may be related to the expenditure of amounts paid under section 9.
NUMISMATIC PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND.
The coins issued under this Act are subject to the provisions of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, relating to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take all actions necessary to ensure that the issuance of the coins authorized by this Act shall result in no net cost to the United States Government.
Adequate Security for Payment Required.--No coin shall be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment therefore; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.