SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National Center for Transportation Solutions Act of 2004''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Establishment of National Center for Transportation Solutions.
Duties of the Center.
National Center for Transportation Solutions Board.
Director of National Transportation Research.
Regional centers for transportation solutions.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Research and development are critical to developing and maintaining a transportation system that meets the goals of safety, mobility, economic vitality, efficiency, equity, and environmental protection.
Federal investment in transportation research and development represents approximately 1 percent of overall Government spending on transportation programs.
While Congress increased funding for overall transportation programs by about 40 percent in the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (Public Law 105- 178), funding for transportation research and development remained relatively flat.
Inadequate resources are devoted to research aimed at long-term transportation goals.
The competitive, peer-reviewed award of research funding is best suited to address long-term, strategic research needs.
The diversity of transportation research programs that address the needs of different customers poses challenges to effective regional-based and university-based transportation research centers, and short-term applied research and development and long-term fundamental research and development.
The wide-ranging subject matter of transportation research makes effective priority setting difficult.
In order to ensure that the United States transportation system meets the goals of safety, mobility, economic vitality, equity, and environmental protection, it is in the interest of the United States to-- (A) increase Federal investment in long-range transportation planning; (B) initiate and support competitive, peer-reviewed research into systemic transportation issues; (C) better coordinate the research and development programs of the Department of Transportation; (D) foster the interchange of transportation research and development data among interested parties; and (E) establish nationwide priorities in Federal transportation research and development.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTER FOR TRANSPORTATION SOLUTIONS.
There is hereby established as an independent agency in the executive branch of government the National Center for Transportation Solutions (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Center'').
The Center shall consist of the National Center for Transportation Solutions Board established under section 5 and the Director of National Transportation Research appointed under section 6.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the National Center for Transportation Solutions Board shall exercise the authorities of the Center.
DUTIES OF THE CENTER.
Research and Development.-- (1) Long-term policy.--The Center shall develop and encourage the execution of a long-term national policy for the promotion of research and development related to multimodal transportation.
Projects.--The Center shall initiate and support research and development projects related to multimodal transportation that-- (A) are of long-term significance; (B) have clear public benefits and in which private investment is not optimal due to the failure of, or distortions in, the market; or (C) are not otherwise conducted in the public or private sectors.
Grants.--The Center is authorized to award competitive, merit- based grants to academic, public, and private research institutions to support long-term, strategic transportation objectives.
Coordination of Research and Development.--The Center shall facilitate the interchange of transportation research data among interested parties in the United States, including by-- (1) serving as a clearinghouse of information for individuals engaged in transportation research and development in the United States; (2) consulting with officials from the Department of Transportation in the development of recommendations related to transportation research; and (3) coordinating scientific research programs with public and private research groups.
Evaluation of Research and Development Programs.--The Center shall evaluate programs related to transportation research and development that are conducted by the United States Government.
Annual Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than January 15, 2006, and annually thereafter, the Director of National Transportation Research shall submit to Congress a report on activities undertaken by the Center during the fiscal year ending in the previous calendar year.
Recommendations.--Each report submitted under paragraph (1) shall include recommendations on research and development related to multimodal transportation, including any minority views and recommendations of members of the National Center for Transportation Solutions Board.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR TRANSPORTATION SOLUTIONS BOARD.
Establishment.--There is hereby established the National Center for Transportation Solutions Board (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Board'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Board shall be composed of the Director of National Transportation Research, who shall serve ex officio, and 16 voting members, of whom-- (A) four shall be appointed by the Secretary of Transportation; (B) four shall be appointed by the Director of the National Academies; and (C) eight shall be appointed by the President, in consultation with the majority leader of the Senate, the minority leader of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the minority leader of the House of Representatives, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Qualifications.--The members of the Board shall-- (A) represent various professions and occupations in the public and private sectors; (B) to the extent practicable, represent a broad range of regions of the United States; and (C) possess skills and experience appropriate to the functions and responsibilities of the Center.
Appointment; Vacancies.-- (1) Initial appointments.--The initial members of the Board shall be appointed not less than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Terms.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), members shall serve for terms of 6 years.
No member may serve for more than two consecutive terms.
Staggered terms.--The terms of the members shall be staggered, with the initial members appointed for the following initial terms: (i) Six members shall serve for a term of six years.
Five members shall serve for a term of four years.
Five members shall serve for a term of two years.
Non-election year expiration.--The term of a member under this subsection shall not expire during a calendar year in which an election occurs to select the President or any members of the Senate or the House of Representatives (not including special elections).
The initial terms described under subparagraph (B) may, at the discretion of the Director, be extended for not to exceed one year for purposes of complying with the requirements of this subparagraph.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Board shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Board have been appointed, the Board shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Board shall meet at the call of the Chair.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairman and Vice Chairman.-- (1) Selection.--The Board shall select a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among its members.
Terms.--The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall serve for 2-year terms.
An individual may not serve for more than two consecutive terms as Chairman.
DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH.
Director.--There shall be a Director of National Transportation Research who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the consent of the Senate (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Director'').
The Board shall have an opportunity to make recommendations to the President with respect to the appointment of the Director.
Duties.--The Director-- (1) shall serve as the chief executive office of the Center; (2) is authorized to carry out the authorities and powers of the Center; and (3) shall serve as a nonvoting, ex officio member of the Board.
Term.--The Director shall serve for a term of six years unless earlier removed by the President.
Salary.--The rate of pay for the Director may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Divisions.--Subject to the discretion of the Board, the Center shall be organized into the following divisions: (1) The Division of Transportation Safety.
The Division of Environmental, Energy, and Land Use Planning.
The Division of Infrastructure.
The Division of Intermodal Connections.
The Division of Transportation Economics and Financial Policy.
Such other divisions as the Board determines appropriate.
Division Committees.-- (1) In general.--Each division under subsection (a) shall have a committee that shall make recommendations to, consult with, and advise the Board and the Director with respect to the issues covered by such division.
Composition.--Each division committee shall be composed of not less than five members who may be, but need not be, members of the Board.
Terms.--Members of the division committees shall serve for terms of two years.
Chairmen.--Each division committee shall annually elect a Chairman from among its members.
Procedures.--Each division committee shall prescribe its own rules of procedure, subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by the Board.
Hearings.--The Board and each division committee may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Board or such division committee considers advisable to carry out this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Board and each division committee may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Board or such division committee considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Board or the Chairman of a division committee, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Board or the division committee, as the case may be.
Contracts.--The Board is authorized to enter into contracts and cooperative agreements to carry out the purposes of this Act, including sole source agreements with the National Academy of Sciences and other entities to provide studies to assist the Board in developing policies and strategies.
Postal Services.--The Board and the division committees may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Board and the division committees may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Publication of Research.--The Center may publish the results of its research.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Director may, without regard to civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate such personnel from among personnel of the Department of Transportation and the National Academies as may be necessary to enable the Center to perform its duties.
Responsibilities.--The staff of the Center appointed under paragraph (1) shall, at the discretion of the Director, carry out the following responsibilities: (A) Submit to the Board a multiyear strategic plan and annual plans for the Center.
Develop an annual budget for the Center.
Administer the programs of the Center, including through oversight of the grant program under section 4(b).
Provide staff support to the Board.
Report periodically to the Board on the progress of the programs of the Center.
Coordinate with personnel from the Department of Transportation, the National Science Foundation, the Transportation Research Board, and other independent organizations that focus on transportation issues in order to leverage intellectual and other resources.
Compensation.--The Director may fix the compensation of Center personnel without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Center without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Acceptance of volunteer services.--The Director may accept volunteer services to carry out activities under this Act without regard to section 1342 of title 31, United States Code.
REGIONAL CENTERS FOR TRANSPORTATION SOLUTIONS.
In General.--Not later than September 30, 2005, the Director shall award grants to establish regional centers for transportation solutions.
One regional center shall be located in each of 4 regions established by the Board for the northeast, northwest, southeast, and southwest regions of the United States.
Research.--The regional centers established under this section shall initiate and support research projects into regional multimodal transportation issues that-- (1) are of long-term significance; (2) have clear public benefits and in which private investment is not optional due to the failure of, or distortions in, the market; or (3) are not otherwise conducted in the public or private sectors.
Northeast Regional Center.--The location of the regional center established under this section for the northeast region of the United States shall be located in a State that-- (1) is one of the 5 States with the highest levels of traffic congestion in the United States, based on the ratio of annual vehicle miles traveled on National Highway System roads that are located in the State to the number of National Highway System lane miles that are located in such State; and (2) is one of the 10 States with the highest levels of traffic congestion in the United States, based on the ratio of miles of National Highway System roads that are located in urban areas in the State to the number of National Highway System lane miles that are located in urban areas in such State.
There are authorized to be appropriated from the Highway Trust Fund the following sums to carry out the purposes of this Act: (1) In fiscal year 2006, $50,000,000.
In fiscal year 2007, $100,000,000.
In fiscal year 2008, $150,000,000.
In fiscal year 2009, $200,000,000.
In fiscal year 2010, $250,000,000.