REDUCTION OF United States Reports CITIZENSHIP VOTING INTEREST OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENT.
Title IV of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code App.
1371- 1389) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
REDUCTION OF United States Reports CITIZENSHIP VOTING INTEREST OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENT.
General Rule.--Notwithstanding the requirement of section 101(16) of this Act that at least 75 percent of the voting interests of an air carrier be owned or controlled by persons who are citizens of the United States or of one of its possessions, a person who is not a citizen of the United States may purchase voting interests of a corporation or association which is, or owns or controls, an air carrier without regard to whether or not such purchase would result in the corporation or association failing to meet such voting interest requirement of section 101(16) if the Secretary of Transportation finds that-- ``(1) after the purchase-- ``(A) the president, chairman of the board of directors, chief operating officer, and two-thirds or more of the board of directors of the corporation or association which is, or owns or controls, the air carrier would be citizens of the United States or one of its possessions; and ``(B) at least 51 percent of the voting interests of the air carrier would be owned or controlled by persons who are citizens of the United States or one of its possessions; and ``(2) the purchase is in the public interest.
Factors to Consider for Public Interest Finding.--The Secretary, in making the finding required by subsection (a)(2), shall consider the following: ``(1) The financial condition of the air carrier and the importance of the purchase to the carrier's ability to survive and effectively compete.
The effect of the purchase on the employees of the air carrier.
The effect of the purchase on competition in interstate, overseas, and foreign air transportation.
Whether the laws and regulations of the foreign country of which the purchaser is a citizen would permit a citizen of the United States to acquire, under similar terms and conditions, the same percentage of stock of a person who provides in such foreign country transportation by aircraft of persons or property as a common carrier as the percentage of stock which the person making the purchase would have in the air carrier after the purchase.
The extent to which the purchaser is owned, controlled, or subsidized by a government of a foreign country.
The extent to which a person who is not a citizen of the United States or one of its possessions would, after the purchase, have the power to exercise control over the air carrier.
The extent to which the foreign country of which the purchaser is a citizen permits air carriers to have access to its aviation markets equivalent to the access that the foreign citizen would have to the aviation markets of the United States after the purchase.
Application.-- ``(1) Submission.--A person interested in making a purchase with respect to which subsection (a) applies must submit an application with respect to such purchase to the Secretary.
The application must be in such form and contain such information as the Secretary may, by regulation, require.
Approval or disapproval.--Within 90 days after an application meeting the requirements of paragraph (1) and any regulations issued thereunder is submitted to the Secretary, the Secretary shall approve the application, approve the application subject to such conditions or modifications as the Secretary determines appropriate to carry out the objectives of this section, or disapprove the application.
Presidential review.-- ``(A) Presentation.--The approval, with or without conditions or modifications, of any application under this section shall be presented to the President for review.
Disapproval; conditions.--The President shall have the right to disapprove or impose conditions on the application solely on the basis of national defense considerations including the effect of the purchase on the Civil Reserve Air Fleet program.
Any such disapproval or conditions shall be issued in a public document, setting forth the reasons for the disapproval or conditions to the extent national security permits, within 30 days after submission of the Secretary's action to the President.
Effect of disapproval.--Any action of the Secretary disapproved by the President under this paragraph shall be null and void.
Effect of expiration of time limit; judicial review.--Any action of the Secretary not disapproved within the 30-day period referred to in subparagraph (B) shall take effect as an action of the Secretary, not the President, and as such shall be subject to judicial review as provided in section 1006 of this Act.''.
The table of contents contained in the first section of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 is amended by adding at the end of the matter relating to title IV of such Act the following: ``Sec.
Reduction of United States Reports citizenship voting interest ownership requirement.
Factors to consider for public interest finding.