This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Securities Response Act of 2003''.
EXTENSION OF EMERGENCY ORDER AUTHORITY OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION.
Extension of Authority.--Paragraph (2) of section 12(k) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78l(k)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Emergency orders.--(A) The Commission, in an emergency, may by order summarily take such action to alter, supplement, suspend, or impose requirements or restrictions with respect to any matter or action subject to regulation by the Commission or a self-regulatory organization under the securities laws, as the Commission determines is necessary in the public interest and for the protection of investors-- ``(i) to maintain or restore fair and orderly securities markets (other than markets in exempted securities); ``(ii) to ensure prompt, accurate, and safe clearance and settlement of transactions in securities (other than exempted securities); or ``(iii) to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the substantial disruption by the emergency of (I) securities markets (other than markets in exempted securities), investment companies, or any other significant portion or segment of such markets, or (II) the transmission or processing of securities transactions (other than transactions in exempted securities).
An order of the Commission under this paragraph (2) shall continue in effect for the period specified by the Commission, and may be extended.
Except as provided in subparagraph (C), the Commission's action may not continue in effect for more than 30 business days, including extensions.
An order of the Commission under this paragraph (2) may be extended to continue in effect for more than 30 business days if, at the time of the extension, the Commission finds that the emergency still exists and determines that the continuation of the order beyond 30 business days is necessary in the public interest and for the protection of investors to attain an objective described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of subparagraph (A).
In no event shall an order of the Commission under this paragraph (2) continue in effect for more than 90 calendar days.
If the actions described in subparagraph (A) involve a security futures product, the Commission shall consult with and consider the views of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
In exercising its authority under this paragraph, the Commission shall not be required to comply with the provisions of section 553 of title 5, United States Code, or with the provisions of section 19(c) of this title.
Notwithstanding the exclusion of exempted securities (and markets therein) from the Commission's authority under subparagraph (A), the Commission may use such authority to take action to alter, supplement, suspend, or impose requirements or restrictions with respect to clearing agencies for transactions in such exempted securities.
In taking any action under this subparagraph, the Commission shall consult with and consider the views of the Secretary of the Treasury.''.
Consultation; Definition of Emergency.--Section 12(k) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78l(k)) is further amended by striking paragraph (6) and inserting the following: ``(6) Consultation.--Prior to taking any action described in paragraph (1)(B), the Commission shall consult with and consider the views of the Secretary of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, unless such consultation is impracticable in light of the emergency.
Definitions.-- ``(A) Emergency.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `emergency' means-- ``(i) a major market disturbance characterized by or constituting-- ``(I) sudden and excessive fluctuations of securities prices generally, or a substantial threat thereof, that threaten fair and orderly markets; or ``(II) a substantial disruption of the safe or efficient operation of the national system for clearance and settlement of transactions in securities, or a substantial threat thereof; or ``(ii) a major disturbance that substantially disrupts, or threatens to substantially disrupt-- ``(I) the functioning of securities markets, investment companies, or any other significant portion or segment of the securities markets; or ``(II) the transmission or processing of securities transactions.
Securities laws.--Notwithstanding section 3(a)(47), for purposes of this subsection, the term `securities laws' does not include the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 (15 United States Code 79a et sequentes).''.
PARALLEL AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY WITH RESPECT TO GOVERNMENT SECURITIES.
Section 15C of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78o- 5) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Emergency Authority.--The Secretary may by order take any action with respect to a matter or action subject to regulation by the Secretary under this section, or the rules of the Secretary thereunder, involving a government security or a market therein (or significant portion or segment of that market), that the Commission may take under section 12(k)(2) of this title with respect to transactions in securities (other than exempted securities) or a market therein (or significant portion or segment of that market).''.
Passed the House of Representatives February 26, 2003.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.