SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``James Hudson Temporary Employee Equity Act of 1993''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: TABLE OF CONTENTS Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Procedures for determining aggregate service.
Effective date; special rules; regulations.
Non-excludability of Certain Temporary Employees.--Paragraph (4) of section 8913(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(4) a temporary employee who-- ``(A) is eligible for benefits under this chapter under section 8906a; or ``(B) in the aggregate, has completed 4 years of service as a temporary employee (in the same or different positions), as determined under chapter 90.''.
Decrease in Minimum Period of Service Required To Be Eligible for Coverage.-- (1) In general.--Section 8906a(a)(2) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``1 year'' and inserting ``6 months''.
Technical amendment.--Section 8906a of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Nothing in this section shall be considered to apply with respect to any temporary employee described in section 8913(b)(4)(B).''.
Non-excludability of Certain Temporary Employees.--Section 8716(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (2); (2) by striking ``3401(2) of this title).''
at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``3401(2)); or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) a temporary employee who-- ``(A) is eligible to be insured under this chapter under section 8709a; or ``(B) in the aggregate, has completed 4 years of service as a temporary employee (in the same or different positions), as determined under chapter 90.''.
Minimum Period of Service Required to Be Insured.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 87 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 8709 the following: ``Sec.
Temporary employees ``(a)(1) The Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations under which temporary employees meeting the requirements of paragraph (2) shall be eligible for insurance under this chapter.
To be eligible for insurance under this chapter, a temporary employee must have completed 6 months of current continuous employment, excluding any break in service of 5 days or less.
Notwithstanding any provision of section 8707 or 8708-- ``(1) during each period in which a temporary employee is insured under a policy purchased by the Office under section 8709, based on such employee's meeting the requirements for eligibility under subsection (a), there shall be withheld from the employee's pay an amount equal to the withholdings required under section 8707 and the Government contribution required under section 8708 in connection with the employee's group life insurance and accidental death and dismemberment insurance; and ``(2) the employing agency of the employee shall not pay the Government contribution under section 8708 for such employee for any period referred to in paragraph (1).
Nothing in this section shall be considered to apply with respect to any temporary employee described in section 8716(b)(4)(B).''.
Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 87 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 8709 the following: ``8709a.
Civil Service Retirement System.--The second sentence of section 8347(g) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``3401(2) of this title).''
and inserting ``3401(2)) or any temporary employee who, in the aggregate, has completed 4 years of service as a temporary employee (in the same or different positions), as determined under chapter 90.''.
Federal Employees' Retirement System.--Section 8402(c)(1) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``3401(2)).''
and inserting ``3401(2)) or a temporary employee who, in the aggregate, has completed 4 years of service as a temporary employee (in the same or different positions), as determined under chapter 90.''.
PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINING AGGREGATE SERVICE.
In General.--Subpart G of part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``CHAPTER 90--TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT ``Sec.
Definitions; applicability ``(a) For the purpose of this chapter-- ``(1) the term `service performed as a temporary employee' means, with respect to a benefit, service performed as a temporary employee which is creditable for purposes of determining eligibility for such benefit; and ``(2) the terms `eligible' and `eligibility', as used with respect to a benefit, include being eligible or having eligibility by virtue of satisfying the requirements for being considered a non-excludable employee for purposes of such benefit.
This chapter applies with respect to any benefit, eligibility for which is based on the completion, in the aggregate, of at least a certain amount of service as a temporary employee (in the same or different positions), but only if the provisions of this chapter are specifically cited as the means for determining whether that service requirement has been met.
Regulations ``(a) The Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations for determining, for purposes of any benefit with respect to which this chapter applies, whether an employee satisfies the service requirement necessary to be eligible for such benefit.
The regulations shall accomplish at least the following: ``(1) Establish procedures setting forth the time, form, and manner in which a temporary employee may apply for any benefit with respect to which this chapter applies, including provisions relating to any documentation or other supporting evidence which may be necessary to establish that the service requirement has been met.
Require agencies to take such measures, both on an intraagency and interagency basis, as may be necessary to allow current or prospective temporary employees to readily ascertain, and obtain supporting evidence as to, the aggregate amount of temporary service such employee has performed in any agency.
Require agencies to take appropriate measures to ensure that temporary employees are notified as to-- ``(A) any benefits for which they may be eligible by virtue of the amendments made by the James Hudson Temporary Employee Equity Act of 1993, and the procedures for establishing eligibility (if appropriate); and ``(B) any resources or assistance which may be available to them in connection with obtaining those benefits.
Establish procedures to ensure that applications are considered, and that final decisions on applications are rendered, in the most expeditious manner possible.
Consistent with applicable provisions of law, specify the time and manner in which a benefit begins or becomes available if a favorable decision under paragraph (4) is rendered.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 89 the following: ``90.
EFFECTIVE DATE; SPECIAL RULES; REGULATIONS.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this Act shall take effect as of the 90th day after the date of the enactment of this Act, subject to subsection (b).
Special Rules.-- (1) Contributions to fehbp.--In the case of a temporary employee who, immediately before the effective date under subsection (a), is contributing to the Employees Health Benefits Fund under section 8906a of title 5, United States Code, any change in the contributions payable by or on behalf of such employee into such fund as a result of the amendments made by section 2 shall become effective as of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after such date.
Creditability of prior service.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), in administering the amendments made by this Act, service may be taken into account whether performed before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Retirement.--For purposes of the amendments made by section 4, any service performed as a temporary employee before the effective date under subsection (a) which, but for such section, would otherwise be excluded from the operation of the retirement system involved, may not be taken into account except for purposes of determining whether or not an employee may be excluded under section 8347(g) or 8402(c)(1) of title 5, United States Code, as applicable.
Regulations.--Any regulations necessary to carry out the amendments made by this Act shall be prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management not later than the effective date under subsection (a).