This Act may be cited as the ``Poison Control Center Enhancement and Awareness Act Amendments of 2003''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Poison control centers are our Nation's primary defense against injury and deaths from poisoning.
Twenty-four hours a day, the general public as well as health care practitioners contact their local poison centers for help in diagnosing and treating victims of poisoning and other toxic exposures.
Poisoning is the third most common form of unintentional death in the United States.
In any given year, there will be between 2,000,000 and 4,000,000 poison exposures.
More than 50 percent of these exposures will involve children under the age of 6 who are exposed to toxic substances in their home.
Poisoning accounts for 285,000 hospitalizations, 1,200,000 days of acute hospital care, and 13,000 fatalities annually.
Stabilizing the funding structure and increasing accessibility to poison control centers will promote the utilization of poison control centers, and reduce the inappropriate use of emergency medical services and other more costly health care services.
The tragic events of September 11, 2001, and the anthrax cases of October 2001, have dramatically changed our Nation.
During this time period, poison centers in many areas of the country were answering thousands of additional calls from concerned residents.
Many poison centers were relied upon as a source for accurate medical information about the disease and the complications resulting from prophylactic antibiotic therapy.
The 2001 Presidential Task Force on Citizen Preparedness in the War on Terrorism recommended that the Poison Control Centers be used as a source of public information and public education regarding potential biological, chemical, and nuclear domestic terrorism.
The increased demand placed upon poison centers to provide emergency information in the event of a terrorist event involving a biological, chemical, or nuclear toxin will dramatically increase call volume.
AMENDMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
Title XII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300d et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Part G--Poison Control ``SEC.
MAINTENANCE OF A NATIONAL TOLL-FREE NUMBER.
In General.--The Secretary shall provide coordination and assistance to regional poison control centers for the establishment of a nationwide toll-free phone number to be used to access such centers.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the establishment or continued operation of any privately funded nationwide toll-free phone number used to provide advice and other assistance for poisonings or accidental exposures.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2009.
Funds appropriated under this subsection shall not be used to fund any toll-free phone number described in subsection (b).
NATIONWIDE MEDIA CAMPAIGN TO PROMOTE POISON CONTROL CENTER UTILIZATION.
In General.--The Secretary shall establish a national media campaign to educate the public and health care providers about poison prevention and the availability of poison control resources in local communities and to conduct advertising campaigns concerning the nationwide toll-free number established under section 1271.
Contract With Entity.--The Secretary may carry out subsection (a) by entering into contracts with one or more nationally recognized media firms for the development and distribution of monthly television, radio, and newspaper public service announcements.
Evaluation.--The Secretary shall-- ``(1) establish baseline measures and benchmarks to quantitatively evaluate the impact of the nationwide media campaign established under this section; and ``(2) prepare and submit to the appropriate congressional committees an evaluation of the nationwide media campaign on an annual basis.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $600,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2005 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2009.
MAINTENANCE OF THE POISON CONTROL CENTER GRANT PROGRAM.
Regional Poison Control Centers.--The Secretary shall award grants to certified regional poison control centers for the purposes of achieving the financial stability of such centers, and for preventing and providing treatment recommendations for poisonings.
Other Improvements.--The Secretary shall also use amounts received under this section to-- ``(1) develop standardized poison prevention and poison control promotion programs; ``(2) develop standard patient management guidelines for commonly encountered toxic exposures; ``(3) improve and expand the poison control data collection systems, including, at the Secretary's discretion, by assisting the poison control centers to improve data collection activities; ``(4) improve national toxic exposure surveillance by enhancing activities at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; ``(5) expand the toxicologic expertise within poison control centers; and ``(6) improve the capacity of poison control centers to answer high volumes of calls during times of national crisis.
Certification.--Except as provided in subsection (d), the Secretary may make a grant to a center under subsection (a) only if-- ``(1) the center has been certified by a professional organization in the field of poison control, and the Secretary has approved the organization as having in effect standards for certification that reasonably provide for the protection of the public health with respect to poisoning; or ``(2) the center has been certified by a State government, and the Secretary has approved the State government as having in effect standards for certification that reasonably provide for the protection of the public health with respect to poisoning.
Waiver of Certification Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may grant a waiver of the certification requirement of subsection (c) with respect to a noncertified poison control center or a newly established center that applies for a grant under this section if such center can reasonably demonstrate that the center will obtain such a certification within a reasonable period of time as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Renewal.--The Secretary may renew a waiver under paragraph (1).
Limitation.--In no instance may the sum of the number of years for a waiver under paragraph (1) and a renewal under paragraph (2) exceed 5 years.
The preceding sentence shall take effect as if enacted on February 25, 2000.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Amounts made available to a poison control center under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, or local funds provided for such center.
Maintenance of Effort.--A poison control center, in utilizing the proceeds of a grant under this section, shall maintain the expenditures of the center for activities of the center at a level that is not less than the level of such expenditures maintained by the center for the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year for which the grant is received.
Matching Requirement.--The Secretary may impose a matching requirement with respect to amounts provided under a grant under this section if the Secretary determines appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004 and $27,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2005 through 2009.
``Nothing in this part may be construed to ease any restriction in Federal law applicable to the amount or percentage of funds appropriated to carry out this part that may be used to prepare or submit a report.''.
The Poison Control Center Enhancement and Awareness Act (42 United States Code 14801 et sequentes) is hereby repealed.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.