This Act may be cited as the ``Holocaust Victims Insurance Act''.
Report.--Any person engaged in the business of insurance in the United States directly or through a related company during the period 1920 to 1945 shall, within 90 days of the enactment of this Act, report to the Secretary of the Commerce on-- (1) the number of insurance policies issued during such period; (2) the holder, beneficiary, and current status of those policies; (3) the attempts made by such person to locate the beneficiaries of such policies for which no claim of benefits has been made; (4) a comparison of the names of the holders and beneficiaries of such policies and the names of the victims of the Holocaust; (5) the reason such person is unable, after reasonable and good faith efforts, to provide information described in paragraphs (1) through (4); and (6) any money contributed to a fund established to compensate victims of the Holocaust as discussed in section 3(b) of this Act.
Penalty.--Any person who does not file a report as required by subsection (a) shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each day such a report is not filed as required.
Transmission of Report.--The Secretary of Commerce shall immediately upon receipt transmit the report required by subsection (a) to the Committees on Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
PAYMENT OF PROCEEDS OF INSURANCE.
Payments.--If such a person engaged in the business of insurance determines that it issued insurance policies to individuals who were victims of the Holocaust, such person shall pay to the beneficiaries or descendants of the victims the proceeds of such policies.
Fund.--Any such person who does not have records of the individuals to whom it issued life insurance policies during the period 1920 to 1945 is strongly encouraged to establish a substantial monetary fund to compensate victims of the Holocaust.
Such fund should be derived from sources including the policies for which there is no one entitled to its proceeds because the holder and all beneficiaries perished in the Holocaust.
The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with State insurance commissioners, shall, within 180 days of the enactment of this Act, report to the Committees on Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Senate, to the extent possible, on-- (1) the number of individuals who were victims of the Holocaust who held life insurance policies during the period 1920 to 1945; (2) the number of such individuals for whom payment was made under such policies and the amount of such payments; (3) the number of such policies for which no payment has been made; (4) the number of such policies for which payment was made to persons other than the policy holder or their beneficiaries; (5) the names of the companies which issued such policies; and (6) the relationship (if any) between such companies and the governments of Germany, Italy, Austria, Croatia, Vichy France, Hungary, Romania, Switzerland, and other provisional governments in Nazi occupied countries.
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum shall develop a registry of those who died in the Holocaust which shall be made available to the general public, including insurance companies preparing a report under section 2(a).
Such sums as may be necessary are authorized to be appropriated for this purpose.
Any action brought by Holocaust victim or heir or beneficiary of a Holocaust victim, seeking proceeds of such policies issued or in effect between 1920 and 1945 shall not be dismissed for failure to comply with the applicable statute of limitations or laches provided the action is commenced on or before December 31, 2010.
For the purpose of this Act: (1) Related company.--The term ``related company'' means any parent, subsidiaries, or affiliated companies at least 50 percent of whose stock is in common ownership with an insurance carrier doing business in the United States.
Victim of the holocaust.--The term ``victim of the Holocaust'' means any person who lost his or her life or property as a result of discriminatory laws, policies, or actions targeted against discrete groups of persons between April 1933 and May 1945 in Nazi Germany, areas occupied by Nazi Germany, and or countries allied with Nazi Germany.
Insurance policies.--The term `insurance policies'' means, but is not limited to, life insurance, property insurance, dowry, or education policies.
Proceeds of such policies.--The term ``proceeds of such policies'' means the face or other payout value of policies and annuities plus reasonable interest to date of payment without diminution for wartime or immediate postwar currency devaluation.