This Act may be cited as the ``Commemoration of the Victory of Freedom in the Cold War Act''.
COMMEMORATION OF THE VICTORY OF FREEDOM IN THE COLD WAR.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Cold War between the United States and the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was the longest and most costly struggle for democracy and freedom in the history of mankind.
Whether millions of people all over the world would live in freedom hinged on the outcome of the Cold War.
Democratic countries bore the burden of the struggle and paid the costs in order to preserve and promote democracy and freedom.
The Armed Forces and the taxpayers of the United States bore the greatest portion of such a burden and struggle in order to protect such principles.
Tens of thousands of United States soldiers, sailors, Marines, and airmen paid the ultimate price during the Cold War in order to preserve the freedoms and liberties enjoyed in democratic countries.
The Berlin Wall erected in Berlin, Germany, epitomized the totalitarianism that the United States struggled to eradicate during the Cold War.
The end of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on December 26, 1991, marked the end for Soviet totalitarianism, and thus the end of the Cold War.
December 26, 2001, is the 10th anniversary of the fall of the Soviet Union.
Cold War Medal.--(1) Chapter 57 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Cold War medal: award ``(a) Award.--There is hereby authorized an award of an appropriate decoration, as provided for under subsection (b), to each person who served honorably in the armed forces during the Cold War in order to recognize the contributions of those person to United States victory in the Cold War.
Design.--The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall, under regulations prescribed by the President, design for purposes of this section a decoration called the `Reagan-Truman Victory in the Cold War Medal'.
The decoration shall be of appropriate design, with ribbons and appurtenances.
Period of Cold War.--In this section, the term `Cold War' shall mean the period beginning on September 2, 1945, and ending on December 26, 1991.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1133.
Cold War medal: award.''.
Participation of Armed Forces in Celebration of Anniversary of End of Cold War.--(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), amounts appropriated for operation and maintenance for the Army shall be available for the purpose of covering the costs of the Armed Forces in participating in a celebration of the 10th anniversary of the end of the Cold War to be held in Washington, District of Columbia, on December 26, 2001.
The total amount of funds available under paragraph (1) for the purpose stated in that paragraph may not exceed $15,000,000.
(A) The Secretary of Defense may accept contributions from the private sector for the purpose of reducing the costs of the Armed Forces described in paragraph (1).
The amount of funds available under paragraph (1) for the purpose set forth in that paragraph shall be reduced by an amount equal to the amount of contributions accepted by the Secretary under subparagraph (A).
Commission on Victory in the Cold War.--(1) There is hereby established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on Victory in the Cold War'' (in this subsection to be referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall be composed of twelve members, as follows: (A) Two shall be appointed by the President.
Three shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Three shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
Two shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Two shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
The Commission shall have as its duty the review of the expenditure of funds by the Armed Forces under subsection (c) before the participation of the Armed Forces in the celebration referred to in paragraph (1) of that subsection, whether such funds are derived from funds of the United States or from amounts contributed by the private sector under paragraph (3)(A) of that subsection.
In addition to the duties provided for under paragraph (3), the Commission shall also have the authority to design and award medals and decorations to current and former public officials and other individuals whose efforts were vital to United States victory in the Cold War.
The Commission shall be chaired by two individuals as follows: (A) One selected by and from among those appointed pursuant to subparagraphs (A), (D), and (E) of paragraph (2).
One selected by and from among those appointed pursuant to subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (2).