This Act may be cited as the ``Bulk Cash Smuggling Act of 1998''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The use of large sums of cash is one of the most reliable warning signs of drug trafficking, terrorism, money laundering, racketeering, tax evasion, and similar crimes.
The prevention, investigation, and prosecution of such crimes depends upon the ability of law enforcement to deter and trace such movements of cash, and the failure to report such movements accordingly undermines law enforcement's ability to prevent and detect serious criminal activity.
The nonreporting of large cash transactions or movements, in contravention of the provisions of subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, and regulations prescribed under such subchapter, is therefore itself a serious crime.
The intentional transportation into or out of the United States of large amounts of currency or monetary instruments, in a manner designed to circumvent the mandatory reporting provisions of such subchapter is the equivalent of, and creates the same harm as, the smuggling of goods.
The penalties in subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, for nonreporting reflect the potential harm caused by the crimes to which intentional nonreporting is linked, and such penalties accordingly protect the following important governmental interests: (A) The obligation of government to prevent the manipulation of commerce and trade by criminals.
The cost to the government of investigating criminal activity and enforcing the laws designed to hinder such activity.
The government's underlying right to taxes sought to be evaded through the movement of unreported cash.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to authorize forfeiture of any cash or instruments whose movements are not reported under the terms of subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, and regulations prescribed under such chapter, to emphasize the seriousness of the act of such nonreporting, and to prescribe guidelines for determining the amount of property subject to such forfeiture in various situations.
Enactment of Bulk Cash Smuggling Offense.--Subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Bulk cash smuggling ``(a) Criminal Offense.--Whoever, with the intent to evade a currency reporting requirement under section 5316, knowingly conceals more than $10,000 in currency or other monetary instruments on the person of such individual or in any conveyance, article of luggage, merchandise, or other container, and transports or transfers or attempts to transport or transfer such currency or monetary instruments from a place within the United States to a place outside of the United States, or from a place outside the United States to a place within the United States, shall be guilty of a currency smuggling offense and subject to punishment pursuant to subsection (b).
Penalty.-- ``(1) Term of imprisonment.--A person convicted of a currency smuggling offense under subsection (a), or a conspiracy to commit such offense, shall be imprisoned for not more than 5 years.
Forfeiture.--In addition, the court, in imposing sentence under paragraph (1), shall order that the defendant forfeit to the United States, any property, real or personal, involved in the offense, and any property traceable to such property, subject to subsection (d) of this section.
Procedure.--The forfeiture of property under this section shall be governed by section 413 of the Controlled Substances Act.
Personal money judgment.--If the property subject to forfeiture under paragraph (2) is unavailable, and the defendant has no substitute property that may be forfeited pursuant to section 413(p) of the Controlled Substances Act, the court shall enter a personal money judgment against the defendant for the amount that would be subject to forfeiture.
Civil Forfeiture.-- ``(1) In general.--Any property involved in a violation of subsection (a), or a conspiracy to commit such violation, and any property traceable to such violation or conspiracy, may be seized and, subject to subsection (d) of this section, forfeited to the United States.
Procedure.--The seizure and forfeiture shall be governed by the procedures governing civil forfeitures in money laundering cases pursuant to section 981(a)(1)(A) of title 18, United States Code.
Treatment of certain property as involved in the offense.--For purposes of this subsection and subsection (b), any currency or other monetary instrument that is concealed or intended to be concealed in violation of subsection (a) or a conspiracy to commit such violation, any article, container, or conveyance used, or intended to be used, to conceal or transport the currency or other monetary instrument, and any other property used, or intended to be used, to facilitate the offense, shall be considered property involved in the offense.
Proportionality of Forfeiture.-- ``(1) In general.--Upon a showing by the property owner by a preponderance of the evidence that the currency or monetary instruments involved in the offense giving rise to the forfeiture were derived from a legitimate source, and were intended for a lawful purpose, the court shall reduce the forfeiture to the maximum amount that is not grossly disproportional to the gravity of the offense.
Factors to be considered.--In determining the amount of the forfeiture, the court shall consider all aggravating and mitigating facts and circumstances that have a bearing on the gravity of the offense, including the following: ``(A) The value of the currency or other monetary instruments involved in the offense.
Efforts by the person committing the offense to structure currency transactions, conceal property, or otherwise obstruct justice.
Whether the offense is part of a pattern of repeated violations of this section or any other currency reporting money laundering offense.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5330, the following new item: ``5331.
FORFEITURE IN CURRENCY REPORTING CASES.
In General.--Subsection (c) of section 5317 of title 31, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Forfeiture.-- ``(1) In general.--The court in imposing sentence for any violation of section 5313, 5313A, 5316, or 5324, or any conspiracy to commit such violation, shall order the defendant to forfeit all property, real or personal, involved in the offense and any property traceable thereto.
Procedure.--Forfeitures under this subsection shall be governed by the procedures established in section 413 of the Controlled Substances Act and the guidelines established in paragraph (4).
Civil forfeiture.--Any property involved in a violation of section 5313, 5313A, 5316, or 5324, or any conspiracy to commit any such violation, and any property traceable to any such violation or conspiracy, may be seized and, subject to paragraph (4), forfeited to the United States in accordance with the procedures governing civil forfeitures in money laundering cases pursuant to section 981(a)(1)(A) of title 18, United States Code.
Proportionality of forfeiture.-- ``(A) In general.--Upon a showing by the property owner by a preponderance of the evidence that any currency or monetary instruments involved in the offense giving rise to the forfeiture were derived from a legitimate source, and were intended for a lawful purpose, the court shall reduce the forfeiture to the maximum amount that is not grossly disproportional to the gravity of the offense.
Factors to be considered.--In determining the amount of the forfeiture, the court shall consider all aggravating and mitigating facts and circumstances that have a bearing on the gravity of the offense, including the following: ``(i) The value of the currency or other monetary instruments involved in the offense.
Efforts by the person committing the offense to structure currency transactions, conceal property, or otherwise obstruct justice.
Whether the offense is part of a pattern of repeated violations.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 981(a)(1)(A) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``of section 5313(a) or 5324(a) of title 31, or''.
Section 982(a)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``of 5313(a), 5316, or 5324 of title 31, or''.