This Act may be cited as the ``Asian Elephant Conservation Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Asian elephant populations in nations within the range of Asian elephants have continued to decline to the point that the long-term survival of the species in the wild is in serious jeopardy.
The Asian elephant is listed as an endangered species under section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 and under appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.
Because the challenges facing the conservation of Asian elephants are so great, resources to date have not been sufficient to cope with the continued loss of habitat and the consequent diminution of Asian elephant populations.
The Asian elephant is a flagship species for the conservation of tropical forest habitats in which it is found and provides the consequent benefit from such conservation to numerous other species of wildlife including many other endangered species.
Among the threats to the Asian elephant in addition to habitat loss are population fragmentation, human-elephant conflict, poaching for ivory, meat, hide, bones and teeth, and capture for domestication.
To reduce, remove, or otherwise effectively address these threats to the long-term viability of populations of Asian elephants in the wild will require the joint commitment and effort of nations within the range of Asian elephants, the United States and other countries, and the private sector.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To perpetuate healthy populations of Asian elephants.
To assist in the conservation and protection of Asian elephants by supporting the conservation programs of Asian elephant range states and the CITES Secretariat.
To provide financial resources for those programs.
In this Act: (1) The term ``CITES'' means the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, signed on March 3, 1973, and its appendices.
The term ``conservation'' means the use of methods and procedures necessary to bring Asian elephants to the point at which there are sufficient populations in the wild to ensure that the species does not become extinct, including all activities associated with scientific resource management, such as conservation, protection, restoration, acquisition, and management of habitat; research and monitoring of known populations; assistance in the development of management plans for managed elephant ranges; CITES enforcement; law enforcement through community participation; translocation of elephants; conflict resolution initiatives; and community outreach and education.
The term ``Fund'' means the Asian Elephant Conservation Fund established under section 6(a).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Agency for International Development.
ASIAN ELEPHANT CONSERVATION ASSISTANCE.
In General.--The Secretary, subject to the availability of funds and in consultation with the Administrator, shall use amounts in the Fund to provide financial assistance for projects for the conservation of Asian elephants for which final project proposals are approved by the Secretary in accordance with this section.
Project Proposal.--Any relevant wildlife management authority of a nation within the range of Asian elephants whose activities directly or indirectly affect Asian elephant populations, the CITES Secretariat, or any person with demonstrated expertise in the conservation of Asian elephants, may submit to the Secretary a project proposal under this section.
Each proposal shall include the following: (1) The name of the individual responsible for conducting the project.
A succinct statement of the purposes of the project.
A description of the qualifications of the individuals who will conduct the project.
An estimate of the funds and time required to complete the project.
Evidence of support of the project by appropriate governmental entities of countries in which the project will be conducted, if the Secretary determines that the support is required for the success of the project.
Information regarding the source and amount of matching funding available to the applicant.
Any other information the Secretary considers to be necessary for evaluating the eligibility of the project for funding under this Act.
Project Review and Approval.-- (1) In general.--Within 30 days after receiving a final project proposal, the Secretary shall provide a copy of the proposal to the Administrator.
The Secretary shall review each final project proposal to determine if it meets the criteria set forth in subsection (d).
Consultation; approval or disapproval.--Not later than 6 months after receiving a final project proposal, and subject to the availability of funds, the Secretary, after consulting with the Administrator, shall-- (A) request written comments on the proposal from each country within which the project is to be conducted; (B) after requesting those comments, approve or disapprove the proposal; and (C) provide written notification of that approval or disapproval to the person who submitted the proposal, the Administrator, and each of those countries.
Criteria for Approval.--The Secretary may approve a final project proposal under this section if the project will enhance programs for conservation of Asian elephants by assisting efforts to-- (1) implement conservation programs; (2) address the conflicts between humans and elephants that arise from competition for the same habitat; (3) enhance compliance with provisions of CITES and laws of the United States or a foreign country that prohibit or regulate the taking or trade of Asian elephants or regulate the use and management of Asian elephant habitat; (4) develop sound scientific information on the condition of Asian elephant habitat, Asian elephant population numbers and trends, or the threats to such habitat, numbers, or trends; or (5) promote cooperative projects on those topics with other foreign governments, affected local communities, nongovernmental organizations, or others in the private sector.
Project Sustainability.--To the maximum extent practical, in determining whether to approve project proposals under this section, the Secretary shall give consideration to projects which will enhance sustainable integrated conservation development programs to ensure effective, long-term conservation of Asian elephants.
Project Reporting.--Each person who receives assistance under this section for a project shall provide periodic reports, as the Secretary considers necessary, to the Secretary and the Administrator.
Each report shall include all information required by the Secretary, after consulting with the Administrator, for evaluating the progress and success of the project.
Matching Funds.--In determining whether to approve project proposals under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to those projects for which there exists some measure of matching funds.
Limitation on Use for Captive Breeding.--Amounts provided as a grant under this Act may not be used for captive breeding of Asian elephants other than for release in the wild.
ASIAN ELEPHANT CONSERVATION FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the general fund of the Treasury a separate account to be known as the ``Asian Elephant Conservation Fund'', which shall consist of amounts deposited into the Fund by the Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (b).
Deposits Into the Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit into the Fund-- (1) all amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations under subsection (d); and (2) other amounts appropriated to the Fund.
Use.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may use amounts in the Fund without further appropriation to provide assistance under section 5.
Administration.--Of amounts in the Fund available for each fiscal year, the Secretary may use not more than 3 percent to administer the Fund.
Acceptance and Use of Donations.--The Secretary may accept and use donations to provide assistance under section 5.
Amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations shall be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into the Fund.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002 to carry out this Act, which may remain available until expended.