CONTINUANCE OF CIVILIAN PAY DURING PERIODS OF LAPSED APPROPRIATIONS.
Continuance of Pay.--Subchapter III of chapter 55 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by redesignating section 5527 as section 5528 and inserting after section 5526 the following: ``Sec.
Continuance of pay during periods of lapsed appropriations ``(a) For purposes of this section-- ``(1) the term `period of lapsed appropriations', when used with respect to any employee, means any period during which appropriations are not available due to the absence of the timely enactment of any Act or joint resolution appropriating funds for the agency in which that employee is employed; ``(2) the term `pay' means basic and premium pay, allowances, agency contributions for retirement and life and health insurance, and any other element of aggregate compensation (as specified in section 530.202 of title 5 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, or, in the case of an employee not subject to such section, any similar form of compensation); and ``(3) the term `employee' means an officer or employee of the United States, but does not include a member of a uniformed service.
For any period of lapsed appropriations, there are appropriated, out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, such sums as may be necessary for the pay of any employee who was employed as such immediately before the period of lapsed appropriations and who continues in the position in which he was so employed.
(1) This section does not authorize expenditure of funds during any period of lapsed appropriations for the pay of any employee at a rate in excess of the rate payable for that employee immediately before that period.
This section shall not be construed to affect the entitlement of any person to an amount of pay which is in excess of the amount payable under this section and to which such person is entitled under other applicable provisions of law.
Expenditures made for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be charged to the applicable appropriation, fund, or authorization whenever the regular appropriation bill becomes law.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) The heading for subchapter III of chapter 55 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``AND ASSIGNMENT'' and inserting ``ASSIGNMENT, AND CONTINUANCE''.
The analysis for chapter 55 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 5527 and inserting the following: ``5527.
Continuance of pay during periods of lapsed appropriations.
The analysis for chapter 55 of title 5, United States Code, is further amended by striking ``AND ASSIGNMENT'' in the item relating to subchapter III and inserting ``ASSIGNMENT, AND CONTINUANCE''.
AUTHORITY TO MAKE CERTAIN EXPENDITURES AND OBLIGATIONS DURING LAPSES IN APPROPRIATIONS.
Authority To Make Certain Expenditures and Obligations.-- Chapter 13 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1310 the following new section: ``Sec.
Authority to make certain expenditures and obligations during lapses in appropriations ``(a)(1) Notwithstanding section 1341, if any appropriation bill for a fiscal year does not become law prior to the beginning of such fiscal year, an officer or employee of the United States Government or of the District of Columbia may make reasonable expenditures or obligations as may be necessary to avoid losses in revenue, except revenue obtained from user fees.
Reasonable expenditures or obligations shall mean a rate not in excess of the lower of-- ``(A) the rate provided for such an expenditure or obligation in the corresponding appropriation Act for the preceding fiscal year; or ``(B) the rate provided for in the House or Senate passed appropriation bill for the fiscal year in question.
Appropriations and funds made available, and authority granted, for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be available for the period beginning with the first day of such fiscal year and ending with the earlier of-- ``(A) the date on which the applicable appropriation bill for such fiscal year becomes law (whether or not such law provides for such project or activity), and ``(B) the last day of such fiscal year.
An appropriation or funds made available, or authority granted, pursuant to this section for any fiscal year shall be subject to the terms and conditions imposed with respect to the appropriation made, funds made available, or authority granted for such operations for the preceding fiscal year.
Expenditures made for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be charged to the applicable appropriation, fund, or authorization whenever the regular applicable appropriation bill for such fiscal year becomes law.
This section shall not apply to operations during a fiscal year if any other provision of law (other than an authorization of appropriations)-- ``(1) makes an appropriation, makes funds available, or grants authority for such project or activity to continue for such period, or ``(2) specifically provides that no appropriation shall be made, no funds shall be made available, or no authority shall be granted for such project or activity to continue for such period.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis of chapter 13 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1310 the following new item: ``1311.
Authority to make certain expenditures and obligations during lapses in appropriations.''.
OMB PLAN IN CASE OF FUNDING LAPSE.
Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall, by rule, develop a plan setting forth policies and procedures to shutdown all or any part of the Government in an orderly manner during a period of lapsed appropriations.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to fiscal years beginning after September 30, 1995.