This Act may be cited as the ``Agricultural Terrorism Prevention and Response Act of 2001''.
ENHANCED SECURITY FOR UNITED STATES AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION AND FOOD SUPPLY SYSTEM.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The agricultural production sector of the United States economy accounts for approximately 13 percent of the United States gross national product.
The strength, importance, and value of the United States agricultural production and food supply system increases the possibility that the system could become a target for international terrorism, particularly a terrorism incident specifically targeted to key animal or plant commodities used in the production of food.
Targeted terrorism activities could include the deliberate introduction of chemical or biological agents that would be harmful or infectious to crops or livestock and could disrupt the processing and distribution of food products.
A successful terrorist attack against the United States agricultural sector involving the release of a contagious agent against crops or livestock could damage public confidence in the safety of the United States food supply.
The United States agricultural sector is particularly susceptible to a foreign crop or livestock disease, against which domestic animals and plants do not have a natural resistance.
With crops and animals concentrated in fewer production facilities, and with the frequent transport among these facilities, a single pathogen introduction could cause widespread infection.
Terrorism threats to the agricultural production and food supply system need to receive the same level of priority as other terrorism threats, and should be treated in a highly coordinated and integrated manner.
An awareness of the terrorism threat against the United States agricultural sector has increased within the intelligence and counterterrorism agencies of the Federal Government, and efforts must be undertaken to position the agricultural sector to anticipate and defend against such a threat.
The internal and external agency structures of the Department of Agriculture must be strengthened to enable to the United States agricultural sector to fully realize its strengths and vulnerabilities in the face of international terrorism.
The Department of Agriculture is a critical component of the collaborative infrastructure needed to deal with terrorism threats to the United States agricultural production and food supply system.
Interagency Agricultural Terrorism Committee.--(1) The President shall establish an Interagency Agricultural Terrorism Committee to coordinate the counterterrorism effort for the protection of the United States agricultural production and food supply system.
Greater coordination between Federal and State government agencies is necessary to effectively address potential terrorism threats against the system.
Primary agencies of concern include-- (A) The Department of Agriculture, in particular the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service of the Department of Agriculture.
The United States Customs Service.
The Food and Drug Administration.
State departments of agriculture.
The responsibilities of the Interagency Agricultural Terrorism Committee shall include-- (A) preparing a plan defining the role of each agency in safeguarding agricultural production, processing and marketing systems; (B) improving domestic crisis planning and management criteria; (C) safeguarding critical infrastructures in agricultural production and food supply system; and (D) supporting research efforts to enhance counterterrorism capabilities related to the agricultural production and food supply system.
Department of Agriculture Cooperation With Other Agencies.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall continue and strengthen cooperation with the National Security Council, the Department of Justice, and other departments and agencies with responsibilities under Presidential Decision Directive 62 concerning the role of the Department of Agriculture in counterterrorism programs of the Federal Government.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall engage in active partnership with the Weapons of Mass Destruction Preparedness Group of the National Security Council focusing on the role of the Department of Agriculture regarding food and agricultural protection issues.
Department of Agriculture Counterterrorism Policy Council.--The Department of Agriculture Counterterrorism Policy Council, established in 1999 and chaired by the Deputy Secretary of Agriculture, shall continue to serve as the Department of Agriculture's senior policy forum for coordinating and leveraging departmental-wide support regarding terrorism issues.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall appoint an agricultural liaison on terrorism to report to the Homeland Security Office and serve as a liaison on all agricultural matters involving security and agricultural terrorism threats.
Agricultural Industry Involvement.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish an Industry Working Group on Agricultural Terrorism comprised of agricultural producer, processing, distribution, and retail organizations to serve in a consultative manner with the Department of Agriculture to develop measures to counteract terrorist threats against the agricultural production and food supply system.
The Secretary shall also establish training and information programs for agricultural producers to counter the threat of pests and disease at the farm level and to convey counterterrorism information to agricultural producers.
Increased Surveillance, Detection and Interdiction.--Greater financial and staff resources should be dedicated at the State and Federal Government levels for the detection and interdiction of agricultural terrorism threats.
Critical among these priorities are increasing the number of inspectors and detection devices at ports of entry for the interception of prohibited and damaging agricultural products or agriculturally related products.
Diagnostic Facilities.--To improve the capability of Federal diagnostic facilities to accurately and efficiently identify diseases and substances that are hazardous to plants and animals used in food production, the Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a Biosafety Level 4 facility within the Department of Agriculture at the Plum Island Diagnostic Laboratory, to create the diagnostic tests and vaccines needed to protect the United States swine industry from acts of biological terrorism and disease, such as the Nipah virus.
The Biosafety Level 4 facility shall be designed to prevent contact between microorganisms and personnel as well as escape into the environment.
A database shall be established to link animal and human disease information systems.