NATIONAL GUARD OPERATION ABOUT FACE TO PROVIDE LIFE-SKILLS FOR AT RISK YOUTH.
Chapter 5 of title 32, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
National Guard operation about face to provide life-skills for at-risk youth ``(a) Program Authority and Purpose.--The Secretary of Defense, through the Chief, National Guard Bureau, may use the National Guard to conduct an at-risk youth life skills program to be known as `National Guard Operation About Face', which shall be a community based outreach program for at-risk youth, which shall include after-school and summer classes to provide academic skills, computer literacy, employability skills, life-coping skills, and communication skills supplemented with work experience activities to create vibrant communities that foster economic opportunity and encourage life-long learning.
Conduct of the Program.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall provide for the conduct of the National Guard Operation About Face in such States as the Secretary considers to be appropriate.
The Secretary shall carry out the National Guard Operation About Face using-- ``(A) funds appropriated directly to the Secretary of Defense for the program; and ``(B) nondefense funds made available or transferred to the Secretary of Defense by other Federal agencies to support the program.
For purposes of a transfer under paragraph (2)(B), administration of the National Guard Operation About Face is a good or service for which an agency agreement may be entered into under section 1535 of title 31, United States Code.
Program Agreements.--(1) To carry out the National Guard Operation About Face in a State, the Secretary of Defense shall enter into an agreement with the Governor of the State, or in the case of the District of Columbia National Guard, with the commanding general of the District of Columbia National, under which the Governor or the commanding general will establish, organize, and administer the National Guard Operation About Face in the State.
The agreement may provide for the Secretary to provide funds to the State for civilian personnel costs attributable to the use of civilian employees of the National Guard in the conduct of the National Guard Operation About Face.
Persons Eligible To Participate in Program.--Any at risk youth may participate in the National Guard Operation About Face.
The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe the standards and procedures for selecting participants from among at risk youth.
Authorized Benefits for Participants.--To the extent provided in an agreement entered into in accordance with subsection (c): ``(1) Any funds made available or transferred to the Secretary of Defense by other Federal agencies under section (b)(2)(B) of this section may be used to provide a stipend to participants for the work experience portion of the National Guard Operation About Face: ``(A) For the original purpose for which the funds were appropriated and in accordance with the regulations of the Federal agency from which the funds were made available or transferred.
For the purpose for which defense funds are appropriated and in accordance with the regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense for the National Guard Operation About Face.
In the case of a conflict between the regulations described in paragraph (A) and (B), the regulations of the Federal agency from which the funds were made available or transferred shall apply.
A participant in the national Guard Operation About Face may receive the following additional benefits in connection with the program: ``(A) Light refreshments.
Program Personnel.--Personnel of the National Guard of a State in which the National Guard Operation About Face is conducted may serve on full-time National Guard duty for the purpose of providing managerial, administrative, training, or supporting services for the program.
Equipment and Facilities.--Equipment and facilities of the National Guard, including military property of the United States issued to the National Guard, may be used in carrying out the National Guard Operation About Face.
Supplemental Resources.--To carry out the National Guard Operation About Face in a State, the Governor of the State or, in the case of the District of Columbia, the commanding general of the District of Columbia National Guard, may supplement funds made available under the program out of other resources (including gifts) available to the Governor or the commanding general.
The Governor or the commanding Federal may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of money, other property or services for the National Guard Operation About Face.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `State' includes the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the territories, and the District of Columbia.
The term `at-risk youth' has the same meaning given that term in section 1432 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6472.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``510.
National Guard operation about face to provide life-skills for at-risk youth.