This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Cost and Tax Relief Act''.
TAX CREDIT FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION EXPENDITURES IN RESIDENCES.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits against tax) is amended by inserting after section 25B the following new section: ``SEC.
ENERGY CONSERVATION PROPERTY IN RESIDENCES.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 50 percent of the expenditures made by the taxpayer for qualified energy conservation property during such taxable year.
Limitation.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) with respect to each dwelling unit for any taxable year shall not exceed $2,500.
Qualified Energy Conservation Property.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified energy conservation property' means energy conservation property described in paragraph (2) if-- ``(A) the property is certified by the Secretary of Energy to equal or exceed energy conservation standards for such property or for the installation of such property, and ``(B) the property is installed on or in connection with a dwelling unit which is located in the United States and which is used by the taxpayer as a residence.
Description of energy conservation property.--For purposes of paragraph (1), energy conservation property described in this paragraph is the following: ``(A) Ceiling insulation.
Water heater insulation blankets.
Insulation of plenums and ducts.
Storm windows with a U-value of 0.45 or less.
Thermal doors and windows.
Thermal energy storage devices with central control systems.
Controls and automatic switching devices between natural and electric lighting.
Any other property that the Secretary of Energy determines to be an effective device for the conservation of energy.
Certification.--For purposes of subsection (c)(1)(A)-- ``(1) Products.--A certification with respect to qualified energy conservation property shall be made by the manufacturer of such property.
Installation.--A certification with respect to the installation of qualified energy conservation property shall be made by the person who sold or installed the property.
Form.--Certifications referred to in this subsection shall be in such form as the Secretary shall prescribe, and, except in the case of a certification by a representative of a local building regulatory authority, shall include the taxpayer identification number of the person making the certification.
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Dollar amounts in case of joint occupancy.--In the case of any dwelling unit which if jointly occupied and used during any calendar year as a residence by 2 or more individuals the following shall apply: ``(A) The amount of the credit allowable under subsection (a) by reason of expenditures (as the case may be) made during such calendar year by any of such individuals with respect to such dwelling unit shall be determined by treating all of such individuals as 1 taxpayer whose taxable year is such calendar year.
There shall be allowable with respect to such expenditures to each of such individuals, a credit under subsection (a) for the taxable year in which such calendar year ends in an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount determined under subparagraph (A) as the amount of such expenditures made by such individual during such calendar year bears to the aggregate of such expenditures made by all of such individuals during such calendar year.
Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing corporation.--In the case of an individual who is a tenant- stockholder (as defined in section 216) in a cooperative housing corporation (as defined in such section), such individual shall be treated as having made his tenant- stockholder's proportionate share (as defined in section 216(b)(3)) of any expenditures of such corporation.
Condominiums.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of an individual who is a member of a condominium management association with respect to a condominium which he owns, such individual shall be treated as having made his proportionate share of any expenditures of such association.
Condominium management association.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `condominium management association' means an organization which meets the requirements of paragraph (1) of section 528(c) (other than subparagraph (E) thereof) with respect to a condominium project substantially all of the units of which are used as residences.
Joint ownership of energy items.-- ``(A) In general.--Any expenditure otherwise qualifying as an expenditure for qualified energy conservation property shall not be treated as failing to so qualify merely because such expenditure was made with respect to 2 or more dwelling units.
Limits applied separately.--In the case of any expenditure described in subparagraph (A), the amount of the credit allowable under subsection (a) shall (subject to paragraph (1)) be computed separately with respect to the amount of the expenditure made for each dwelling unit.
Allocation in certain cases.--If less than 80 percent of the use of an item is for nonbusiness residential purposes, only that portion of the expenditures for such item which is properly allocable to use for nonbusiness residential purposes shall be taken into account.
When expenditure made; amount of expenditure.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), an expenditure with respect to an item shall be treated as made when the original installation of the item is completed.
Expenditures part of building construction.-- In the case of an expenditure in connection with the construction or reconstruction of a structure, such expenditure shall be treated as made when the original use of the constructed or reconstructed structure by the taxpayer begins.
Amount.--The amount of any expenditure shall be the cost thereof.
Other applicable rules.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (4) and (5) of section 48(a) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Basis Adjustments.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit is allowed under this section for any expenditure with respect to any property, the increase in the basis of such property which would (but for this subsection) result from such expenditure shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so allowed.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction or other credit shall be allowed under this chapter for any expenditure for which credit is allowed under this section.
Election To Have Credit Not Apply.--A taxpayer may elect to have this section not apply for any taxable year.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply to expenditures with respect to property placed in service after December 31, 2000.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code (relating to general rule for adjustments to basis) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (27), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (28) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(29) in the case of a residence with respect to which a credit was allowed under section 25C, to the extent provided in section 25C(f).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25B the following new item: ``Sec.
Energy conservation property in residences.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.
TAX CREDIT FOR PURCHASES OF ENERGY EFFICIENT APPLIANCES.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits against tax), as amended by section 2, is amended by inserting after section 25C the following new section: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount paid by the taxpayer for the purchase of any qualified appliance.
Limitation.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed $2,500.
Qualified Appliance.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified appliance' means any appliance listed in paragraph (2) if it meets the standards in the Appliance Standards Program of the Department of Energy (in part 430 of chapter II of title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations).
List of appliances.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the appliances listed in this paragraph are the following: ``(A) Air conditioners--central air and heat pumps.
Heating equipment--furnaces and boilers.
Kitchen ranges and ovens.
Refrigerators, refrigerator-freezers, and freezers.
Water closets and urinals.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code, as amended by section 2, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25C the following new item: ``25D.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.