This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission To Ensure Small Aircraft Safety Act of 1993''.
Congress finds and declares the following: (1) Small aircraft safety is a serious national concern.
The Federal Government's resources must be utilized to ensure the safety of small aircraft travel.
On at least three separate occasions, the National Transportation Safety Board contacted the Federal Aviation Administration regarding the Hartzell HC-B4 propeller assembly featured on Mitsubishi MU-2 aircraft.
The National Transportation Safety Board urged the Federal Aviation Administration to conduct full fleet inspections of Hartzell propeller assemblies as a result of an accident near Utica, New York.
The Federal Aviation Administration concluded that a special investigation was not warranted.
The National Transportation Safety Board found the Federal Aviation Administration's responses unacceptable.
The National Transportation Safety Board has no other authority to pursue its recommendations other than to report to the Federal Aviation Administration.
Small aircraft safety investigatory practices and procedures should be examined.
Federal Government resources are not utilized effectively when there is no mechanism or procedure to resolve disagreements among Federal agencies over questions of small aircraft safety.
Procedures are necessary to resolve Federal agency disagreements over aircraft safety.
Alleviating Government gridlock among Federal entities responsible for the safety of our Nation's pilots and passengers should be a top priority.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission To Ensure Small Aircraft Safety (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members of whom-- (A) 1 shall be appointed by the President, subject to paragraph (2); (B) 5 shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, 3 upon the recommendation of the majority leader of the Senate, and 2 upon the recommendation of the minority leader of the Senate, from among the Members of the Senate; and (C) 3 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among the Members of such House, and 2 shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives from among the Members of such House.
Prohibition.--The member of the Commission appointed under paragraph (1)(A) may not be an employee or former employee of the Federal Government.
Date.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made no later than 30 days following the date of the enactment of this Act.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--No later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--Except for its initial meeting, the Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
In General.--Members appointed shall be appointed from among individuals who are experts in general aviation policy (including representatives of Federal, State and local governments and other public authorities responsible for general aviation and small aircraft safety), small aircraft safety, and organizations representing general aviation, small aircraft pilots, passengers, shippers, and small aircraft designers and manufacturers.
Chairman and Vice Chairman.--The Commission shall select a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among its members.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.--The Commission shall conduct a thorough study and investigation of all matters relating to current investigatory procedures and practices of the National Transportation Safety Board and the Federal Aviation Administration with respect to small aircraft safety; the adequacy of these practices and procedures, the coordination of National Transportation Safety Board and Federal Aviation Administration investigations and enforcement of recommendations; the enforcement of Federal Aviation Administration small aircraft safety regulations; and the impediments to full utilization of National Transportation Safety Board and Federal Aviation Administration investigatory resources and enforcement.
Recommendations.--The Commission shall develop recommendations on those policies which need to be adopted to-- (1) achieve a national goal of safety in small aircraft and the general aviation industry; (2) resolve disagreements among Federal investigatory and regulatory agencies responsible for small aircraft safety; (3) develop coordination among Federal agencies responsible for investigating small aircraft safety; and (4) ensure full and effective enforcement of small aircraft safety regulations.
Report.--No later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit a report to the President and the Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairman of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 180 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 4.
All records and papers of the Commission shall be deposited by the Administrator of General Services in the National Archives.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated $____________ for fiscal year 1994 to the Commission to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.