AIR FORCE ROLE IN MANAGEMENT OF CIVIL AIR PATROL AS CIVILIAN AUXILIARY OF THE AIR FORCE.
In General.--Chapter 909 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 9442 as section 9443; and (2) by inserting after section 9441 the following new section: ``Sec.
Air Force role in management ``(a) Administrative Responsibility.--In its capacity as a federally chartered corporation under chapter 403 of title 36 and a volunteer civilian auxiliary of the Air Force, the Civil Air Patrol shall be administered by the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, under the direction of the Secretary of the Air Force.
For command, control, and administrative purposes, the Civil Air Patrol shall have such organizational elements as are approved by the Secretary of the Air Force in regulations.
Board of Directors.--(1) The Secretary of the Air Force shall appoint a National Board of Directors for the Civil Air Patrol.
The National Board of Directors shall be composed of the following: ``(A) General officers of the Air Force, including the Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard.
Senior civilian employees of the Department of the Air Force.
Members appointed from the volunteer Civil Air Patrol membership.
The chairman of the National Board of Directors shall be the member of the Board who is the senior active duty Air Force officer.
The members of the Board appointed under paragraph (1)(C) may not exceed a minority of the Board.
Executive Direction.--(1) The National Board of Directors shall appoint for the Civil Air Patrol the following: ``(A) A National Commander, to be appointed from the civilian volunteer membership of the Civil Air Patrol.
The Executive Director, Safety Officer, and Inspector General appointed under paragraph (1) shall report directly to the Secretary of the Air Force through the National Board of Directors.
The Chief of Staff of the Air Force may assign officers and enlisted members of the Air Force on active duty and civilian employees of the Department of the Air Force to serve on the staff of the national headquarters of the Civil Air Patrol.
Effect of Appointment or Assignment.--(1) The appointment or assignment of members of the armed forces or civilian employees under subsection (b) or (c) is not precluded by any law or regulation prohibiting active duty members of the armed forces or civilian employees from participating in the management of non-Federal entities.
An officer or enlisted member of the Air Force appointed to or assigned to duty in a Civil Air Patrol management position specified in subsection (b) or (c) shall not receive any compensation, other than the regular military compensation to which the officer or member is otherwise entitled, as a result of the appointment or assignment.
Use of Civil Air Patrol Members and Employees.--(1) The Executive Director and National Board of Directors may use such Civil Air Patrol employees and volunteer Civil Air Patrol members as the Executive Director and National Board of Directors considers necessary to administer the Civil Air Patrol and to ensure that it is capable of assisting the Department of the Air Force in the performance of its noncombat mission.
Except as provided in section 9441(c) of this title, a member of the Civil Air Patrol or an employee of the Civil Air Patrol is not a Federal employee and is not subject to the provisions of law relating to Federal employment, including those relating to hours of work, rates of compensation, leave, unemployment compensation, Federal employee benefits, ethics, conflicts of interest, and other similar criminal or civil statutes and regulations governing the conduct of Federal employees.
However, nothing in this paragraph shall constrain the Secretary of the Air Force from prescribing standards of conduct and behavior for Civil Air Patrol members and employees.
Funds Management.--All funds provided to the Civil Air Patrol under subsections (b) and (d) of section 9441 of this title, or any other provision of law, are subject to the requirements of sections 6304 and 6305 of title 31 (commonly known as the Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act) and the Federal regulations governing the provision of appropriated funds to private, nonprofit organizations.
Relation to Federal Charter.--The powers granted to the Civil Air Patrol in section 40304 of title 36, including the power to adopt a constitution, bylaws, and regulations, are subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Air Force under the authority granted to the Secretary by this section and are subject to any policies, regulations, or instructions issued by the Secretary under that authority.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by striking the item relating to section 9442 and inserting the following new items: ``9442.
Air Force role in management.
Assistance by other agencies.