This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Health Care Protection and Improvement Act of 1995''.
IMPROVING HEALTH CARE ACCESS AND REDUCING HEALTH CARE COSTS THROUGH TELEMEDICINE.
In General.--Title XVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300u et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in the title heading by striking out ``AND HEALTH PROMOTION'' and inserting ``, HEALTH PROMOTION AND TELEMEDICINE DEVELOPMENT''; (2) by inserting after the title heading the following: ``Part A--Health Information and Health Promotion''; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new part: ``Part B--Telemedicine Development ``SEC.
GRANT PROGRAM FOR PROMOTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL TELEMEDICINE NETWORKS.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a program to award grants to eligible entities in accordance with this subsection to promote the development of rural telemedicine networks.
Grants for Development of Rural Telemedicine.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Office of Rural Health Policy, shall award grants to eligible entities that have applications approved under subsection (d) for the purpose of expanding access to health care services for individuals in rural areas through the use of telemedicine.
Grants shall be awarded under this section to-- ``(1) encourage the initial development of rural telemedicine networks; ``(2) expand existing networks; ``(3) link existing networks together; or ``(4) link such networks to existing fiber optic telecommunications systems.
Eligible Entity Defined.--For the purposes of this section the term `eligible entity' means hospitals and other health care providers operating in a health care network of community-based providers that includes at least three of the following-- ``(1) community or migrant health centers; ``(2) local health departments; ``(3) community mental health centers; ``(4) nonprofit hospitals; ``(5) private practice health professionals, including rural health clinics; or ``(6) other publicly funded health or social services agencies.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section an eligible entity shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including a description of-- ``(1) the need of the entity for the grant; ``(2) the use to which the entity would apply any amounts received under such grant; ``(3) the source and amount of non-Federal funds that the entity will pledge for the project funded under the grant; and ``(4) the long-term viability of the project and evidence of the providers commitment to the network.
Preference in Awarding Grants.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give preference to applicants that-- ``(1) are health care providers operating in rural health care networks or that propose to form such networks with the majority of the providers in such networks being located in a medically undeserved area or health professional shortage area; ``(2) can demonstrate broad geographic coverage in the rural areas of the State, or States in which the applicant is located; and ``(3) propose to use funds received under the grant to develop plans for, or to establish, telemedicine systems that will link rural hospitals and rural health care providers to other hospitals and health care providers; ``(4) will use the amounts provided under the grant for a range of health care applications and to promote greater efficiency in the use of health care resources; ``(5) demonstrate the long-term viability of projects through use of local matching funds (in cash or in-kind); and ``(6) demonstrate financial, institutional, and community support and the long-range viability of the network.
Use of Amounts.--Amounts received under a grant awarded under this section shall be utilized for the development of telemedicine networks.
Such amounts may be used to cover the costs associated with the development of telemedicine networks and the acquisition of telemedicine equipment and modifications or improvements of telecommunications facilities, including-- ``(1) the development and acquisition through lease or purchase of computer hardware and software, audio and visual equipment, computer network equipment, modification or improvements to telecommunications transmission facilities, telecommunications terminal equipment, interactive video equipment, data terminal equipment, and other facilities and equipment that would further the purposes of this section; ``(2) the provision of technical assistance and instruction for the development and use of such programming equipment or facilities; ``(3) the development and acquisition of instructional programming; ``(4) the development of projects for teaching or training medical students, residents, and other health professions students in rural training sites about the application of telemedicine; ``(5) transmission costs, maintenance of equipment, and compensation of specialists and referring practitioners; ``(6) the development of projects to use telemedicine to facilitate collaboration between health care providers; and ``(7) such other uses that are consistent with achieving the purposes of this section as approved by the Secretary.
Prohibited Use of Amounts.--Amounts received under a grant awarded under this section shall not be used for-- ``(1) expenditures to purchase or lease equipment to the extent the expenditures would exceed more than 60 percent of the total grant funds; or ``(2) expenditures for indirect costs (as determined by the Secretary) to the extent the expenditures would exceed more than 10 percent of the total grant funds.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Definition.--For the purposes of this section, the term `rural health care network' means a group of rural hospitals or other rural health care providers (including clinics, physicians and non- physicians primary care providers) that have entered into a relationship with each other or with nonrural hospitals and health care providers for the purpose of strengthening the delivery of health care services in rural areas or specifically to improve their patients' access to telemedicine services.
At least 75 percent of hospitals and other health care providers participating in the network shall be located in rural areas.
Regulations on Reimbursement of Telemedicine.--Not later than July 1, 1996, the Secretary, in consultation with the Office of Rural Health and the Health Care Financing Administration, shall issue regulations regarding reimbursement for telemedicine services provided under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF RURAL HEALTH OUTREACH GRANT PROGRAM.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part: ``Part O--Rural Health Outreach Grants ``SEC.
RURAL HEALTH OUTREACH GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants to demonstrate the effectiveness of outreach to populations in rural areas that do not normally seek or do not have access to health or mental health services.
Grants shall be awarded to enhance linkages, integration, and cooperation in order to provide health or mental health services, to enhance services, or increase access to or utilization of health or mental health services.
Mission of the Outreach Projects.--Projects funded under subsection (a) should be designed to facilitate the integration and coordination of services in or among rural communities in order to address the needs of populations living in rural or frontier communities.
Composition of Program.-- ``(1) Consortium arrangement.--To be eligible to participate in the grant program established under subsection (a), an applicant entity shall be a consortium of three or more separate and distinct entities formed to carry out an outreach project under subsection (b).
Certain requirements.--A consortium under paragraph (1) shall be composed of three or more public or private nonprofit health care or social service providers.
Consortium members may include local health departments, community or migrant health centers, community mental health centers, hospitals or private practices, or other publicly funded health or social service agencies.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $30,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 2000.''.
EXTENSION OF CERTAIN PAYMENT PROVISIONS FOR MEDICARE DEPENDENT SMALL RURAL HOSPITALS.
In General.--Section 1886(d)(5)(G)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(d)(5)(G)(i)) is amended by striking ``October 1, 1994'' and inserting ``October 1, 1999''.
Payment.--Section 1886(b)(3)(D) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(b)(3)(D)) is amended by striking ``September 30, 1994'' and inserting ``September 30, 1999''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect as if enacted on October 1, 1994.