This Act may be cited as the ``Tribal Sovereignty Protection Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) In response to a California Supreme Court decision that overturned Proposition 5, the passage of which in 1998 confirmed gaming rights for California tribes, the United States attorney declared that all tribal gaming in California must cease unless Tribal-State compacts were signed by October 13, 1999.
It is estimated that Indian gaming in California directly supports more than 16,000 jobs and indirectly supports another 34,000 jobs in California, while it has reduced welfare payments by $50,000,000.
Faced with the prospect that their most valuable economic assets would be shut down, 61 California tribes were essentially forced to sign gaming compacts with California Governor Gray Davis.
The Governor of California acted in bad faith by conditioning those compacts on the tribes' signing separate labor agreements that could result in the forced intrusion by labor unions on sovereign tribal lands and the unprecedented unionization of Indian casino employees.
The United States Constitution recognizes Indian tribes as sovereign governmental entities.
Indian tribes have an inherent right to govern themselves consistent with the United States Constitution, treaties, laws, and court decisions.
The National Labor Relations Board has held that tribally-owned and operated businesses located on Indian lands are exempt from the National Labor Relations Act under the Act's exemption for government entities.
The labor agreements forced on the tribes in California establish jurisdiction outside of the National Labor Relations Board and would instead be enforceable in State court.
By signing these labor agreements, California tribes were forced to cede their sovereignty and their constitutional rights to the State of California in order to save their enterprises from being shut down by the United States Department of Justice.
The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act was established to ``[promote] tribal economic development'' and ``for the regulation of gaming by an Indian tribe adequate to shield it from organized crime .
and to ensure that the Indian tribe is the primary beneficiary of the gaming operation''.
Labor agreements have never been part of Tribal-State compacts outside California and could undermine the stated purposes of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act.
The situation in California is part of a broader attack on tribal sovereignty led by labor-backed interests.
The recently-released report of the National Gambling Impact Study Commission, at the insistence of commission member John Wilhelm, president of the Hotel Employee and Restaurant Employee International Union, recommends that Indian tribes voluntarily enter into agreements with organized labor that could lead to the unionization of Indian casino employees, and states that if the tribes do not reach such agreements within a ``reasonable period of time'' that ``Congress should enact legislation establishing'' labor organizing rights, essentially forcing the tribes to unionize their casino employees.
The decision to allow access to tribal employees and the unionization of tribally owned and operated casinos located on tribal lands should be determined solely by the individual sovereign tribes, not the State or Federal Government.
Amending the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act to ensure that Indian tribes cannot be forced to provide access to or otherwise unionize their casino employees as a condition of obtaining a federally approved Tribal-State gaming compact under the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act would protect the constitutional rights of all federally recognized tribes and honor the Federal Government's treaty obligations to Native Americans, and would ensure that no tribe could be forced into any labor agreement against its will.
PROHIBITION ON LABOR AGREEMENTS AS PART OF TRIBAL-STATE COMPACTS.
Section 11(d)(3) of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 United States Code 2710(d)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(D) No Tribal-State compact negotiated under subparagraph (A) shall include, or be conditioned by another agreement which includes, any provision relating to labor terms or conditions (including terms or conditions related to free association, organizing, or collective bargaining) for employees of tribally owned businesses located on Indian lands.
Any such provision entered into before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this subparagraph shall be null and void.
If such a provision is included in, or otherwise is purported to condition the effectiveness of, a Tribal-State compact, such provision shall be deemed as severed from and not conditioning the effectiveness of the Tribal-State compact which shall remain in force as if such provision had never been executed.