The 21st Century Community Learning Centers Act (20 United States Code 8241 et seq.)
is amended to read as follows: ``PART I--21ST CENTURY COMMUNITY LEARNING CENTERS ``SEC.
``This part may be cited as the `21st Century Community Learning Centers Act'.
``Congress finds the following: ``(1) Each day during the school year, millions of children return to unsupervised homes after school.
Each week, between 5,000,000 and 15,000,000 children return from school to empty homes.
Child care experts believe that there is a direct correlation between the degree of after-school supervision and grade completion.
Students who have little or no after-school supervision are more apt to receive poor grades or to drop out of school than students who are engaged in supervised, constructive activities.
A recent study found that twice as many parents want supervised after-school programs for their children than are currently available.
Statistically, most juvenile crime takes place between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. and our children are most at risk of being victims of crime during the hours after school.
Quality after-school programs help to protect our children while affording them enhanced opportunities to succeed academically.
Twenty-first century community learning centers serve as a marvelous local resource for our communities to develop the best strategies to integrate after-school programs into the whole education of their youth.
Strategies developed locally best fit the unique needs of each community and those of its school-aged citizens.
Grants by the Secretary.--The Secretary is authorized, in accordance with the provisions of this part, to award grants to rural and inner-city schools and organizations, or consortia of such schools or organizations, to enable such schools or organizations to plan, implement, or to expand after-school projects that benefit the educational, health, social service, cultural, and recreational needs of a rural or inner-city youth.
Equitable Distribution.--In awarding grants under this part, the Secretary shall assure an equitable distribution of assistance among the States, among urban and rural areas of the United States, and among urban and rural areas of a State.
Grant Period.--The Secretary shall award grants under this part for a period not to exceed 3 years.
Amount.--The Secretary shall not award a grant under this part in any fiscal year in an amount less than $40,000.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this part, a school or organization, or consortia of such schools or organizations, shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably prescribe.
Each such application shall include-- ``(1) a comprehensive local plan that enables the school or organization, or consortia of such schools or organizations, to serve as a center for the delivery of education and human resources for youth through after-school programs; ``(2) an evaluation of the needs, available resources, and goals and objectives for the proposed project in order to determine which activities will be undertaken to address such needs; and ``(3) a description of the proposed project, including-- ``(A) a description of the mechanism that will be used to disseminate information in a manner that is understandable and accessible to the community; ``(B) identification of Federal, State, and local programs to be merged or coordinated so that public resources may be maximized; ``(C) a description of the collaborative efforts to be undertaken by community-based organizations, related public agencies, businesses, or other appropriate organizations; ``(D) a description of how the school, organization, or consortia of such schools or organizations, will serve as a delivery center for existing and new after-school services; and ``(E) an assurance that the school, organization, or consortia of such schools or organizations, will establish a facility utilization policy that specifically states-- ``(i) the rules and regulations applicable to building and equipment use; and ``(ii) supervision guidelines.
Priority.--The Secretary shall give priority to applications describing projects that offer a broad selection of services which address the needs of youth in after-school programs.
``Grants awarded under this part may be used to plan, implement, or expand community learning centers.
``For the purpose of this part-- ``(1) the term ``community learning center'' means an entity that provides educational, recreational, health, and social service programs for youth within a local community; ``(2) the term ``organization'' means a youth development group, local charity, religious organization, community-based organization, or faith-based organization; ``(3) the term ``school'' means a public elementary or secondary school.
the term ``after-school program'' means a child care program to assist working parents when school is not in session, including before- and after-school, weekends, holidays, and vacations.
``There are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal year thereafter, to carry out this part.