This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Adjustment Assistance for Communities Act of 2003''.
The purpose of this Act is to assist communities negatively impacted by trade with economic adjustment through the integration of political and economic organizations, the coordination of Federal, State, and local resources, the creation of community-based development strategies, and the provision of economic transition assistance.
TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITIES.
Chapter 4 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2371 et seq.)
is amended to read as follows: ``CHAPTER 4--TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITIES ``SEC.
``In this chapter: ``(1) Affected domestic producer.--The term `affected domestic producer' means any manufacturer, producer, farmer, rancher, fisherman or worker representative (including associations of such persons) that was affected by a finding under the Antidumping Act of 1921, or by an antidumping or countervailing duty order issued under title VII of the Tariff Act of 1930.
Agricultural commodity producer.--The term `agricultural commodity producer' has the same meaning as the term `person' as prescribed by regulations promulgated under section 1001(5) of the Food Security Act of 1985 (7 United States Code 1308(5)).
Community.--The term `community' means a city, county, or other political subdivision of a State or a consortium of political subdivisions of a State that the Secretary certifies as being negatively impacted by trade.
Community negatively impacted by trade.--A community negatively impacted by trade means a community with respect to which a determination has been made under section 273.
Eligible community.--The term `eligible community' means a community certified under section 273 for assistance under this chapter.
Fisherman.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `fisherman' means any person who-- ``(i) is engaged in commercial fishing; or ``(ii) is a United States fish processor.
Commercial fishing, fish, fishery, fishing, fishing vessel, person, and united states fish processor.--The terms `commercial fishing', `fish', `fishery', `fishing', `fishing vessel', `person', and `United States fish processor' have the same meanings as such terms have in the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1802).
Job loss.--The term `job loss' means the total or partial separation of an individual, as those terms are defined in section 247.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Commerce.
COMMUNITY TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
Establishment.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Trade Adjustment Assistance for Communities Act of 2003, the Secretary shall establish a Trade Adjustment Assistance for Communities Program at the Department of Commerce.
Personnel.--The Secretary shall designate such staff as may be necessary to carry out the responsibilities described in this chapter.
Coordination of Federal Response.--The Secretary shall-- ``(1) provide leadership, support, and coordination for a comprehensive management program to address economic dislocation in eligible communities; ``(2) coordinate the Federal response to an eligible community-- ``(A) by identifying all Federal, State, and local resources that are available to assist the eligible community in recovering from economic distress; ``(B) by ensuring that all Federal agencies offering assistance to an eligible community do so in a targeted, integrated manner that ensures that an eligible community has access to all available Federal assistance; ``(C) by assuring timely consultation and cooperation between Federal, State, and regional officials concerning economic adjustment for an eligible community; and ``(D) by identifying and strengthening existing agency mechanisms designed to assist eligible communities in their efforts to achieve economic adjustment and workforce reemployment; ``(3) provide comprehensive technical assistance to any eligible community in the efforts of that community to-- ``(A) identify serious economic problems in the community that are the result of negative impacts from trade; ``(B) integrate the major groups and organizations significantly affected by the economic adjustment; ``(C) access Federal, State, and local resources designed to assist in economic development and trade adjustment assistance; ``(D) diversify and strengthen the community economy; and ``(E) develop a community-based strategic plan to address economic development and workforce dislocation, including unemployment among agricultural commodity producers, and fishermen; ``(4) establish specific criteria for submission and evaluation of a strategic plan submitted under section 274(d); ``(5) establish specific criteria for submitting and evaluating applications for grants under section 275; ``(6) administer the grant programs established under sections 274 and 275; and ``(7) establish an interagency Trade Adjustment Assistance for Communities Working Group, consisting of the representatives of any Federal department or agency with responsibility for economic adjustment assistance, including the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Education, the Department of Labor, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Small Business Administration, the Department of the Treasury, the Department of Commerce, and any other Federal, State, or regional department or agency the Secretary determines necessary or appropriate.
Certification.--Not later than 45 days after an event described in subsection (c)(1), the Secretary of Commerce shall determine if a community described in subsection (b)(1) is negatively impacted by trade, and if a positive determination is made, shall certify the community for assistance under this chapter.
Determination That Community Is Eligible.-- ``(1) Community described.--A community described in this paragraph means a community with respect to which on or after October 1, 2003-- ``(A) the Secretary of Labor certifies a group of workers (or their authorized representative) in the community as eligible for assistance pursuant to section 223; ``(B) the Secretary of Commerce certifies a firm located in the community as eligible for adjustment assistance under section 251; ``(C) the Secretary of Agriculture certifies a group of agricultural commodity producers (or their authorized representative) in the community as eligible for adjustment assistance under section 293; ``(D) an affected domestic producer is located in the community; or ``(E) the Secretary determines that a significant number of fishermen in the community is negatively impacted by trade.
Negatively impacted by trade.--The Secretary shall determine that a community is negatively impacted by trade, after taking into consideration-- ``(A) the number of jobs affected compared to the size of workforce in the community; ``(B) the severity of the rates of unemployment in the community and the duration of the unemployment in the community; ``(C) the income levels and the extent of underemployment in the community; ``(D) the outmigration of population from the community and the extent to which the outmigration is causing economic injury in the community; and ``(E) the unique problems and needs of the community.
Definition and Special Rules.-- ``(1) Event described.--An event described in this paragraph means one of the following: ``(A) A notification described in paragraph (2).
A certification of a firm under section 251.
A finding under the Antidumping Act of 1921, or an antidumping or countervailing duty order issued under title VII of the Tariff Act of 1930.
A determination by the Secretary that a significant number of fishermen in a community have been negatively impacted by trade.
Notification.--The Secretary of Labor, immediately upon making a determination that a group of workers is eligible for trade adjustment assistance under section 223, (or the Secretary of Agriculture, immediately upon making a determination that a group of agricultural commodity producers is eligible for adjustment assistance under section 293, as the case may be) shall notify the Secretary of Commerce of the determination.
Look back.--In any case in which an event described in paragraph (1) occurred on or after January 1, 1998, and before the effective date of this chapter, the Secretary shall, not later than 45 days after such effective date, determine whether the community is negatively impacted by trade, and if a positive determination is made, shall certify the community for assistance under this chapter.
Notification to Eligible Communities.--Immediately upon certification by the Secretary of Commerce that a community is eligible for assistance under subsection (b), the Secretary shall notify the community-- ``(1) of the determination under subsection (b); ``(2) of the provisions of this chapter; ``(3) how to access the clearinghouse established by the Department of Commerce regarding available economic assistance; ``(4) how to obtain technical assistance provided under section 272(c)(3); and ``(5) how to obtain grants, tax credits, low income loans, and other appropriate economic assistance.
In General.--An eligible community may develop a strategic plan for community economic adjustment and diversification.
Requirements for Strategic Plan.--A strategic plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following: ``(1) A description and justification of the capacity for economic adjustment, including the method of financing to be used.
A description of the commitment of the community to the strategic plan over the long term and the participation and input of groups affected by economic dislocation.
A description of the projects to be undertaken by the eligible community.
A description of how the plan and the projects to be undertaken by the eligible community will lead to job creation and job retention in the community.
A description of how the plan will achieve economic adjustment and diversification.
A description of how the plan and the projects will contribute to establishing or maintaining a level of public services necessary to attract and retain economic investment.
A description and justification for the cost and timing of proposed basic and advanced infrastructure improvements in the eligible community.
A description of how the plan will address the occupational and workforce conditions in the eligible community.
A description of the educational programs available for workforce training and future employment needs.
A description of how the plan will adapt to changing markets and business cycles.
A description and justification for the cost and timing of the total funds required by the community for economic assistance.
A graduation strategy through which the eligible community demonstrates that the community will terminate the need for Federal assistance.
Grants To Develop Strategic Plans.--The Secretary, upon receipt of an application from an eligible community, may award a grant to that community to be used to develop the strategic plan.
Submission of Plan.--A strategic plan developed under subsection (a) shall be submitted to the Secretary for evaluation and approval.
GRANTS FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
In General.--The Secretary, upon approval of a strategic plan from an eligible community, may award a grant to that community to carry out any project or program that is certified by the Secretary to be included in the strategic plan approved under section 274(d), or consistent with that plan.
Additional Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), in order to assist eligible communities to obtain funds under Federal grant programs, other than the grants provided for in section 274(c) or subsection (a), the Secretary may, on the application of an eligible community, make a supplemental grant to the community if-- ``(A) the purpose of the grant program from which the grant is made is to provide technical or other assistance for planning, constructing, or equipping public works facilities or to provide assistance for public service projects; and ``(B) the grant is 1 for which the community is eligible except for the community's inability to meet the non-Federal share requirements of the grant program.
Use as non-federal share.--A supplemental grant made under this subsection may be used to provide the non-Federal share of a project, unless the total Federal contribution to the project for which the grant is being made exceeds 80 percent and that excess is not permitted by law.
Rural Community Preference.--The Secretary shall develop guidelines to ensure that rural communities receive preference in the allocation of resources.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
Before implementing any regulation or guideline proposed by the Secretary with respect to this chapter, the Secretary shall submit the regulation or guideline to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives for approval.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds appropriated under this chapter shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, and local public funds expended to provide economic development assistance for communities.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $350,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007, to carry out this chapter.
Amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall remain available until expended.''.
Termination.--Section 285(b) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2271 note) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Assistance for communities.--Technical assistance and other payments may not be provided under chapter 4 after September 30, 2007.''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for title II of the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by striking the items relating to chapter 4 of title II and inserting after the items relating to chapter 3 the following new items: ``Chapter 4--Trade Adjustment Assistance for Communities ``Sec.
Community Trade Adjustment Assistance Program.
Grants for economic development.
Judicial Review.--Section 284(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2395(a)) is amended by striking ``section 271'' and inserting ``section 273''.
The provisions of this Act shall take effect on October 1, 2003.