This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Commission to Study the Culture and Glorification of Violence in America Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Violence in the United States may be fueled by interrelated factors such as the media, psychological stress, the role of the school system, gun regulations, and economic characteristics.
According to the Department of Justice, there were as many as 1,823,400 serious violent crimes and 419,640 firearm- related incidents in 2005.
Teens and young adults experience the highest rates of violent crime.
In 2005, approximately 28 percent of public and private school students ages 12-18 reported that they had been bullied at school within the previous 6 months.
According to the Department of Justice, the incarceration rate has continuously increased since the 1980s, and prisoners convicted of a violent offense make up over half of the national prison population.
According to the Department of Justice, the Federal Government spent $35,400,000,000 on criminal justice in 2005, while local governments spent $103,700,000,000.
According to several studies from the American Journal of Economics and Sociology, economic frustration motivates criminal behaviors and inhibits communal deterrence capacities.
According to the Department of Labor, the number of unemployed persons has increased from 7,000,000 in June 2007 to 8,500,000 in June 2008.
Unemployed workers are more likely to be teenagers, young adults, and African Americans.
According to a study from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), prolonged exposure to violence in the media can increase acceptance of violence as an appropriate means of solving problems, can glamorize weapons as sources of personal power, and can contribute to aggressive behavior.
There is established a commission to be known as the Presidential Commission to Study the Culture and Glorification of Violence in America (hereinafter the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall-- (1) examine the glorification of violence in the United States; (2) examine the relationship between psychological factors and increased violence; (3) examine the role of the media in the violent atmosphere prevalent today; (4) examine the correlation, if any, between economic frustration and increased violence; (5) examine the correlation, if any, between ease of access to firearms and increased violence; (6) examine the role of the school system in preventing violent behaviors and identifying potential perpetrators of violence; and (7) make findings and conclusions and recommend potential solutions (including recommendations for legislation and administrative action) to alleviate the problems related to the glorification of violence in the United States.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 16 members (hereinafter the ``members'') who shall be appointed as follows: (1) 8 members appointed by the President.
2 members appointed by the majority leader of the House of Representatives.
2 members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
2 members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
2 members appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Qualifications.-- (1) In general.--Members shall have special knowledge of or experience in the issue of violence in America, and may include sociologists, psychologists, clergy, school counselors, law enforcement officials, victims of violence, and representatives from the media and the entertainment and gun industries.
Political affiliation.--Political affiliation shall not be a determining factor in the appointment of members.
Deadline for Appointment.--Every original member shall be appointed to the Commission not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Terms and Vacancies.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.--Members shall not be paid by reason of their service as members.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--Eight members shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the Commission, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The members shall elect one member to act as the Chairperson of the Commission (hereinafter the ``Chairperson'').
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Staff.--The Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of the Commission personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the department or agency to assist the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate to carry out this Act.
Powers of Members and Agents.--The Commission may delegate to a member or agency any authority of the Commission under subsection (c) or (e).
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of the department or agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate Government or private agencies or persons for supplies or services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
The Commission shall transmit a report to the President and the Congress not later than one year after the date that all original members have been appointed to the Commission.
The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting the report required by section 7.
Any spending authority (as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 401(c)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974) authorized by this Act shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriations Acts.