Additional Restrictions on Marketing, Advertising, and Access.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall revise the regulations related to tobacco products promulgated by the Secretary on August 28, 1996 (61 Fed.
44396) to include the additional restrictions on marketing, advertising, and access described in Title IA and Title IC of the Proposed Resolution entered into by the tobacco manufacturers and the State attorneys general on June 20, 1997, except that the Secretary shall not include an additional restriction on marketing or advertising in such regulations if its inclusion would violate the First Amendment to the Constitution.
Warnings.-- ``(1) Cigarettes and smokeless tobacco.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to require warnings on cigarette and smokeless tobacco labeling and advertisements.
The content, format, and rotation of warnings shall conform to the specifications described in Title IB of the Proposed Resolution entered into by the tobacco manufacturers and the State attorneys general on June 20, 1997.
Prohibition.--It shall be unlawful to advertise tobacco products on any medium of electronic communication subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications Commission.
Ingredients.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations relating to ingredients in tobacco products.
Except as provided in paragraph (2), such regulations shall conform to the specifications described in Title IF of the Proposed Resolution entered into by the tobacco manufacturers and the State attorneys general on June 20, 1997.
Failure to act.--If the Secretary fails to approve or disapprove an ingredient's safety within the review period prescribed under the regulations under paragraph (1), such failure shall not be considered an approval of such ingredient.
Reduced-Risk Products.--No manufacturer of a tobacco product may state or imply in the labeling or advertisements of the tobacco product that the tobacco product presents a reduced risk to health unless the Secretary has determined that the tobacco product does present a significantly reduced risk to health.
Other Authority.--This section does not limit the authority the Secretary has under other provisions of this Act with respect to tobacco products.
STATE TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMS.
In General.--Effective 2 years after the date of the enactment of this subchapter, a State may not receive funds under this Act for tobacco control activities unless the State has put into law a State tobacco control program that conforms to the model State program established by the Secretary under subsection (b).
Model State Program.-- ``(1) General rule.--Within one year of the date of the enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall establish a model State tobacco control program.
Program content.--The model State tobacco control program established under paragraph (1) shall-- ``(A) require persons who sell tobacco products to individuals for personal consumption to obtain a license from the State; ``(B) require licensed retailers to comply with the requirements under this Act that are applicable to tobacco product retailers; ``(C) prohibit any individual from purchasing tobacco products for resale or distribution to individuals under the age of 18; ``(D) include minimum requirements for the conduct and frequency of compliance inspections of licensed retailers; ``(E) include State performance objectives, including objectives for reducing the level of violations observed during compliance inspections; ``(F) include provisions for appropriate penalties for violations of the program requirements, including provisions for license suspension and revocation; and ``(G) include such other provisions as the Secretary determines are appropriate to protect public health.
Failure To Implement.--If a State fails to effectively implement a State tobacco control program which conforms to the Model State program established under subsection (b) or if a State fails to achieve the performance objectives applicable to the State under the Model State program, the Secretary shall withhold up to 20 percent of the funds made available under this Act to the State for tobacco control activities.
Federal Licensing Program.--Within one year of the date of the enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall establish Federal licensing requirements for-- ``(1) tobacco product retailers operating on Federal property; ``(2) tobacco product retailers operating in a State which does not put into law or effectively implement a State tobacco control program which conforms to the Model State Program; and ``(3) such other tobacco product retailers as the Secretary may specify.
The Federal tobacco control requirements shall conform to the licensing requirements of the Model State Program.
Federal Authority.--The Secretary may order a retailer licensed by a State to suspend or cease selling tobacco products if the tobacco product retailer is in violation of a requirement under this Act related to tobacco products.
Indian Tribes.--In the case of tobacco product retailers operating on Indian reservations, the governing Indian tribe or tribal organization shall be treated as a State.''.
Enforcement.--Section 301 (21 United States Code 331) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(bb) The violation of any requirement under this Act relating to tobacco products.''.
Access to Information.--Section 701 (21 U.S.C 371) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) To acquire information related to tobacco products, the Secretary may administer oaths and require the testimony of witnesses and the production of documents and other materials.
The Secretary may disclose to the public information acquired under this subsection if the Secretary determines that disclosure is appropriate to protect public health.''.
The Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 United States Code 1331 et sequentes) and the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of 1986 (15 United States Code 4401 et sequentes) are repealed on the date the regulations described in section 566(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act take effect.