This Act may be cited as the ``Education for the 21st Century (E- 21) Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to enable America's schools to use their computer hardware to increase student achievement and prepare students for the 21st century workplace.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Establishing computer literacy programs for students will help ensure that our children are receiving the skills needed for advanced education and for securing employment in the 21st century.
Computer literacy skills, such as information gathering, critical analysis and communication with the latest technology, build upon the necessary basics of reading, writing, mathematics, and other core subject areas.
According to a study conducted by the Educational Testing Service (ETS), eighth grade mathematics students whose teachers used computers for simulations and applications outperformed students whose teachers did not use such educational technology.
Although an ever increasing amount of schools are obtaining the latest computer hardware, schools will not be able to take advantage of the benefits of computer-based learning unless teachers are effectively trained in the latest educational software applications.
The Educational Testing Service (ETS) study showed that students whose teachers received training in computers performed better than other students.
The study also found that schools that provide teachers with professional development in computers enjoyed higher staff morale and lower absenteeism rates.
Some of the most exciting applications in educational technology are being developed not only by commercial software companies, but also by secondary school and college students.
The fruit of this academic talent should be channeled more effectively to benefit our Nation's elementary and secondary schools.
Grants Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Education is authorized to award grants to States that integrate into the State curriculum the goal of making all middle school graduates in the State technology literate.
Priority.--The Secretary shall give preference in awarding grants under this section to States which place a priority on training middle school teachers.
Uses.--Grants awarded under this section shall be used for teacher training in technology, with an emphasis on programs that prepare 1 or more teachers in each elementary, middle, and secondary school in the State to become technology leaders who then serve as experts and train other teachers.
Matching Funds.--Each State shall encourage schools that receive assistance under this section to provide matching funds, with respect to the cost of teacher training in technology to be assisted under this section, in order to enhance the impact of the teacher training and to help ensure that all middle school graduates in the State are computer literate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $30,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
HIGH-QUALITY EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE FOR ALL SCHOOLS.
Competition Authorized.--The Secretary of Education is authorized to award grants, on a competitive basis, to secondary school and college students working with university faculty, software developers, and experts in educational technology for the development of high-quality educational software and Internet web sites by such students, faculty, developers, and experts.
Recognition.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Education shall recognize outstanding educational software and Internet web sites developed with assistance provided under this section.
Certificates.--The President is requested to, and the Secretary shall, issue an official certificate signed by the President and Secretary, to each student and faculty member who develops outstanding educational software or an Internet web site recognized under this section.
Focus.--The educational software or Internet web sites that are recognized under this section shall focus on core curriculum areas.
Priority.-- (1) First year.--For the first year that the Secretary awards grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to awarding grants for the development of educational software or Internet web sites in the areas of mathematics, science, and reading.
Second and third years.--For the second and third years that the Secretary awards grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to awarding grants for the development of educational software or Internet web sites in the areas described in paragraph (1) and in social studies, the humanities, and the arts.
Judges.--The Secretary shall designate official judges to recognize outstanding educational software or Internet web sites assisted under this section.
Downloading.--Educational software recognized under this section shall be made available to local educational agencies for free downloading from the Department of Education's Internet web site.
Internet web sites recognized under this section shall be accessible to any user of the World Wide Web.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.