This Act may be cited as the ``Family Health Care Coverage Act''.
FAMILY COVERAGE OF CHILDREN.
In General.--In the case of an individual enrolled in a health plan under a family class of enrollment, the carrier providing the plan, or the plan sponsor sponsoring or maintaining the plan, shall offer and provide equal coverage under the plan to any child of the individual, if the child elects to receive coverage pursuant to such family enrollment.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Carrier.--The term ``carrier'' means a licensed insurance company, a hospital or medical service corporation (including an existing Blue Cross or Blue Shield organization, within the meaning of section 833(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), a health maintenance organization, or any other entity (other than a plan sponsor) licensed or certified by a State to provide health insurance or health benefits.
Child.-- (A) In general.--The term ``child'' means an individual who-- (i) is less than 27 years of age; (ii) has never been married; (iii) has no dependents; and (iv) has a parent-child relationship with another individual who is eligible to enroll in a health plan under a family class of enrollment.
Application of state law.--Determination of whether a child has a parent-child relationship with another individual shall be made in accordance with applicable State law.
Family class of enrollment.--The terms ``family class of enrollment'' and ``family enrollment'' mean enrollment in a health plan under a class of enrollment that provides coverage for-- (A) An unmarried individual and 1 or more children; or (B) A married couple and 1 or more children.
Group health plan.--The term ``group health plan'' means an employee welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) providing medical care (as defined in section 213(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) to participants or beneficiaries (as defined in section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise.
Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' means-- (A) any contract of health insurance, including any hospital or medical service policy or certificate, hospital or medical service plan contract, or health maintenance organization group contract, that is provided by a carrier; or (B) a group health plan, an employee welfare benefit plan, a multiple employer welfare arrangement, or other arrangement insofar as the plan or arrangement provides health benefits and is funded in a manner other than through the purchase of one or more policies or contracts described in subparagraph (A).
Plan sponsor.--The term ``plan sponsor'' means-- (A) a plan sponsor described in section 3(16)(B)(iii) of Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, but only with respect to a group health plan that is maintained by the sponsor; (B) an employer of an employee covered under a health plan that is a multiple employer welfare arrangement (as defined in section 3(40) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act); or (C) an employee organization that sponsors such a health plan.
Violation.--Any individual who, or entity that, the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines has failed to comply with section 1 shall be subject, in addition to any other penalties that may be prescribed by law, to a civil money penalty of not more than $500 for each such violation.
Procedures for Imposition of Penalties.--The provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other than subsections (a) and (b) and the second sentence of subsection (f)) shall apply to the imposition of a civil monetary penalty under this section in the same manner as such provisions apply with respect to the imposition of a penalty under section 1128A of such Act.
INAPPLICABILITY OF MCCARRAN-FERGUSON ACT.
For purposes of section 2(b) of the Act of March 9, 1945 (15 United States Code 1012(b); commonly known as the McCarran-Ferguson Act), this Act shall be considered to specifically relate to the business of insurance.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services may issue regulations to carry out this Act.