granting the consent of Congress to the Emergency Management Assistance Compact' (Public Law 104-321; 110 United States Statutes at Large 3877).
Uses.--A grant under this section shall be used to-- ``(1) carry out recommendations identified in after-action reports for the 2004 and 2005 hurricane season issued under the Emergency Management Assistance Compact; ``(2) coordinate with the Department and other Federal Government agencies; ``(3) coordinate with State and local government entities and their respective national associations; ``(4) assist State and local governments with credentialing emergency response providers and the typing of emergency response resources; or ``(5) administer the operations of the Emergency Management Assistance Compact.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2010.
Amounts appropriated under this section shall remain available for 3 fiscal years after the date on which such funds are appropriated.
OFFICE FOR THE PREVENTION OF TERRORISM.
Establishment.--There is established in the Department an Office for the Prevention of Terrorism, which shall be headed by a Director.
Director.-- ``(1) Reporting.--The Director of the Office for the Prevention of Terrorism shall report directly to the Secretary.
Qualifications.--The Director of the Office for the Prevention of Terrorism shall have an appropriate background with experience in law enforcement, intelligence, or other anti-terrorist functions.
Assignment of Personnel.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall assign to the Office for the Prevention of Terrorism permanent staff and other appropriate personnel detailed from other components of the Department to carry out the responsibilities under this section.
Liaisons.--The Secretary shall designate senior employees from each component of the Department that has significant antiterrorism responsibilities to act a liaison between that component and the Office for the Prevention of Terrorism.
Responsibilities.--The Director of the Office for the Prevention of Terrorism shall-- ``(1) coordinate policy and operations between the Department and State and local government agencies relating to preventing acts of terrorism within the United States; ``(2) serve as a liaison between State and local law enforcement agencies and the Department; ``(3) in coordination with the Office of Intelligence, develop better methods for the sharing of intelligence with State and local law enforcement agencies; ``(4) coordinate with the Office of Grants and Training to ensure that homeland security grants to State and local government agencies are adequately focused on terrorism prevention activities; and ``(5) coordinate with the Authority, the Department of Justice, the National Institute of Justice, law enforcement organizations, and other appropriate entities to develop national voluntary consensus standards for training and personal protective equipment to be used in a tactical environment by law enforcement officers.
Pilot Project.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Office for the Prevention of Terrorism, in coordination with the Director for Response, shall establish a pilot project to determine the efficacy and feasibility of establishing law enforcement deployment teams.
Function.--The law enforcement deployment teams participating in the pilot program under this subsection shall form the basis of a national network of standardized law enforcement resources to assist State and local governments in responding to a natural or man-made disaster.
Construction.--Nothing in this section may be construed to effect the roles or responsibilities of the Department of Justice.
Cybersecurity and Telecommunications.--There is in the Department an Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity and Telecommunications.
United States Fire Administration.--The Administrator of the United States Fire Administration shall have a rank equivalent to an assistant secretary of the Department.''.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Executive Schedule.-- (1) Administrator.--Section 5313 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Administrator of the United States Emergency Management Authority.''.
Directors.--Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Directors, United States Emergency Management Authority.''.
FEMA officers.-- (A) Federal insurance administrator.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Federal Insurance Administrator, Federal Emergency Management Agency.''.
Inspector general.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Inspector General, Federal Emergency Management Agency.''.
Chief information officer.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Chief Information Officer, Federal Emergency Management Agency.''.
Officers of the Department.--Section 103(a) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 113(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (5) and inserting the following: ``(5) An Administrator of the United States Emergency Management Authority.
''; (2) by striking paragraph (2); and (3) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (10) (as amended by this subsection) as paragraphs (2) through (9), respectively.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101 et sequentes) is amended by striking the items relating to title V and sections 501 through 509 and inserting the following: ``TITLE V--NATIONAL PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE ``Sec.
United States Emergency Management Authority.
Preserving the United States Emergency Management Authority.
National Advisory Council on Emergency Preparedness and Response.
National Incident Management System Integration Center.
Public and community preparedness.
National Search and Rescue Response System.
Metropolitan Medical Response System.
Emergency Management Assistance Compact authorization.
Office for the Prevention of Terrorism Coordination.
Conduct of certain public health-related activities.
Use of national private sector networks in emergency response.
Use of commercially available technology, goods, and services.
Procurement of security countermeasures for strategic national stockpile.
Urban and other high risk area communications capabilities.''.
This Act, and the amendments made by this Act, shall take effect on January 1, 2007.