This Act may be cited as the ``Patent Improvement Act of 2001''.
In General.--Title 35, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 31 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 32--OPPOSITION PROCEDURES ``Sec.
Effect on other proceedings.
Opposition procedures ``(a) Administrative Opposition Panel.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Director shall, not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Patent Improvement Act of 2001, establish an Administrative Opposition Panel.
The Administrative Opposition Panel shall be comprised of not less than 18 administrative opposition judges, each of whom shall be an individual of competent legal knowledge and scientific ability.
Upon establishment of the Administrative Opposition Panel, the Director shall publish notice of the establishment of the Panel in the Federal Register.
Assignment of patent examiners to panel.--Patent examiners may be assigned on detail to assist the Administrative Opposition Panel in carrying out opposition proceedings under this section, except that a patent examiner may not be assigned to assist in review of a patent application examined by that patent examiner.
The Director shall establish procedures by which an opposition is heard under subsection (b).
Opposition Procedures.-- ``(1) Request for opposition.--(A) Any person may file a request for an opposition to a patent on the basis of section 101, 102, 103, or 112 of this title.
Such a request is valid only if the request-- ``(i) is made not later than 9 months after the date of issuance of the patent; ``(ii) is in writing; ``(iii) is accompanied by payment of the opposition fee set forth in section 41(a) of this title; and ``(iv) sets forth in detail the basis on which the opposition is requested.
Not later than 60 days after receiving a valid request under subparagraph (A), the Director shall issue an order for an opposition proceeding to be held on the record after opportunity for a hearing, and shall promptly send a copy of the request to the owner of record of the patent.
The patent owner shall be provided a reasonable period, but in no case less than 60 days after the date on which a copy of the request is given or mailed to the patent owner, within which the owner may file a statement in reply to the grounds for the request for opposition, including any amendment to the patent and new claim or claims, for consideration in the opposition proceeding.
If the patent owner files such a statement, the patent owner shall promptly serve a copy of the statement on the third-party requester.
Not later than 2 months after the date of such service, the third-party requester may file and have considered in the opposition proceeding a reply to the statement filed by the patent owner.
Conduct of opposition proceedings.--Each opposition shall be heard by one administrative opposition judge, and no party shall be permitted ex parte communication with the administrative opposition judge.
In addition to the statements and replies set forth in paragraph (1), the administrative opposition judge may consider evidence that the judge considers relevant, including evidence that is presented in any oral testimony (including exhibits and expert testimony) in direct or cross examination, or in any deposition, affidavit, or other documentary form, whether voluntary or compelled.
In any opposition proceeding, the Federal Rules of Evidence shall apply.
Amendments to patent claims.--A patent applicant may propose to amend a patent claim or propose a new claim at any time during the opposition proceeding, except that no proposed amended or new claim enlarging the scope of a claim of the patent may be permitted at any time during an opposition proceeding under this section.
Determination.--Not later than 18 months after the filing of a request for an opposition under this section, the administrative opposition judge in the opposition proceeding shall determine the patentability of the subject matter of the patent, a record of the administrative opposition judge's determination under this section shall be placed in the official file of the patent, and a copy shall promptly be given or mailed to the owner of record of the patent and to the third-party requester.
Appeals.--Any party to the opposition may appeal a decision of the Administrative Opposition Panel under the provisions of section 134 of this title, and may seek court review under the provisions of sections 141 through 145 of this title, with respect to any decision in regard to the patentability of any original or proposed amended or new claim of the patent.
A patent owner may be a party to an appeal taken by a third-party requester.
Any third-party requester may be a party to an appeal taken by a patent owner.
Certification of patentability.--In an opposition proceeding under this chapter, when the time for appeal has expired or any appeal proceeding has terminated, the Director shall issue and publish a certificate canceling any claim of the patent finally determined to be unpatentable, confirming any claim of the patent determined to be patentable, and incorporating in the patent any proposed amended or new claim determined to be patentable.
Effect of determination.--Any proposed, amended, or new claim determined to be patentable and incorporated into a patent following an opposition proceeding shall have the same effect as that specified in section 252 of this title for reissued patents on the right of any person who made, purchased, or used within the United States, or imported into the United States, anything patented by such proposed amended or new claim, or who made substantial preparations therefor, prior to issuance of a certificate under paragraph (6) of this subsection.
Effect on other proceedings ``(a) Right to Litigation.--Subject to subsections (b) and (c), proceedings under section 321 shall not alter or prejudice any party's right to pursue remedies under provisions of law other than this section.
In the case of court proceedings, other than an appeal of a decision in an opposition proceeding under section 321, the court may consider any matter independently of any opposition proceeding under this section.
Effect of Final Decision.-- ``(1) In future opposition proceedings.--If a final decision has been entered against a party in a civil action arising in whole or in part under section 1338 of title 28, establishing that the party has not sustained its burden of proving the invalidity of any patent claim, or if a final decision in an inter partes reexamination proceeding instituted by a third-party requester is favorable to the patentability of any original or proposed amended or new claim of the patent-- ``(A) neither that party to the civil action, the third-party requester, nor the privies of that party or third-party requester may thereafter request an opposition to such patent claim on the basis of issues which that party, third-party requester, or the privies of that party or third-party requester raised in such civil action or inter partes reexamination proceeding (as the case may be); and ``(B) an opposition requested by that party, third- party requester, or the privies of that party or third- party requester on the basis of such issues may not thereafter be maintained by the Office.
Effect of final decision in opposition.--If a final decision in an opposition proceeding instituted by a third- party requester is favorable to the patentability of any original or proposed amended or new claim of the patent-- ``(A) neither the third-party requester, nor the privies of that third-party requester, may thereafter bring a civil action under section 1338 of title 28, or request an inter partes reexamination of, or an opposition to, such patent claim on the basis of issues which that third-party requester, or the privies of that third-party requester, raised in such opposition proceeding; and ``(B) an inter partes reexamination or opposition requested by that third-party requester, or the privies of that third-party requester, on the basis of such issues may not thereafter be maintained by the Office.
New evidence.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) do not prevent the assertion by a party to a civil action or a third-party requester of invalidity based on newly discovered prior art, or other evidence, unavailable to that party or third-party requester, as the case may be, and the Patent and Trademark Office, at the time of the civil action, inter partes reexamination, or opposition proceeding (as the case may be).
Stay of Litigation.--Once an order for an opposition proceeding with respect to a patent has been issued under section 321(b)(1)(B), any party to the proceeding may obtain a stay of any pending court proceeding (other than an appeal to the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit) which involves an issue of patentability of any claims of the patent which are the subject of the opposition proceeding, unless the court before which such litigation is pending determines that a stay would not serve the interests of justice.''.
Fees.--Section 41(a) of title 35, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (7) through (15) as paragraphs (9) through (17), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following: ``(7)(A) On filing an opposition under chapter 32 to a patent based on prior art citations or obviousness, a fee of $200.
On filing an opposition under chapter 32 to a patent on any other basis, a fee of $5,000.
The Director may waive the payment by an individual of fees under this paragraph if such waiver is in the public interest.
On filing a request for a proceeding to determine whether an invention claimed in an application was known or used, or has been in public use or on sale, under section 102, a fee of $35.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part III of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``32.
Section 103 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d)(1) An invention shall be presumed obvious under this section if the only significant difference between the combined teachings of the prior art and the claimed invention is that the claimed invention is appropriate for use with a computer technology, unless-- ``(A) the application of the computer technology is novel; or ``(B) the computer technology is novel and not the subject of another patent or patent application.
(A) An applicant or patentee may rebut the presumption under paragraph (1) upon a showing by a preponderance of the evidence that the invention is not obvious to persons of ordinary skill in all relevant arts.
Those areas of art which are relevant for purposes of subparagraph (A) include the field of the computer implementation.''.
REQUIREMENT TO DISCLOSE SEARCH.
The Director of the Patent and Trademark Office shall, within 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, publish notice of rulemaking proceedings to amend the rules of the Patent and Trademark Office to require an applicant for a patent to disclose in the application the extent to which the applicant searched for prior art to meet the requirements of title 35, United States Code.
Such amendment shall include appropriate penalties for failure to comply with such requirement.
The Director shall ensure that the amendment is implemented as promptly as possible.
Definitions.--Section 100(e) of title 35, United States Code, is amended by striking ``or inter partes reexamination under section 311'' and inserting ``, inter partes reexamination under section 311, or an opposition under section 321,''.
Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences.--Section 134 of title 35, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)-- (A) by inserting ``or opposition'' after ``reexamination''; and (B) by inserting ``or the Administrative Opposition Panel (as the case may be)'' after ``administrative patent judge''; and (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) by striking ``proceeding'' and inserting ``reexamination proceeding or an opposition proceeding''; (B) by inserting ``or the Administrative Opposition Panel (as the case may be)'' after ``administrative patent judge''; and (C) in the last sentence, by inserting ``in an inter partes reexamination proceeding'' after ``requester''.
Appeal to Court of Appeals.--(1) Section 141 of title 35, United States Code, is amended in the second sentence by inserting after ``reexamination proceeding'' the following: ``, and any party in an opposition proceeding, who is''.
Section 143 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the third sentence the following: ``In any opposition proceeding, the Administrative Opposition Panel shall submit to the court in writing the grounds for the decision of the Panel, addressing all the issues involved in the appeal.''.
In General.--Subject to subsections (b), (c), and (d), this Act and the amendments made by this Act apply to-- (1) any application for patent that is pending on, or that is filed on or after, the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) any patent issued on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Patents Issued Before Establishment of Administrative Opposition Panel.--In the case of a patent issued after the enactment of this Act but before the date on which notice of the establishment of the Administrative Opposition Panel is published under section 321(a)(1) of title 35, United States Code (as added by this Act), a request for an opposition to the patent may be filed under section 321(b)(1)(A) of title 35, United States Code (as added by this Act), notwithstanding the 9-month requirement set forth in clause (i) of that section, if the request is filed not later than 9 months after the date on which such notice is so published.