This Act may be cited as the ``Ecstasy Prevention Act of 2001''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The illegal importation and use of 3,4-methylenedioxy methamphetamine (referred to in this Act as ``MDMA'' or ``Ecstasy'') has increased more than 400 percent during the past 3 years, as evidenced by Ecstasy seizures by the United States Customs Service.
Some research has indicated that the use of Ecstasy can cause long-lasting and perhaps permanent damage to the serotonin system of the brain, and can cause long-term problems with learning and memory.
Due to the popularity and marketability of Ecstasy, and the skyrocketing use, seizures, and deaths, greater emphasis needs to be placed on-- (A) the education of young people on the negative health effects of Ecstasy (and other club drugs) since the reputation of Ecstasy as a ``safe drug'' is its most dangerous component; (B) the education of State and local law enforcement agencies and health care professionals and personnel regarding the growing problem of Ecstasy use and trafficking; (C) adequate funding for the National Institutes of Health to support and report on research that documents the health effects of Ecstasy use; and (D) State and local government initiatives.
GRANTS FOR ECSTASY ABUSE PREVENTION.
Section 506B(c) of title V of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Effective programs.-- ``(A) In general.--In addition to the priority under paragraph (2), the Administrator shall give priority to communities that have taken measures to combat club drug use, including passing ordinances restricting rave clubs, increasing law enforcement on Ecstasy, and seizing lands under nuisance abatement laws to make new restrictions on an establishment's use.
State priority.--A priority grant may be made to a State under this paragraph on a pass-through basis to an eligible community.''.
COMBATING ECSTASY AND OTHER CLUB DRUGS IN HIGH INTENSITY DRUG TRAFFICKING AREAS.
Program.-- (1) In general.--The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy shall use amounts available under this section to combat the trafficking of MDMA in areas designated by the Director as high intensity drug trafficking areas.
Activities.--In meeting the requirement in paragraph (1), the Director shall transfer funds to assist anti-Ecstasy law enforcement initiatives in high intensity drug trafficking areas, including assistance for investigative costs, intelligence enhancements, technology improvements, and training.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section-- (A) $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; and (B) such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2005.
No supplanting.--Any Federal funds received under this section shall be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise be used to carry out activities funded under this section.
Apportionment of Funds.--The Director shall apportion amounts appropriated for a fiscal year pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in subsection (b) for activities under subsection (a) among and within areas designated by the Director and based on the threat assessments submitted by individual high intensity drug trafficking areas.
NATIONAL YOUTH ANTIDRUG MEDIA CAMPAIGN.
In General.--In conducting the national media campaign under section 102 of the Drug-Free Media Campaign Act of 1998, the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy shall ensure that such campaign addresses the reduction and prevention of abuse of MDMA and club and emerging drugs among young people in the United States.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section-- (1) $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; and (2) such sums as are necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2005.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Office of National Drug Control Policy such sums as are necessary to commission a drug test for MDMA which would meet the standards for the Federal Workplace.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE REPORT.
Research.--The Director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse (referred to in this section as the ``Director'') shall conduct research-- (1) that evaluates the effects that MDMA use can have on an individual's health, such as-- (A) physiological effects such as changes in ability to regulate one's body temperature, stimulation of the cardiovascular system, muscle tension, teeth clenching, nausea, blurred vision, rapid eye movement, tremors, and other such conditions, some of which can result in heart failure or heat stroke; (B) psychological effects such as mood and mind altering and panic attacks which may come from altering various neurotransmitter levels such as serotonin in the brain; (C) short-term effects like confusion, depression, sleep problems, severe anxiety, paranoia, hallucinations, and amnesia; and (D) long-term effects on the brain with regard to memory and other cognitive functions, and other medical consequences; and (2) documenting those research findings and conclusions with respect to MDMA that are scientifically valid and identify the medical consequences on an individual's health.
Final Report.--Not later than January 1, 2003, the Director shall submit a report to the Congress.
Report Public.--The report required by this section shall be made public.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $1,500,000 to carry out this section.
INTERAGENCY ECSTASY/CLUB DRUG TASK FORCE.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy shall establish a Task Force on Ecstasy/ MDMA and Emerging Club Drugs (referred to in this section as the ``task force'') which shall-- (A) design, implement, and evaluate the education, prevention, and treatment practices and strategies of the Federal Government with respect to Ecstasy, MDMA, and emerging club drugs; and (B) specifically study the club drug problem and report its findings to Congress.
Membership.--The task force shall-- (A) be under the jurisdiction of the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, who shall designate a chairperson; and (B) include as members law enforcement, substance abuse prevention, judicial, and public health professionals as well as representatives from Federal, State, and local agencies.
Responsibilities.--The responsibilities of the task force shall be-- (1) to evaluate the current practices and strategies of the Federal Government in education, prevention, and treatment for Ecstasy, MDMA, and other emerging club drugs and recommend appropriate and beneficial models for education, prevention, and treatment; (2) to identify appropriate government components and resources to implement task force recommendations; and (3) to make recommendations to the President and Congress to implement proposed improvements in accordance with the National Drug Control Strategy and its budget allocations.
Meetings.--The task force shall meet at least once every 6 months.
Termination.--The task force shall terminate 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 to carry out this section.