This Act may be cited as the ``Regional Presidential Selection Act of 1999''.
In this Act: (1) Caucus.--The term ``caucus'' means any convention, meeting, or series of meetings held for the selection of delegates to a national Presidential nominating convention of a political party.
Election year.--The term ``election year'' means a year during which a Presidential election is to be held.
National committee.--The term ``national committee'' means the organization which, by virtue of the bylaws of a political party, is responsible for the day-to-day operation of such political party at the national level, as determined by the Federal Election Commission.
Political party.--The term ``political party'' means an association, committee, or organization which-- (A) nominates a candidate for election to any Federal office whose name appears on the election ballot as the candidate of such association, committee, or organization; and (B) won electoral votes in the preceding Presidential election.
Primary.--The term ``primary'' means a primary election held for the selection of delegates to a national Presidential nominating convention of a political party, but does not include a caucus, convention, or other indirect means of selection.
State committee.--The term ``State committee'' means the organization which, by virtue of the bylaws of a political party, is responsible for the day-to-day operation of such political party at the State level, as determined by the Federal Election Commission.
Schedule.-- (1) First election cycle.--Subject to paragraph (3), in 2004, each State shall hold a primary in accordance with this Act, according to the following schedule: (A) Region i.--Each State in Region I shall hold a primary on the first Tuesday in March.
Region ii.--Each State in Region II shall hold a primary on the first Tuesday in April.
Region iii.--Each State in Region III shall hold a primary on the first Tuesday in May.
Region iv.--Each State in Region IV shall hold a primary on the first Tuesday in June.
Subsequent election cycles.-- (A) General rule.--Subject to paragraph (3), except as provided in subparagraph (B), in each subsequent election year after 2004, each State in each region shall hold a primary on the first Tuesday of the month following the month in which the State held a primary in the preceding election year.
Limitation.--If the States in a region were required to hold primaries on the first Tuesday in June of the preceding election year, such States shall hold primaries on the first Tuesday in March of the succeeding election year.
Exception.--If all but one of the seriously considered candidates withdraw from a primary in a State before the date on which the primary for such State is scheduled, the State may cancel the primary in the State.
Regions.--For purposes of subsection (a): (1) Region i.--Region I shall be comprised of the following: (A) Connecticut.
Region ii.--Region II shall be comprised of the following: (A) Alabama.
Region iii.--Region III shall be comprised of the following: (A) Illinois.
Region iv.--Region IV shall be comprised of the following: (A) Alaska.
Territories.--The national committees shall jointly determine the region of each territory of the United States.
Certification by Federal Election Commission.--The Federal Election Commission shall certify to the States in the relevant region the names of all seriously considered candidates of each political party-- (1) for the first primary in the election year, not later than 6 weeks before such primary; and (2) in the subsequent primaries in the election year, not later than one week after the preceding primary in such election year.
State Primary Ballots.--Each State shall include on the State's primary ballot-- (1) the names certified by the Federal Election Commission; and (2) any other names determined by the appropriate State committee.
VOTING AT NATIONAL PARTY CONVENTIONS BY STATE DELEGATES.
In General.--Each State committee shall establish a procedure for the apportionment of delegates to the national Presidential nominating convention of each political party based on one of the following models: (1) Winner-take-all.--A binding, winner-take-all system in which the results of the primary bind each member of the State delegation or Congressional district delegation (or combination thereof) to the national convention to cast a vote for the primary winner in the State.
Proportionate preference.--A binding proportionate representation system in which the results of the State primary are used to allocate members of the State delegation or Congressional district delegation (or combination thereof) to the national convention to Presidential candidates based on the proportion of the vote for some or all of the candidates received in the primary in the State.
Selection of Delegates.-- (1) Submission of names.--Not later than the date on which a candidate is certified on the ballot for a State, such candidate shall submit to the State committee, in priority order, a list of names of individuals proposed by the candidate to serve as delegates for such candidate.
Selection.--Delegates apportioned to represent a candidate pursuant to the procedure established under subsection (a) shall be selected according to the list submitted by the candidate pursuant to paragraph (1).
Voting at the National Conventions.--Each delegate to a national convention who is required to vote for the winner of the State primary under the system established under subsection (a) shall so vote for at least 2 ballots at the national convention, unless released by the winner of the State primary to which such delegate's vote is pledged.
OPTIONAL STATE CAUCUS TO SELECT DELEGATES.
Election.--Instead of, or in addition to, holding the primary required under section 3, a State may elect to select delegates to a national Presidential nominating convention of a political party in accordance with this section, through a caucus held by any political party which has the authority to nominate a candidate.
Schedule.--A State that makes an election under subsection (a) shall ensure that the caucus does not commence earlier than the date such State otherwise would be required to hold a primary under section 3.
Qualification for Ballot.--A State committee of a political party that holds a caucus shall certify and include candidates in the same manner provided under section 4.
Voting at National Party Conventions by State Delegates.--Each State committee shall establish a procedure for the apportionment of delegates to the national Presidential nominating convention of each political party and the method of selecting such delegates.
This Act shall apply with respect to any primary or caucus held in connection with a general election held in the year 2004 and in each election year thereafter.