This Act may be cited as the ``Beryllium Exposure Compensation Act''.
FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND APOLOGY.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) hazards involved in the mining and processing of beryllium and its compounds are presumed to have caused injury, disease, and disability among those who worked in the beryllium processing industry; (2) workers who were exposed to beryllium hazards were subjected to increased risk of injury and disease to serve the national security interests of the United States; and (3) the United States should recognize and assume responsibility for the harm done to these workers.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to establish a procedure to provide relief to the workers described in subsection (a) for the burdens they have borne for the Nation as a whole.
Apology.--The Congress apologizes on behalf of the Nation to the workers described in subsection (a) and their families for the hardships they have endured.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States, a trust fund to be known as the Beryllium Exposure Compensation Trust Fund, which shall be administered by the Secretary of the Treasury.
Investment of Amounts in the Fund.--Amounts in the Fund shall be invested in accordance with section 9702 of title 31, United States Code, and any interest on, and proceeds from any such investment shall be credited to the Fund.
Availability of the Fund.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available only for disbursement by the Attorney General under section 5.
Termination.--The Fund shall terminate 30 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
If all of the amounts in the Fund have not been expended by the end of that 30-year period, investments of amounts in the Fund shall be liquidated and receipts thereof deposited in the Fund and all funds remaining in the Fund shall be deposited in the miscellaneous receipts account in the Treasury.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund such sums as may be necessary to carry out its purposes, which may remain available until expended.
In General.--A beryllium worker described in subsection (b) shall receive $100,000 if-- (1) the claim for such payment is filed with the Attorney General by or on behalf of such individual; and (2) the Attorney General determines, in accordance with section 5, that the claim meets the requirements for payment under this Act.
Eligible Beryllium Worker.--A beryllium worker described in this subsection is an individual who-- (1) at any time during the period beginning January 1, 1930, and ending December 31, 1980, was employed at a beryllium industry site; (2) was exposed to significant beryllium hazards in the course of such employment; and (3) after such exposure developed a condition known to be related to beryllium exposure.
Conformity With Section 5.--Payments under this section may be made only in accordance with section 5.
DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
Establishment of Filing Procedures.--The Attorney General shall establish procedures whereby claims may be submitted under this Act.
Required Procedures.--The procedures established pursuant to subsection (a) shall provide that a claim meets the requirements for payment under this Act only if the claim includes-- (1) adequate documentation that the individual satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 4(b); and (2) written medical documentation that the individual satisfies the requirements of paragraph (3) of section 4(b).
Determination of Claims.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General shall determine, in accordance with the guidelines established pursuant to this subsection, whether each claim filed under this Act meets the requirements for payment under this Act.
Consultation on guidelines.--The Attorney General shall establish guidelines in consultation with-- (A) the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, and the Secretary of Labor, for determining what constitutes adequate documentation that an individual satisfies the requirements of paragraph (1) of section 4(b); (B) the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, for determining what constitutes significant beryllium hazards within the meaning of paragraph (2) of section 4(b) and what constitutes adequate documentation that an individual satisfies the requirements of such paragraph; and (C) the Surgeon General, for determining what constitutes written medical documentation that an individual satisfies the requirements of paragraph (3) of section 4(b).
Consultation on determinations.--The Attorney General may consult with-- (A) the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, and the Secretary of Labor in making determinations pursuant to the guidelines established under paragraph (2)(A); (B) the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in making determinations pursuant to the guidelines established under paragraph (2)(B); and (C) the Surgeon General in making determinations pursuant to the guidelines established under paragraph (2)(C).
Payment of Claims.-- (1) In general.--Subject to section 12, the Attorney General shall pay, from amounts available in the Fund, claims filed under this Act which the Attorney General determines meet the requirements for payment under this Act.
Offset for certain payments.--A payment under this Act to an individual, or to a survivor of that individual, on a claim under section 4 shall be offset by the amount of any payment made pursuant to a final award or settlement on a claim (other than a claim for worker's compensation), against any person, that is based on injuries incurred by that individual on account of exposure to significant beryllium hazards at any time during the period referred to in section 4(b)(1).
Right of subrogation.--Upon payment of a claim under this Act, the United States Government is subrogated for the amount of the payment to a right or claim that the individual to whom the payment was made may have against any person on account of injuries referred to in paragraph (2).
Payments in the case of deceased persons.-- (A) In general.--In the case of an individual who is deceased at the time of payment under this Act, such payment may be made only as follows: (i) If the individual is survived by a spouse who is living at the time of payment, such payment shall be made to such surviving spouse.
If there is no surviving spouse described in clause (i), such payment shall be made in equal shares to all children of the individual who are living at the time of payment.
If there is no surviving spouse described in clause (i) and if there are no children described in clause (ii), such payment shall be made in equal shares to the parents of the individual who are living at the time of payment.
If there is no surviving spouse described in clause (i), and if there are no children described in clause (ii) or parents described in clause (iii), such payment shall be made in equal shares to all grandchildren of the individual who are living at the time of payment.
If there is no surviving spouse described in clause (i), and if there are no children described in clause (ii), parents described in clause (iii), or grandchildren described in clause (iv), then such payment shall be made in equal shares to the grandparents of the individual who are living at the time of payment.
Individuals who are survivors.--If an individual eligible for payment under section 4 dies before filing a claim under this Act, any survivor of that individual described in subparagraph (A) may file a claim for such payment under this Act.
Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph-- (i) the spouse of an individual is a wife or husband of that individual who was married to that individual for at least one year immediately before the death of that individual; (ii) a child includes a recognized natural child, a stepchild who lived with an individual in a regular parent-child relationship, and an adopted child; (iii) a parent includes fathers and mothers through adoption; (iv) a grandchild of an individual is a child of a child of that individual; and (v) a grandparent of an individual is a parent of a parent of that individual.
Action on Claims.--The Attorney General shall complete the determination on each claim filed in accordance with the procedures established under subsection (a) not later than 12 months after the claim is so filed.
Payment in Full Settlement of Claims Against United States.-- The acceptance of payment by an individual under this Act shall be in full satisfaction of all claims of or on behalf of that individual against the United States, or against any person with respect to that person's performance of a contract with the United States, that arise out of exposure to significant beryllium hazards at any time during the period referred to in section 4(b)(1).
Administrative Costs Not Paid From Fund.--The costs incurred by the Attorney General in carrying out this Act may not be paid from the Fund or set off against, or otherwise deducted from, any payment under this Act to any individual.
Termination of Duties of Attorney General.--The duties of the Attorney General under this Act shall cease when the Fund terminates.
Certification of Treatment of Payments Under Other Laws.-- Amounts paid to an individual under this Act-- (1) shall be treated for purposes of the internal revenue laws of the United States as damages for human suffering; and (2) shall not be included as income or resources for purposes of determining eligibility to receive benefits described in section 3803(c)(2)(C) of title 31, United States Code, or the amount of such benefits.
Use of Existing Resources.--The Attorney General should use funds and resources available to the Attorney General to carry out his or her functions under this Act.
Regulatory Authority.--The Attorney General may issue any regulations necessary to carry out this Act.
Issuance of Regulations, Guidelines, and Procedures.-- Regulations, guidelines, and procedures to carry out this Act shall be issued not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
CLAIMS NOT ASSIGNABLE OR TRANSFERABLE; LIMITATION OF REMEDIES.
Claims Not Assignable or Transferable.--A claim cognizable under this Act may not be assigned or transferred.
Limitation of Remedies.--An individual may not receive more than one payment under this Act.
A claim to which this Act applies shall be barred unless the claim is filed within 20 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
It shall be unlawful for an amount exceeding 10 percent of the value of any payment made under this Act to be paid to, or received by, any agent or attorney for any service rendered in connection with the claim for payment.
Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an infraction, and shall be subject to a fine in the amount provided in title 18, United States Code.
CERTAIN CLAIMS NOT AFFECTED BY AWARDS OF DAMAGES.
A payment made under this Act shall not be considered as any form of compensation or reimbursement for a loss for purposes of imposing liability on any individual receiving such payment, on the basis of such receipt, to repay any insurance carrier for insurance payments, or to repay any person on account of worker's compensation payments, and a payment under this Act shall not affect any claim against an insurance carrier with respect to insurance or against any person with respect to worker's compensation.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Beryllium industry site.--The term ``beryllium industry site'' means a site that-- (A) was owned, operated, or supervised by the Federal Government for the mining or processing of beryllium or a beryllium compound; or (B) produced mined or processed beryllium or beryllium compound under contract with the Federal Government.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Beryllium Exposure Compensation Trust Fund under section 3(a).
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to the Congress not later than September 30, 2003, a report on the incidence of beryllium-related illness among workers employed at beryllium industry sites.
The authority under this Act to enter into contracts or to make payments shall not be effective in any fiscal year except to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.