APPLICATION OF INFORMATION DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS TO CONGRESS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and subject to the amendments made by this Act, the provisions of section 552 of title 5, United States Code (popularly known as the ``Freedom of Information Act''), shall apply to the legislative branch.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 551(1)(A) of title 5, United States Code (relating to the exclusion of the Congress from, among other matters, laws requiring the disclosure of public information), is amended to read as follows: ``(A) except as that term is used in section 552, the Congress;''.
SPECIAL RULES REGARDING APPLICATION OF INFORMATION DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS TO LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.
Authority to Decide Complaints.--Section 552(a)(4) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B) in the first sentence by inserting before the period the following: ``, except that in the case of a complaint against an agency in the legislative branch a member of the Disclosure Review Board selected under subsection (g)(2) shall have that jurisdiction''; (2) in subparagraph (E) by striking ``The court'' and inserting ``The court or member of the Disclosure Review Board''; and (3) by striking ``the court'' each place it appears and inserting ``the court or member of the Disclosure Review Board''.
Procedures for Deciding Complaints.--Section 552 of title 5, United States Code (relating to the disclosure of public information), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(g)(1) There is established in the legislative branch of the Federal Government a board to be known as the Disclosure Review Board.
Each member of the Board shall have the jurisdiction to hear and determine claims certified under subsection (i)(4)(B) to the Board and referred to such member, in accordance with rules issued under subsection (m), for hearing and determination.
(A) Members of the Board shall be appointed from among individuals who are retired from Federal service as administrative law judges appointed under section 3105, as follows: ``(i) 3 members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
3 members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
3 members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
3 members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Any individual so appointed shall serve on the Board for a term of 2 years and may be reappointed to the Board.
Any member of the board who is hearing and determining any claim under this section at the time the term of such member expires may continue to serve as a member of the Board until such individual concludes the determination of such claim.
(A) For any claim in a complaint under subsection (b)(4)(B) filed with the Disclosure Review Board alleging a failure by a Member of Congress or any individual on the personal staff of a Member of Congress to make available information, records, or other material required by this section to be made available, one of the members of the Board shall be selected as follows to hear and determine the claims alleged in such complaint which are certified under subsection (i)(4)(B): ``(i) If such Member of Congress belongs to the majority party of the House of Congress to which such Member belongs, then the minority leader of such House of Congress shall select the member of the Board to hear and determine such claim.
If such Member of Congress belongs to the minority party of the House of Congress to which such Member belongs, then the Speaker of the House of Representatives (if such Member belongs to the House of Representatives) or the majority leader of the Senate (if such Member belongs to the Senate) shall select the member of the Board to hear and determine such claim.
If a claim in a complaint filed under subsection (b) alleges that a committee of Congress (other than a joint committee), an agency established in a House of Congress, or any individual on the staff of such committee or agency has failed to make available information, records, or other material required by this section to be made available, then one of the members of the Board shall be selected as follows to hear and determine the claims alleged in such complaint which are certified under subsection (i)(4)(B): ``(i) If such committee or agency is established in the House of Representatives, then the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall select the member of the Board to hear and determine such claim.
If such committee or agency is established in the Senate, then the majority leader of the Senate shall select a member of the Board to hear and determine such claim.
If a claim in a complaint filed under subsection (b) alleges that a joint committee of Congress, an agency established in the legislative branch of the Federal Government (other than an agency established in a House of Congress), or any individual on the staff of such committee or agency has failed to make available information, records, or other material required by this section to be made available, then the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall select a member of the Board to hear and determine such claim.
The offices of the Board shall be in the District of Columbia.
There shall be detailed to the Board such employees of the Congress as the Board may require to carry out its duties under this section.
(1) The Board shall designate one of its members (other than any Special Hearing Member) to serve for a term of 1 year as the Complaint Referral Officer.
The Complaint Referral Officer may not hear or determine any claim in a complaint referred under paragraph (2) to such Officer.
Except as provided in subparagraph (B), each complaint filed with the Board in accordance with subsection (b) shall be referred immediately to the Complaint Referral Officer.
Not later than 15 days after a complaint filed in accordance with subsection (b)(4) is received by the Board, the Complaint Referral Officer shall appoint an individual (other than a member of the Board) to serve as the Investigating Counsel with respect to such complaint and shall refer such complaint to such Investigating Counsel.
(1) Each individual appointed under subsection (d)(3) as Investigating Counsel shall meet the qualifications for appointment as a United States magistrate specified in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of section 631 of title 28.
(A) An Investigating Counsel shall comply with the requirements for service applicable to part-time United States magistrates specified in section 632(b) of title 28.
If the appointment of an Investigating Counsel is terminated by reason of resignation, death, or removal from office, the Complaint Referral Officer shall appoint another individual as Investigating Counsel to complete the work of the Investigating Counsel who so resigned, died, or was removed.
An Investigating Counsel may be removed from office only by the Complaint Referral Officer and only for good cause, physical disability, mental incapacity, or any other condition that substantially impairs the performance of such Investigating Counsel's duties.
Not earlier than 45 days, and not later than 90 days, after receiving a complaint referred under paragraph (2), the Investigating Counsel involved shall conduct a thorough investigation of each unresolved claim therein alleging a failure to make available material required by this section to be made available and shall determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe any such claim is true.
For purposes of conducting such investigation, such Investigating Counsel shall have investigative powers of the types vested in the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission by section 709(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
(A) If such Investigating Counsel determines that there is reasonable cause to believe any such claim is true, then such Investigating Counsel shall attempt to secure from the defendant and the person that filed the complaint making the claim, during the 30-day period beginning on the date of such determination, an agreement to make available the material that is the subject of the complaint.
If such Investigating Counsel is unable to secure such agreement with respect to any such claim, then such Investigating Counsel shall certify to the Board for hearing and determination each claim with respect to which such reasonable cause is found.
(A) Each Investigating Counsel appointed under this subsection shall be paid at the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable from time to time for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 for each day (including traveltime) during which such Investigating Counsel is engaged in the actual performance of duties under this subsection.
(i) If the complaint with respect to which an Investigating Counsel is appointed is based on an alleged failure by the Congress to make available material, then the Investigating Counsel shall be paid compensation in connection with such complaint from the contingent fund of the House of Congress (upon vouchers approved by the Clerk of the House of Representatives or the Secretary of the Senate in which the failure occurred.
If the complaint with respect to which an Investigating Counsel is appointed is based on an alleged failure to make available material by an agency or unit of the legislative branch of the Federal Government (other than the Congress), then the Investigating Counsel shall be paid compensation in connection with such complaint by such agency or unit from funds available to such agency or unit.
(1) The member of the Board, to whom a claim is referred under subsection (g) for hearing and determination shall make such determination as promptly as possible and, insofar as practicable, not later than 180 days after the date the Board received the complaint involved.
(A) Each determination made by the Board or a member of the Board shall be in writing.
In the case of a determination made by a member of the Board to dispose of any claim in such complaint, such member shall file with the Board a written report containing such member's findings of fact and conclusions of law with respect to such claim.
If such member finds that the defendant has failed to make available material that is required by this section to be made available, then such member shall submit to the Board, and the Board shall issue, an order for relief which compels the defendant to do one or more of the following, as appropriate, for the benefit of the person that filed the complaint: ``(i) Make available the information, record, or other material that is the subject of the complaint, on such terms and conditions as determined to be appropriate.
Pay the fees and allowances of witnesses in the same manner as is provided in section 1821 of title 28, and pay a reasonable attorney's fee.
Any payment ordered under subparagraph (B) with respect to a violation of this section by a Member of Congress, a committee of Congress, or an officer or employee of Congress shall be paid from the contingent fund of the appropriate House of Congress, upon vouchers approved by the Clerk of the House of Representatives or the Secretary of the Senate, as the case may be.
(A) Any member of the Board may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence that relates to a complaint pending before the Board.
Such attendance of witnesses and production of evidence may be required from any place within the United States.
Any member of the Board may administer oaths and affirmations.
If a person issued a subpoena under subparagraph (A) refuses to obey such subpoena or is guilty of contumacy, the district court of the United States for the District of Columbia or the district court of the United States for the judicial district within which such person is found or resides, or transacts business may, upon application by the Board, order such person to appear before the appropriate member of the Board to produce evidence or to give testimony relating to such complaint.
Any failure to obey such order of the court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof.
Subpoenas issued by members of the Board shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district courts under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
All process of any court to which application may be made under this subsection may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides, is found, or transacts business.
For purposes of sections 6002 and 6004 of title 18, the Board shall be considered to be an agency of the United States.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this section, rules 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 43, and 50 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply with respect to complaints filed under subsection (b)(1).
The Federal Rules of Evidence shall apply with respect to the hearing and determination of claims by the Board.
(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, none of the records of the Board relating to a complaint filed under subsection (b)(1) may be disclosed to the public by the Board or by any court or agency of the United States until the conclusion of any judicial review of the order issued by the Board disposing of such complaint or the expiration of any period allowed by law to seek such review, whichever occurs later.
No determination made by the Supreme Court of the United States, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, the Board (or any member of the Board), or the Investigating Counsel with respect to any claim alleging a violation of this section is admissible in evidence in any administrative or judicial proceeding other than a proceeding authorized by law to review a determination made under this section by the Board (or any member of the Board) or the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
(A) Any person who files a complaint under subsection (b)(4)(B) may attend, and may be represented by an attorney at, any hearing conducted under this subsection with respect to such complaint.
(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), if such individual resides more than 100 miles from the place where such hearing is held, then such individual shall be reimbursed by the defendant for any actual and reasonable costs incurred by such individual to attend such hearing.
If such complaint is filed with respect to a failure by the Congress to make available materials, then such reimbursement shall be paid from the contingent fund of the appropriate House of Congress, upon vouchers approved by the Clerk of the House of Representatives or the Secretary of the Senate, as the case may be.
(1) Chapter 7 shall apply with respect to judicial review of orders of the Board.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit shall have jurisdiction to review and to enjoin, set aside, suspend, modify, and enforce the orders of the Board.
Any person who is a party to a proceeding in which the Board issues an order may seek review of such order by filing in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit (hereinafter in this subsection referred to as the `court'), not later than 60 days after the date such order is entered by the Board, a written petition for review.
A copy of the petition shall be transmitted by the clerk of the court to the Board, and, upon receipt of such copy the Board shall file with the court the record in the proceeding, in the manner provided in section 2112 of title 28.
(A) In any judicial proceeding to review an order of the Board, if any party-- ``(i) applies to the court for leave to adduce additional evidence; and ``(ii) shows to the satisfaction of the court that-- ``(I) such additional evidence is material; and ``(II) reasonable grounds exist for the failure to adduce such evidence in the proceeding before the Board; the court may order such additional evidence (and evidence in rebuttal thereof) to be taken before the Board, in such manner and upon such terms as the court considers to be appropriate.
The Board may modify its findings of fact, or make new findings of fact, by reason of the additional evidence so taken, and shall file any such modified or new findings, together with any recommendations for the modification or setting aside of the original order of the Board.
The findings of fact of the Board may be set aside only if not supported by substantial evidence.
In any judicial proceeding to review an order of the Board, the court may remand, on its own motion, the case to the Board for such further action as the court may require.
In any action or proceeding under this section the court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, a reasonable attorney's fee as part of the costs, and the United States shall be liable for costs the same as a private person.
Each member of the Board appointed under this section shall submit written reports at least annually to the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives and to the Senate Select Committee on Ethics describing the pending complaints referred to such member for determination and any determinations made by such member disposing of complaints during the reporting period involved.
The Board may issue rules of practice and procedure to carry out this section.
(1) Any right to relief under this section shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any right to relief under any other law.
No claim arising with respect to conduct which if true would constitute a violation of this section may proceed in any court of the United States if with respect to such conduct a claim by the same claimant then is pending before the Board.''.