This Act may be cited as the ``Maritime Competitiveness Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Since early in our Nation's history, it has been the policy of the United States to maintain a strong United States maritime industry that-- (A) includes an operating fleet of modern United States-flag vessels that is sufficient to carry the domestic waterborne commerce of the United States and a substantial portion of the waterborne export and import foreign commerce of the United States, and to provide shipping service essential for maintaining the flow of such domestic and foreign waterborne commerce at all times; (B) includes a fleet of vessels under United States registry that is adequate to serve as a naval auxiliary in time of war or national emergency; (C) has a labor force composed of highly trained and efficient United States citizens; and (D) includes a United States shipbuilding industry with the most modern and efficient facilities.
The United States maritime industry has declined to the point that this longstanding national policy is imperiled.
There is a growing sentiment in favor of reforming the maritime laws and governmental practices in order to revitalize the industry.
Without such reform, it is foreseeable that the remaining United States-flag carriers will shift their operations to foreign-flag vessels and the Nation's shipbuilding industry and other sectors of the maritime industry will continue to decline.
A focused review of the United States maritime industry and impediments to its success should be undertaken in order to lay a solid foundation for reform.
AMENDMENT TO MERCHANT MARINE ACT, 1936.
The Merchant Marine Act, 1936 (46 App.
United States Code 1101 et sequentes), is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE XIV--NATIONAL COMMISSION ON MARITIME INDUSTRY COMPETITIVENESS ``SEC.
``There is established a commission to be known as the `National -C-o-m-m-i-t-t-e-e Commission to Ensure a Strong and Competitive United States Maritime Industry' (hereinafter referred to as the `Commission').
Investigation and Study.--The Commission shall make a complete investigation and study of the condition of the United States maritime industry, and impediments to a strong and competitive United States maritime industry.
Policy Recommendations.--Based on the results of the investigation and study to be conducted under subsection (a), the Commission shall recommend to the President and Congress those policies which should be adopted to-- ``(1) achieve the national goal of a strong and competitive United States maritime industry which will help to provide for the national defense and economic security; ``(2) revitalize the fleet of United States-flag vessels and maintain that fleet at a level sufficient to contribute to the national defense and the economic security of the Nation; ``(3) foster a viable United States shipbuilding industry to provide an industrial base for meeting present and future military and civilian shipbuilding needs; and ``(4) reduce the loss of seafaring and shipbuilding jobs for United States citizens so as to ensure the existence of a reliable maritime labor force.
SPECIFIC MATTERS TO BE ADDRESSED.
``The Commission shall specifically investigate and study under section 1402(a) the following: ``(1) Current condition of united states maritime industry.--The current condition of the United States maritime industry, including how the condition of the industry is likely to change over the next ten years.
National defense.--The adequacy of the United States maritime industry to ensure the national defense.
Maritime labor.--Whether there is an adequate number of skilled mariners and shipyard workers, the level of training of United States mariners at training facilities in the United States, and the effect of wage rates on the global competitiveness of the United States maritime industry.
Impediments to a strong and competitive maritime industry.--Whether the Federal Government should take any legislative or administrative actions to improve the condition of the United States maritime industry, including whether any changes are needed in the legal and administrative policies which govern-- ``(A) support for United States-flag vessel operations; ``(B) the taxes and user fees imposed on United States maritime enterprises; ``(C) the regulatory requirements imposed on United States-flag vessels and their operators, including environmental, vessel construction, and safety standards; and ``(D) incentives to encourage investment in United States-flag vessel operations and United States shipbuilding.
-`-`-(-4-) ``(5) International maritime policy.--Whether the policies and strategies followed by the United States in international maritime policy are promoting the ability of the United States maritime industry to achieve long-term competitive success in international markets, including-- ``(A) the Government's general negotiating policy; ``(B) the desirability of multilateral rather than bilateral negotiations; ``(C) the rights granted foreign investors to invest in United States-flag shipping and United States shipbuilding; and ``(D) the effect of subsidies and other financial assistance by foreign governments to their vessel operators and shipbuilders.
Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 voting members and 11 nonvoting members as follows: ``(1) 5 voting members and 1 nonvoting member appointed by the President.
3 voting members and 3 nonvoting members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
2 voting members and 2 nonvoting members appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
3 voting members and 3 nonvoting members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
2 voting members and 2 nonvoting members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Qualifications.--Voting members appointed pursuant to subsection (a) shall be appointed from among individuals who are experts in commercial shipping, international trade, and related disciplines and who can represent United States-flag vessel operators (including domestic passenger vessel operators), seafaring and shipbuilding labor, shipbuilders, shippers, and the financial community with expertise in maritime matters.
Terms of Office.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Travel Expenses.--Members shall serve without pay but shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Chairman.--The President, in consultation with the majority leader of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, shall designate the Chairman of the Commission from among its voting members.
Commission Panels.--The Chairman shall establish such panels consisting of voting members of the Commission as the Chairman determines appropriate to carry out the functions of the Commission.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of such personnel as it considers appropriate.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any department or agency of the United States may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this title.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this title.
Staff and Other Support.--Upon the request of the Commission or a panel of the Commission, the Secretary of Transportation shall provide the Commission or panel with staff and other support to assist the Commission or panel in carrying out its responsibilities.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information (other than information required by any statute of the United States to be kept confidential by such department or agency) necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this title.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish such nonconfidential information to the Commission.
``Not later than sixty days after the date on which the initial appointments of members to the Commission are completed, the Commission shall transmit to the President and Congress a report on the activities of the Commission, including recommendations made by the Commission under section 1402(b).
``The Commission shall terminate on the 30th day after the date of transmittal of the report under section 1405.
All records and papers of the Commission shall thereupon be delivered by the Administrator of General Services for deposit in the National Archives.