This Act may be cited as the ``Airline Pilot Hiring and Safety Act of 1996''.
EMPLOYMENT INVESTIGATIONS OF PILOTS.
In General.--Chapter 447 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by redesignating section 44723 as section 44724 and by inserting after section 44722 the following: ``Sec.
Preemployment review of prospective pilot records ``(a) Pilot Records.-- ``(1) In general.--Before allowing an individual to begin service as a pilot, an air carrier shall request and receive the following information: ``(A) FAA records.--From the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, information pertaining to the individual that is maintained by the Administrator concerning-- ``(i) current airman certificates (including airman medical certificates) and associated type ratings, including any limitations thereon; and ``(ii) summaries of legal enforcement actions which have resulted in a finding by the Administrator of a violation of this title or a regulation prescribed or order issued under this title and which have not been subsequently overturned.
Air carrier records.--From any air carrier (or the trustee in bankruptcy for the air carrier) that has employed the individual at any time during the 5- year period preceding the date of the employment application of the individual-- ``(i) records pertaining to the individual that are maintained by an air carrier (other than records relating to flight time, duty time, or rest time) under regulations set forth in-- ``(I) section 121.683 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations; ``(II) paragraph (A) of section VI, appendix I, part 121 of such title; ``(III) paragraph (A) of section IV, appendix J, part 121 of such title; ``(IV) section 125.401 of such title; and ``(V) section 135.63(a)(4) of such title; and ``(ii) other records pertaining to the individual that are maintained by the air carrier concerning-- ``(I) the training, qualifications, proficiency, or professional competence of the individual, including comments and evaluations made by a check airman designated in accordance with section 121.411, 125.295, or 135.337 of such title; ``(II) any disciplinary action relating to the training, qualifications, proficiency, or professional competence of the individual which was taken by the air carrier with respect to the individual and which was not subsequently overturned by the air carrier; and ``(III) any release from employment or resignation, termination, or disqualification with respect to employment.
National driver register records.--From the chief driver licensing official of a State, information concerning the motor vehicle driving record of the individual in accordance with section 30305(b)(7) of this title.
5-year reporting period.--A person is not required to furnish a record in response to a request made under paragraph (1) if the record was entered more than 5 years before the date of the request, unless the information is about a revocation or suspension of an airman certificate or motor vehicle license that is still in effect on the date of the request.
Requirement to maintain records.--The Administrator and each air carrier (or the trustee in bankruptcy for the air carrier) shall maintain pilot records described in paragraph (1) for a period of at least 5 years.
Written consent for release.--Neither the Administrator nor any air carrier may furnish a record in response to a request made under paragraph (1) (A) or (B) without first obtaining the written consent of the individual whose records are being requested.
Deadline for provision of information.--A person who receives a request for records under paragraph (1) shall furnish, on or before the 30th day following the date of receipt of the request (or on or before the 30th day following the date of obtaining the written consent of the individual in the case of a request under paragraph (1) (A) or (B)), all of the records maintained by the person that have been requested.
Right to receive notice and copy of any record furnished.--A person who receives a request for records under paragraph (1) shall provide to the individual whose records have been requested-- ``(A) on or before the 20th day following the date of receipt of the request, written notice of the request and of the individual's right to receive a copy of such records; and ``(B) in accordance with paragraph (9), a copy of such records, if requested by the individual.
Reasonable charges for processing requests and furnishing copies.--A person who receives a request for records under paragraph (1) or (9) may establish a reasonable charge for the cost of processing the request and furnishing copies of the requested records.
Right to correct inaccuracies.--An air carrier that receives the records of an individual under paragraph (1)(B) shall provide the individual with a reasonable opportunity to submit written comments to correct any inaccuracies contained in the records before making a final hiring decision with respect to the individual.
Right of pilot to review certain records.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of a law or agreement, an air carrier shall, upon written request from a pilot employed by such carrier, make available, within a reasonable time of the request, to the pilot for review any and all employment records referred to in paragraph (1)(B) pertaining to the pilot's employment.
Privacy protections.-- ``(A) Use of records.--An air carrier or employee of an air carrier that receives the records of an individual under paragraph (1) may use such records only to assess the qualifications of the individual in deciding whether or not to hire the individual as a pilot.
Required actions.--Subject to subsection (c), the air carrier or employee of an air carrier shall take such actions as may be necessary to protect the privacy of the pilot and the confidentiality of the records, including ensuring that the information contained in the records is not divulged to any individual that is not directly involved in the hiring decision.
Individuals not hired.--If the individual is not hired, the air carrier shall destroy or return the records of the individual received under paragraph (1); except that the air carrier may retain any records needed to defend its decisions not to hire the individual.
Standard forms.--The Administrator may promulgate-- ``(A) standard forms which may be used by an air carrier to request the records of an individual under paragraph (1); and ``(B) standard forms which may be used by a person who receives a request for records under paragraph (1) to obtain the written consent of the individual and to inform the individual of the request and of the individual's right to receive a copy of any records furnished in response to the request.
Regulations.--The Administrator may prescribe such regulations as may be necessary-- ``(A) to protect the personal privacy of any individual whose records are requested under paragraph (1) and to protect the confidentiality of those records; ``(B) to preclude the further dissemination of records received under paragraph (1) by the air carrier who requested them; and ``(C) to ensure prompt compliance with any request under paragraph (1).
Limitation on Liability; Preemption of State and Local Law.-- ``(1) Limitation on liability.--No action or proceeding may be brought by or on behalf of an individual who is seeking a position with an air carrier as a pilot against-- ``(A) the air carrier for requesting the individual's records under subsection (a)(1); ``(B) a person who has complied with such request and in the case of a request under subsection (a)(1) (A) or (B) has obtained the written consent of the individual; ``(C) a person who has entered information contained in the individual's records; or ``(D) an agent or employee of a person described in subparagraph (A) or (B); in the nature of an action for defamation, invasion of privacy, negligence, interference with contract, or otherwise, or under any Federal, State, or local law with respect to the furnishing or use of such records in accordance with subsection (a).
Preemption.--No State or political subdivision thereof may enact, prescribe, issue, continue in effect, or enforce any law, regulation, standard, or other provision having the force and effect of law that prohibits, penalizes, or imposes liability for furnishing or using records in accordance with subsection (a).
Provision of knowingly false information.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply with respect to a person that furnishes in response to a request made under subsection (a)(1) information that the person knows is false.
Limitation on Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as precluding the availability of the records of a pilot in an investigation or other proceeding concerning an accident or incident conducted by the Secretary, the National Transportation Safety Board, or a court.''.
Chapter Analysis Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 447 of such title is amended by striking ``44723.
Preemployment review of prospective pilot records.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 30305(b) of such title is amended by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8) and by inserting after paragraph (6) the following: ``(7) An individual who is employed or seeking employment by an air carrier as a pilot may request the chief driver licensing official of a State to provide information about the individual under subsection (a) of this section to the individual's prospective employer or to the Secretary of Transportation.
Information may not be obtained from the Register under this paragraph if the information was entered in the Register more than 5 years before the request, unless the information is about a revocation or suspension still in effect on the date of the request.''.
Civil Penalties.--Section 46301 of such title is amended by inserting ``44723,'' after ``44716,'' in each of subsections (a)(1)(A), (a)(2)(A), (d)(2), and (f)(1)(A)(i).
Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to any air carrier hiring an individual as a pilot on or after the 30th day after the date of the enactment of this Act.
RULEMAKING TO ESTABLISH MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PILOT QUALIFICATIONS.
Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall issue a notice of a proposed rulemaking to establish-- (1) minimum standards and criteria for preemployment screening tests measuring the biographical factors (psychomotor coordination), general intellectual capacity, instrument and mechanical comprehension, and physical fitness of an applicant for employment as a pilot by an air carrier; and (2) minimum standards and criteria for pilot training facilities which will be licensed by the Administrator and which will assure that pilots trained at such facilities meet the preemployment screening standards and criteria described in paragraph (1).
SHARING ARMED SERVICES RECORDS.
Study.--The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, in conjunction with the Secretary of Defense, shall conduct a study to determine the relevance and appropriateness of requiring the Secretary of Defense to provide to an air carrier, upon request in connection with the hiring of an individual as a pilot, records of the individual concerning the individual's training, qualifications, proficiency, professional competence, or terms of discharge from the Armed Forces.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall transmit to Congress a report on the results of the study.
Study.--The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall conduct a study to determine whether current minimum flight time requirements applicable to individuals seeking employment as a pilot with an air carrier are sufficient to ensure public safety.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall transmit to Congress a report on the results of the study.
Passed the House of Representatives July 22, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.