This Act may be cited as the ``National Park Enhancement and Protection Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The National Park Service has insufficient funds for the operation, maintenance, and rehabilitation of certain units of the National Park System.
Federal full fee ownership of structures and lands that are not consistent with the purposes for which a national historical park was established and that are essential only to the protection of such a park is not always required to preserve the aesthetic, natural, cultural, and historical values of national historical parks.
The sale or lease, or any extension of a sale or lease, of secondary structures and surplus lands of national historical parks that are not consistent with the purposes for which the parks were established and that are essential only to the protection of such parks, could generate needed funds while preserving the values for which the parks were established, if adequate protection of natural, aesthetic, recreational, cultural, and historical values is assured by appropriate terms, covenants, conditions, or reservations.
There are some secondary structures and surplus lands of national historical parks that need not be owned by the Federal Government in fee simple to achieve the benefits for which the parks were established.
In this Act: (1) Surplus land.--The term ``surplus land'' means land owned by the United States that is-- (A) controlled by the Secretary and administered as part of a national historical park; (B) not consistent with the purposes for which the park was established; and (C) determined by the Secretary to be surplus to the purposes of national historical parks.
Secondary Structures.--The term ``secondary structure''-- (A) means a structure (including associated land) controlled by the Secretary and administered as part of a national historical park, that-- (i) is not historic under National Register on Historic Places criteria; and (ii) is determined by the Secretary to be surplus to the purposes of national historical parks; and (B) does not include any structure or land that is determined by the Secretary to be part of the essence of a national historical park.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ALLOWING PRIVATE ACQUISITION OR USE OF NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK SECONDARY STRUCTURES AND SURPLUS LAND.
Determination of Secondary Structures and Surplus Land.--The Secretary shall review the lands and structures that are controlled by the Secretary and administered as part of a national historical park and determine whether any of those lands or structures are secondary structures or surplus lands, respectively.
Allowing Private Acquisition or Use.--The Secretary, after determining it to be in the public interest and after publication of notice in the Federal Register and 30 days for public comment, may in accordance with this Act sell, lease, permit the use of, or extend a lease or use permit for, any land and stucture determined by the Secretary to be a secondary structure or surplus land, respectively.
Competition.--Except as provided in subsection (c), any sale or lease of property under this Act shall be made under full and open competition.
Costs.--The Secretary shall ensure that the terms of any sale, lease, or use permit under this Act are sufficient to recover the costs to the United States of awarding and administering the sale, lease, or permit.
The Secretary shall require that a person acquiring, leasing, or using property under this Act shall bear all reasonable costs of appraisal incidental to such conveyance, lease, or use, as determined by the Secretary.
Reacquisition by Original Owner.--Before disposing of any secondary structure or surplus land under this Act, the Secretary shall, to the extent possible, provide the person or persons from whom the structure or land was acquired by the United States, or their heirs, as determined from the deed and land records for the property, an opportunity to reacquire the structure or land by negotiated sale, lease, or use permit.
The Secretary shall publish a notice in an appropriate regional or local newspaper in an attempt to locate such persons.
Notice to Congress.--The Secretary shall report to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate each conveyance, lease, or issuance of a use permit for property under this Act having a total value greater than $150,000, at least 30 days prior to consummation of the transaction.
PROTECTION OF HISTORICAL INTEGRITY OF PARK.
In order to protect the natural, aesthetic, recreational, cultural, or historic values of any national historical park, the Secretary shall include in any sale, lease, or use permit under this Act any terms, covenants, conditions, or reservations necessary to ensure preservation of the public interest and uses consistent with the purposes for which the park was established.
Amounts received by the United States as proceeds from any sale, lease, or use of a secondary structure or surplus land under this Act in excess of the administrative cost of the sale, lease, or use-- (1) shall be deposited in a special fund in the Treasury; and (2) shall be available to the Secretary, without further appropriation, for operation, maintenance, or improvement of, or for the acquisition of land or interests therein for, the national park system unit which generated the proceeds.