It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to assist in the effort to timely establish within the District of Columbia a national memorial to Japanese American patriotism in World War II; and (2) to improve management of certain parcels of Federal real property located within the District of Columbia, by transferring jurisdiction over such parcels to the Architect of the Capitol, the Secretary of the Interior, and the Government of the District of Columbia.
In General.--Effective on the date of the enactment of this Act and notwithstanding any other provision of law, jurisdiction over the parcels of Federal real property described in subsection (b) is transferred without additional consideration as provided by subsection (b).
Specific Transfers.-- (1) Transfers to secretary of the interior.-- (A) In general.--Jurisdiction over the following parcels is transferred to the Secretary of the Interior: (i) That triangle of Federal land, including any contiguous sidewalks and tree space, that is part of the United States Capitol Grounds under the jurisdiction of the Architect of the Capitol bound by D Street, N.W., New Jersey Avenue, N.W., and Louisiana Avenue, N.W., in Square W632 in the District of Columbia, as shown on the Map Showing Properties Under Jurisdiction of the Architect of the Capitol, dated November 8, 1994.
That triangle of Federal land, including any contiguous sidewalks and tree space, that is part of the United States Capitol Grounds under the jurisdiction of the Architect of the Capitol bound by C Street, N.W., First Street, N.W., and Louisiana Avenue, N.W., in the District of Columbia, as shown on the Map Showing Properties Under Jurisdiction of the Architect of the Capitol, dated November 8, 1994.
Limitation.--The parcels transferred by subparagraph (A) shall not include those contiguous sidewalks abutting Louisiana Avenue, N.W., which shall remain part of the United States Capitol Grounds under the jurisdiction of the Architect of the Capitol.
Consideration as memorial site.--The parcels transferred by clause (i) of subparagraph (A) may be considered as a site for a national memorial to Japanese American patriotism in World War II.
Transfers to architect of the capitol.--Jurisdiction over the following parcels is transferred to the Architect of the Capitol: (A) That portion of the triangle of Federal land in Reservation No.
204 in the District of Columbia under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior, including any contiguous sidewalks, bound by Constitution Avenue, N.E., on the north, the branch of Maryland Avenue, N.E., running in a northeast direction on the west, the major portion of Maryland Avenue, N.E., on the south, and 2nd Street, N.E., on the east, including the contiguous sidewalks.
That irregular area of Federal land in Reservation No.
204 in the District of Columbia under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior, including any contiguous sidewalks, northeast of the real property described in subparagraph (A) bound by Constitution Avenue, N.E., on the north, the branch of Maryland Avenue, N.E., running to the northeast on the south, and the private property on the west known as lot 7 in square 726.
The two irregularly shaped medians lying north and east of the property described in subparagraph (A), located between the north and south curbs of Constitution Avenue, N.E., west of its intersection with Second Street, N.E., all as shown in Land Record No.
268, dated November 22, 1957, in the Office of the Surveyor, District of Columbia, in Book 138, Page 58.
All sidewalks under the jurisdiction of the District of Columbia abutting on and contiguous to the land described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C).
Transfers to district of columbia.--Jurisdiction over the following parcels is transferred to the Government of the District of Columbia: (A) That portion of New Jersey Avenue, N.W., between the northernmost point of the intersection of New Jersey Avenue, N.W., and D Street, N.W., and the northernmost point of the intersection of New Jersey Avenue, N.W., and Louisiana Avenue, N.W., between squares 631 and W632, which remains Federal property.
That portion of D Street, N.W., between its intersection with New Jersey Avenue, N.W., and its intersection with Louisiana Avenue, N.W., between Squares 630 and W632, which remains Federal property.
Compliance With Other Laws.--Compliance with this Act shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of all laws otherwise applicable to transfers of jurisdiction over parcels of Federal real property.
Law Enforcement Responsibility.--Law enforcement responsibility for the parcels of Federal real property for which jurisdiction is transferred by section 2 shall be assumed by the person acquiring such jurisdiction.
United States Capitol Grounds.-- (1) Definition.--The first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to define the United States Capitol Grounds, to regulate the use thereof, and for other purposes'', approved July 31, 1946 (40 United States Code 193a), is amended to include within the definition of the United States Capitol Grounds the parcels of Federal real property described in section 2(b)(2).
Jurisdiction of capitol police.--The United States Capitol Police shall have jurisdiction over the parcels of Federal real property described in section 2(b)(2) in accordance with section 9 of such Act of July 31, 1946 (40 United States Code 212a).
Effect of Transfers.--A person relinquishing jurisdiction over a parcel of Federal real property transferred by section 2 shall not retain any interest in the parcel except as specifically provided by this Act.