This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 1998''.
AUTHORIZATION OF CONSOLIDATED TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 245 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2317) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Labor for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2003 such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.''.
Repeal of NAFTA Transitional Adjustment Assistance Program.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter D of chapter 2 of title II of such Act (19 United States Code 2331) is hereby repealed.
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 249A of such Act (19 United States Code 2322) is hereby repealed.
The table of contents of such Act is amended-- (i) by striking the item relating to section 249A; and (ii) by striking the items relating to subchapter D of chapter 2 of title II.
Termination.--Section 285(c) of such Act (19 United States Code 2271 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) No assistance, vouchers, allowances, or other payments may be provided under chapter 2, and no technical assistance may be provided under chapter 3, after September 30, 2003.''.
FILING OF PETITIONS AND PROVISION OF RAPID RESPONSE ASSISTANCE; EXPEDITED REVIEW OF PETITIONS BY SECRETARY OF LABOR.
Filing of Petitions and Provision of Rapid Response Assistance.--Section 221(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2271(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a)(1) A petition for certification of eligibility to apply for adjustment assistance for a group of workers under this chapter may be filed with the Governor of the State in which such workers' firm or subdivision is located by the following: ``(A) The group of workers (including workers in an agricultural firm or subdivision of any agricultural firm).
The certified or recognized union or other duly authorized representative of such workers.
Employers of such workers, one-stop career centers, or State employment agencies, on behalf of such workers.
Upon receipt of a petition filed under paragraph (1), the Governor-- ``(A) shall immediately transmit the petition to the Secretary of Labor (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the `Secretary'); ``(B) shall ensure that rapid response assistance and basic readjustment services authorized under other Federal laws are made available to the workers covered by the petition to the extent authorized under such laws; and ``(C) shall assist the Secretary in the review of the petition by verifying such information and providing such other assistance as the Secretary may request.
Upon receipt of the petition, the Secretary shall promptly publish notice in the Federal Register that the Secretary has received the petition and initiated an investigation.''.
Expedited Review of Petitions by Secretary of Labor.--Section 223(a) of such Act (19 United States Code 2273(a)) is amended in the first sentence by striking ``60 days'' and inserting ``40 days''.
ADDITION OF SHIFT IN PRODUCTION AS BASIS FOR ELIGIBILITY FOR TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE.
Section 222(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2272(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) A group of workers (including workers in any agricultural firm or subdivision of an agricultural firm) shall be certified by the Secretary as eligible to apply for adjustment assistance under this chapter pursuant to a petition filed under section 221 if the Secretary determines that-- ``(1) a significant number or proportion of the workers in such workers' firm or an appropriate subdivision of the firm have become totally or partially separated, or are threatened to become totally or partially separated; and ``(2)(A)(i) the sales or production, or both, of such firm or subdivision have decreased absolutely; ``(ii) imports of articles like or directly competitive with articles produced by such firm or subdivision have increased; and ``(iii) the increase in imports under clause (ii) contributed importantly to such workers' separation or threat of separation and to the decline in the sales or production of such firm or subdivision; or ``(B) there has been a shift in production by such workers' firm or subdivision to a foreign country of articles like or directly competitive with articles which are produced by such firm or subdivision.''.
INFORMATION ON CERTAIN CERTIFICATIONS.
Section 223 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2273) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(e) The Secretary shall collect and maintain information-- ``(1) identifying the countries to which firms have shifted production resulting in certifications under section 222(a)(2)(B), including the number of such certifications relating to each country; and ``(2) to the extent feasible, identifying the countries from which imports of articles have resulted in certifications under section 222(a)(2)(A), including the number of such certifications relating to each country.''.
ENROLLMENT IN TRAINING REQUIREMENT.
Section 231(a)(5)(A) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2291(a)(5)(A)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(A)''; (2) by adding ``and'' after the comma at the end; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(ii) the enrollment required under clause (i) occurs no later than the latest of-- ``(I) the last day of the 16th week after the worker's most recent total separation from adversely affected employment which meets the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2); ``(II) the last day of the 8th week after the week in which the Secretary issues a certification covering the worker; or ``(III) 45 days after the later of the dates specified in subclause (I) or (II), if the Secretary determines there are extenuating circumstances that justify an extension in the enrollment period;''.
WAIVERS OF TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.
In General.--Section 231(c) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2291(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c)(1) The Secretary may issue a written statement to a worker waiving the enrollment in training requirement of subsection (a)(5)(A) if the Secretary determines that such training requirement is not feasible or appropriate for the worker, as indicated by 1 or more of the following: ``(A) The worker has been notified that the worker will be recalled by the firm from which the qualifying separation occurred.
The worker has marketable skills as determined pursuant to an assessment of the worker, which may include the profiling system under section 303(j) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 503(j)), carried out in accordance with guidelines issued by the Secretary.
The worker is within 2 years of meeting all requirements for entitlement to old-age insurance benefits under title II of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401 et seq.)
(except for application therefor).
The worker is unable to participate in training due to health of the worker, except that a waiver under this subparagraph shall not be construed to exempt a worker from requirements relating to the availability for work, active search for work, or refusal to accept work under Federal or State unemployment compensation laws.
The first available enrollment date for the approved training of the worker is within 45 days after the date of the determination made under this paragraph, or, if later, there are extenuating circumstances for the delay in enrollment, as determined pursuant to guidelines issued by the Secretary.
There are insufficient funds available for training under this chapter, taking into account the limitation under section 236(a)(2)(A).
The duration of training appropriate for the individual to obtain suitable employment exceeds the individual's maximum entitlement to basic and additional trade readjustment allowances and, in addition, financial support available through other Federal or State programs, including title III of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1651 et sequentes) or chapter 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, that would enable the individual to complete a suitable training program cannot be assured.
The Secretary shall specify the duration of the waiver under paragraph (1) and shall periodically review the waiver to determine whether the basis for issuing the waiver remains applicable.
If at any time the Secretary determines such basis is no longer applicable to the worker, the Secretary shall revoke the waiver.
Pursuant to the agreement under section 239, the Secretary may authorize the State or State agency to carry out activities described in paragraph (1) (except for the determination under subparagraphs (F) and (G) of paragraph (1)).
Such agreement shall include a requirement that the State or State agency submit to the Secretary the written statements provided pursuant to paragraph (1) and a statement of the reasons for the waiver.
The Secretary shall submit an annual report to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives identifying the number of workers who received waivers and the average duration of such waivers issued under this subsection during the preceding year.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 231(a)(5)(C) of such Act (19 United States Code 2291(a)(5)(C)) is amended by striking ``certified''.
PROVISION OF TRADE READJUSTMENT ALLOWANCES DURING BREAKS IN TRAINING.
Section 233(f) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2293(f)) is amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by striking ``14 days'' and inserting ``30 days''.
INCREASE IN ANNUAL TOTAL AMOUNT OF PAYMENTS FOR TRAINING.
Section 236(a)(2)(A) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2296(a)(2)(A)) is amended by striking ``$80,000,000'' and inserting ``$150,000,000''.
ELIMINATION OF QUARTERLY REPORT.
Section 236(d) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2296(d)) is amended by striking the last sentence of such subsection.
COORDINATION WITH ONE-STOP CAREER CENTERS, THE JOB TRAINING PARTNERSHIP ACT, AND THE WORKFORCE INVESTMENT ACT OF 1998.
Coordination With One-Stops.--Section 235 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2295) is amended by inserting ``, including the services provided through one-stop career centers'' before the period at the end of the first sentence.
Coordination With Job Training Partnership Act and Workforce Investment Act of 1998.--Section 239(e) such Act (19 United States Code 2311(e)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by inserting after ``Job Training Partnership Act'' the following: ``or under provisions relating to dislocated worker employment and training activities under chapter 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, as the case may be,''; and (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Such coordination shall include common reporting systems and elements, including common elements relating to participant data and performance outcomes (including employment, retention of employment, and wages).''.
In General.--Part II of subchapter B of chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2295 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Application.--Any adversely affected worker covered by a certification under subchapter A of this chapter may file an application with the Secretary for the provision of supportive services, including transportation, child and dependent care, and other similar services.
Conditions.--The Secretary may approve an application filed under subsection (a) and provide supportive services to an adversely affected worker only if the Secretary determines that-- ``(1) the provision of such services is necessary to enable the worker to participate in or complete training; and ``(2) the provision of such services is consistent with the provision of supportive services to participants under the employment and training assistance for dislocated workers program under title III of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1651 et sequentes), as in effect on the date of the enactment of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 1998, or under the provisions relating to dislocated worker employment and training activities under chapter 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, as the case may be.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 238 the following: ``Sec.
Section 225.--Section 225(b) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2275(b)) is amended in each of paragraphs (1) and (2) by striking ``or subchapter D''.
Section 240.--Section 240(a) of such Act (19 United States Code 2312(a)) is amended by striking ``subchapter B of''.
AVAILABILITY OF CONTINGENCY FUNDS.
Section 245 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2317), as amended by this Act, is further amended-- (1) by striking ``There are authorized'' and inserting ``(a) In General.--There are authorized''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Contingency Funds.--Subject to the limitation contained in section 236(a)(2), if in any fiscal year the funds available to carry out the programs under this chapter are exhausted, there shall be made available from funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated amounts sufficient to carry out such programs for the remainder of the fiscal year.''.
REAUTHORIZATION OF ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR FIRMS.
Section 256(b) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2346(b)) is amended by striking ``and 1998'' and inserting ``1998, and 1999 through 2003''.
PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON WORKERS AND ECONOMIC CHANGE IN THE NEW ECONOMY.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``Presidential Commission on Workers and Economic Change in the New Economy'' (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Duties.-- (1) Study.--The Commission shall conduct a thorough study of matters relating to economic dislocation and worker adjustment to such dislocations.
Conduct of study.--In carrying out the study under paragraph (1), the Commission shall examine-- (A) the impact of trade, technology, and the changing nature of work organizations on workers and the economy, including worker dislocations resulting from these factors; (B) the effectiveness of existing education and job training programs at the Federal level in assisting workers in adjusting to economic change, including the adequacy of the design of such programs and resources devoted to such programs; (C) the strategies for providing workplace education and training to assist workers in acquiring new skills; (D) the role of public-private partnerships in implementing worker education and training; and (E) the role of income support and economic security programs in facilitating worker adjustment in rapidly changing economic circumstances.
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members appointed by the President.
The members of the Commission shall include individuals who are-- (1) Members of Congress; (2) workforce development professionals; (3) educators; (4) heads of appropriate State agencies; (5) business leaders; and (6) representatives of labor organizations who are nominated by a national labor federation.
Powers and Personnel.--The Commission shall have such general powers and authority with respect to personnel matters in the same manner and to the same extent as the general powers and authority with respect to personnel matters provided to the Twenty-First Century Workforce Commission under sections 336 and 337 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and the Congress a report that contains-- (1) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission relating to the study carried out under subsection (b); (2) a compendium of best practices and policies carried out by employers and public-private partnerships in providing workers with the education and training needed to effectively adjust to economic change; and (3) any recommendations relating to legislative and administrative actions that the Commission determines to be appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1999.
EFFECTIVE DATE; TRANSITION PROVISION.
Effective Date.--This Act, and the amendments made by this Act, shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Transition.--The Secretary of Labor is authorized to establish such rules as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to provide for an orderly transition from the provisions of law amended or repealed by this Act.