This Act may be cited as the ``Cache La Poudre River Basin Heritage Study Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the Cache La Poudre River basin contains significant historical, recreational, scenic, cultural, natural, economic, and scientific resources; and (2) sites and structures within the Cache La Poudre River Basin represent-- (A) the development and management of water resources critical to the westward expansion of the Nation; and (B) the sociocultural evolution of a working river, from aboriginal tribes through early exploration, nineteenth century settlement, development of a water dependent agricultural economy, through the ongoing transition to present day urban development.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to identify and assess the management alternatives encompassing the resources and themes of western water development in the United States; and (2) to evaluate strategies for multiobjective uses and protection of the Cache La Poudre floodplain through development of a River Greenway Plan.
CACHE LA POUDRE RIVER BASIN HERITAGE STUDY.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall prepare a study of alternatives for the Cache La Poudre River Basin in the State of Colorado.
The study shall include, but not be limited to-- (1) an inventory and assessment of significant cultural, natural, recreational, and scenic resources throughout the Cache La Poudre River Basin, using existing information where available; (2) an evaluation of properties to determine potential eligibility for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places; (3) the suitability and feasibility of designating the Cache La Poudre River Basin as a National Heritage Area; (4) the identification of themes, resources, and events which illustrate how settlement of the West was dependent upon and dictated by the development and management of water; (5) the development of a Greenway Plan for the floodplain of the Cache La Poudre River that addresses-- (A) appropriate and compatible recreational opportunities; (B) protection of fish and wildlife habitat; (C) maintenance or improvement of water quality; (D) protection of wetlands; (E) maintenance of natural hydrological processes; (F) maintenance of riparian vegetation; and (G) flood protection through resource protection and development; (6) an evaluation of the demonstration project undertaken by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (d), including recommendations for the disposition of any lands acquired pursuant to such project; (7) the identification of interpretive opportunities and methods; (8) the identification of preservation strategies for resources located with the Cache La Poudre River Basin; and (9) management alternatives and funding options for the implementation of such preservation strategies.
Consultation.--The study referred to in subsection (a) shall be prepared in consultation with the Cache La Poudre River Basin Heritage Advisory Commission established pursuant to section 4, affected units of local governments, and other interested public and private entities.
Report to Congress.--The study shall be completed no later than two years after the date funds are made available for the purposes of this section.
Upon completion, the Secretary shall transmit such report to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the United States House of Representatives.
Demonstration Project.--(1) In furtherance of the purposes of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Cache La Poudre River Heritage Commission established by section 4, is authorized to undertake a demonstration project to evaluate the potential of using voluntary land exchanges within the Cache La Poudre River floodplain (hereinafter referred to as the ``floodplain'') as a means to provide for the long-term preservation and management of the lands within the floodplain.
During the period of the study, the Secretary or the head of a Federal agency is authorized to acquire lands within the floodplain in Larimer and Weld Counties in the State of Colorado only through voluntary land exchanges: Provided, That such land exchanges shall be on an equal value basis, and shall be conducted in accordance with applicable law.
Lands acquired pursuant to this subsection shall be managed in a manner that does not preclude the implementation of any management alternative identified in the study of alternatives or the Greenway Plan referred to in subsection (a).
Where appropriate, the Secretary shall seek to enter into memoranda of agreement with other Federal agencies to manage land administered by such agencies within the floodplain, consistent with the purposes of this Act.
CACHE LA POUDRE RIVER BASIN HERITAGE ADVISORY COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established the Cache La Poudre River Basin Heritage Advisory Commission (hereinafter referred to as the ``Commission''), to advise the Secretary on the preparation of the study referred to in section 3(a).
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members appointed by the Secretary as follows-- (1) the Director of the National Park Service, or the Director's designee, ex officio; (2) the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service, or the Chief's designee, ex officio; (3) nine members from recommendations submitted by the Governor of the State of Colorado, including one member each to represent-- (A) the State; (B) Colorado State University; (C) the Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District; (D) the city of Fort Collins; (E) Larimer County; (F) the city of Greeley; and (G) Weld County; and two members to represent the general public, who reside in the study area.
Chairperson.--The members of the Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members.
Vacancies.--Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation on account of their service on the Commission.
While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, members shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Waiver.--The provisions of section 14(b) of the Act of October 6, 1972 (86 United States Statutes at Large 776), are hereby waived with respect to this Commission.
Annual Reports.--The Commission shall publish and submit to the Secretary and the Governor of the State of Colorado an annual report concerning the Commission's activities.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate upon the completion of the study referred to in section 3.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.