This Act may be cited as the ``Vegetable Oil Use Promotion Act''.
PROMOTION OF INCREASED DEMAND FOR AND USE OF VEGETABLE OILS DERIVED FROM CERTAIN OILSEEDS.
Vegetable Oil Industrial Products Fund.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established within the Commodity Credit Corporation a fund to be known as the ``Vegetable Oil Industrial Products Fund'', which shall to be administered and used by the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out subsection (b).
Contents of fund.--The Fund shall consist of amounts deposited in the Fund by the Secretary in each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000 from amounts available to the Commodity Credit Corporation, as follows: (A) $7,800,000 for fiscal year 1995.
$15,500,000 for fiscal year 1996.
$23,300,000 for fiscal year 1997.
$31,100,000 for fiscal year 1998.
$38,900,000 for fiscal year 1999.
$46,700,000 for fiscal year 2000.
Availability of fund.--Amounts in the Fund shall remain available to the Secretary until expended.
Use of Fund To Promote Industrial Products Containing Vegetable Oils.--The Secretary shall use amounts in the Fund to make grants to promote the increased commercial use of industrial products that contain, as an ingredient, vegetable oils produced from eligible oilseeds.
For each fiscal year in which amounts are available in the Fund, the Secretary shall solicit grant applications from persons whose manufacturing operations are located in the United States and that desire financial assistance to begin or expand production of such industrial products.
The applications shall be in such form, shall contain such information, and shall be submitted at such time, as the Secretary may prescribe.
On the basis of such applications, the Secretary shall select as grant recipients to the extent practicable those persons whose manufacturing operations will use the greatest possible amount of vegetable oils produced from eligible oilseeds in comparison to the amount of assistance requested.
Limitation on Amount of Assistance.--A person may not receive more than 10 percent of the total assistance provided by the Secretary in any fiscal year from the Fund.
Annual Estimates of Vegetable Oil Stocks.--Not later than October 1 and April 1 of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall announce an estimate of-- (1) the amount of vegetable oil to be produced in the United States from oilseeds grown in the United States and consumed domestically or exported from the United States during that fiscal year; and (2) the amount of such vegetable oil likely to remain available in public and private stocks in the United States at the end of the marketing year.
Activities To Increase Demand for Vegetable Oil.--If the October 1 estimate of end-of-year stocks of vegetable oil produced in the United States from oilseeds grown in the United States, as a percentage of total domestic and export demand, exceeds the average percentage of end-of-year stocks to total demand during fiscal years 1985 through 1994, the Secretary shall use existing authorities to promote an increase in domestic and export demand for such vegetable oil by an amount that will prevent end-of-year stocks from exceeding this level.
If the April 1 estimate indicates a significant change in the stocks to use ratio from the October 1 estimate, the Secretary shall adjust the vegetable oil demand expansion activities to reflect this change.
The authorities that the Secretary may use to effect an increase in domestic and export demand for such vegetable oil shall include the following: (1) Purchasing for donation to meet critical human dietary needs in developing countries.
Purchasing for donation to emerging democracies, with the proceeds from any subsequent sale required to be used for economic development, infrastructure improvements, or activities that foster development of markets for United States agricultural products in recipient countries.
Purchasing for donation or discounted sale to producers of industrial products that contain, as an ingredient, vegetable oils produced from eligible oilseeds, to promote the increased commercial use of such products.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Vegetable Oil Industrial Products Fund.
Oilseeds.--The term ``oilseeds'' means soybeans, corn, cottonseed, sunflower seed, flaxseed, canola, rapeseed, safflower, and mustard seed.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.