This Act may be cited as the ``Hurricane Katrina Emergency Relief CDBG Flexibility Act of 2005''.
SUSPENSION OF PUBLIC SERVICES CAP.
Units of General Local Government and Indian Tribes.-- (1) Suspension for directly affected communities.--The percentage limitations under paragraph (8) of section 105(a) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5305(a)(8)) on the amount of assistance under title I of such Act that may be used for the provision of public services by a unit of general local government or Indian tribe that is, or is within, a directly affected community (as such term is defined in section 4 of this Act) shall not apply with respect to any of fiscal years 2005 through 2008 for such unit of general local government or Indian tribe.
Authority to suspend for indirectly affected communities.--For any indirectly affected community (as such term is defined in section 4 of this Act), the Secretary may waive the applicability, for such period during the fiscal years referred to in paragraph (1) as the Secretary considers appropriate, of the percentage limitations under paragraph (8) of section 105(a) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5305(a)(8)) on the amount of assistance under title I of such Act that may be used for the provision of public services by a unit of general local government or Indian tribe that is, or is within, such indirectly affected community.
In determining the period for which to waive such limitations, the Secretary shall take into consideration the specific economic circumstances of each such indirectly affected community.
Nonentitlement Communities.--Assistance provided under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 may be used for the provision of public services in any directly affected community (as such term is defined in section 4 of this Act) without regard to the percentage limitations under paragraph (8) of section 105(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 5305(a)(8)) on the amount of assistance that may be used statewide in nonentitlement communities for such activities and any such amounts so used in any directly affected community shall not be considered for purposes of such statewide limitations.
SUSPENSION OF PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENT.
In General.--The Secretary shall, with respect to a grant under section 106 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5306) for fiscal year 2006 for any unit of general local government or Indian tribe that is, or is located in, a directly affected community, waive or specify alternative requirements for the public hearing requirements specified under subsection (b).
Public Hearing Requirements.--The public hearing requirements specified under this subsection are-- (1) the requirement under section 104(a)(2)(C) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5304(a)(2)(C)) to hold public hearings; (2) the requirements under subparagraphs (D) and (F) of section 104(a)(3) of such Act to make certifications in the detailed citizenship participation plan regarding public hearings; and (3) any requirement pursuant to section 106(d)(7)(C) of such Act (42 United States Code 5306(d)(7)(C)) to hold public hearings.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Directly affected community.--The term ``directly affected community'' means a unit of general local government or area for which the President has declared a major disaster under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5121 et sequentes) in connection with Hurricane Katrina or Hurricane Rita.
Indirectly affected community.--The term ``indirectly affected community'' means a unit of general local government or area that-- (A) is a metropolitan city, urban county, or Indian tribe (as such terms are defined in section 102(a) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5304(a)); (B) is not, and is not within, a directly affected community; and (C) is determined by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to have been significantly affected economically by the occurrence of Hurricane Katrina or Hurricane Rita (including economic effects from the presence of persons evacuated from an area for which the President has declared a major disaster in connection with Hurricane Katrina or Hurricane Rita).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
Passed the House of Representatives October 6, 2005.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.