This Act may be cited as the ``Home Health Access Preservation Act of 1999''.
ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS TO AGENCIES FOR MOST EXPENSIVE CASES.
Payments for Outliers.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), from amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (e), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall pay an additional amount to home health agencies furnishing qualified home health services during a cost reporting period beginning on or after October 1, 1997, under the medicare program (under title XVIII of the Social Security Act).
Limitation of payments.--No payment shall be made under this section to a home health agency that, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, has ceased furnishing home health services for which payment may be made under the medicare program (under such title).
Description of Qualified Services.--For purposes of additional payment amounts under this section by the Secretary to home health agencies, qualified home health services are home health services furnished under the medicare program for the treatment of conditions within a diagnosis described in subsection (c).
Description of Diagnosis.--A diagnosis described in this subsection is one of the following diagnoses as classified in St. Anthony's ICD-9-CM Code Book for Physician Payment: (1) diabetes mellitus (ICD-9-CM code 250).
essential hypertension (ICD-9-CM code 401).
other forms of chronic ischemic heart disease (ICD-9-CM code 414).
heart failure (ICD-9-CM code 428).
acute, but ill-defined cerebrovascular disease (ICD-9- CM code 436).
pneumonia, organism unspecified (ICD-9-CM code 486).
chronic airway obstruction, not elsewhere classified (ICD-9-CM code 496).
chronic ulcer of skin (ICD-9-CM code 707).
symptoms involving urinary system (ICD-9-CM code 788).
fracture of neck of femur (ICD-9-CM code 820).
Determination of Agency-Specific Payment Amount.-- (1) Certification of quantity of qualified home health services furnished.-- (A) In general.--With respect to a fiscal year, a home health agency may submit to the Secretary a certification of the number of patients to whom the agency furnished qualified home health services during the agency's cost reporting period beginning in that fiscal year.
Deadline for submission.-- (i) In general.--Such certification shall be submitted to the Secretary during the 30-day period beginning on the date the agency submits to the Secretary a cost report for the cost reporting period beginning in such fiscal year.
Transition rule.--In the case of an agency with a cost reporting period beginning on or after October 1, 1997, that ends before the date of the enactment of this Act, with respect to such cost reporting period, the 30- day period under clause (i) begins 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Determination of aggregate qualified home health services furnished.--From data contained in certifications submitted under paragraph (1) with respect to cost reporting periods beginning in fiscal years 1998, 1999, and 2000, the Secretary shall determine, with respect to a fiscal year, the number of patients who have received qualified home health services furnished by agencies submitting such certifications for that fiscal year.
The Secretary shall make such determination by not later than 120 days after all cost reports for that fiscal year have been received.
Agency-specific percentage of aggregate amount.--For each home health agency submitting a certification under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year described in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall determine an agency-specific percentage by dividing the number of patients certified by the home health agency for that fiscal year by the national total specified in paragraph (2) for that fiscal year.
Payment amount.--The Secretary shall pay for a fiscal year described in paragraph (2) to a home health agency making the certification under paragraph (1) an amount equal to the product of the percentage determined under paragraph (3) and the amount appropriated for such fiscal year under subsection (e).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund (established under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i)) for making additional payments to home health agencies under this section, $250,000,000 in each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2002.
Termination.--The Secretary shall not make additional payments under this section for cost reporting periods, or portions of cost reporting periods, beginning on or after the date of the implementation of the prospective payment system for home health services under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff).
Limitation on Judicial Review.--There shall be no administrative or judicial review under section 1869 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ff), section 1878 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395oo), or otherwise of any action of the Secretary with respect to the determination of an additional payment amount under this section.
36-Month Repayment Period.--In the case of an overpayment by the Secretary of Health and Human Services to a home health agency for home health services furnished during a cost reporting period beginning on or after October 1, 1997, as a result of payment limitations provided for under clause (v), (vi), or (viii) of section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)), the home health agency may elect to repay the amount of such overpayment over a 36- month period beginning on the date of notification of such overpayment.
Interest on Overpayment Amounts.-- (1) 36-month grace period.-- (A) In general.--In the case of an agency that makes an election under subsection (a), no interest shall accrue on the outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment during such 36-month period.
Overdue balances.--In the case of such an agency, interest shall accrue on any outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment after termination of such 36-month period.
Interest shall accrue under this subparagraph at the rate of interest charged by banks for loans to their most favored commercial customers, as published in the Wall Street Journal on the Friday immediately following the date of the enactment of this Act.
Other agencies.--In the case of an agency described in subsection (a) that does not make an election under subsection (a), interest shall accrue on the outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment at the rate described in the second sentence of paragraph (1)(B).
Termination.--No election under subsection (a) may be made for cost reporting periods, or portions of cost reporting periods, beginning on or after the date of the implementation of the prospective payment system for home health services under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff).
Effective Date.--The provisions of subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
UPDATE ON IMPLEMENTATION OF PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR HOME HEALTH AGENCIES.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 90 days thereafter until the prospective payment system for home health agencies (established by section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff)) is implemented, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall meet with the staff of the appropriate committees of Congress to provide an informal update regarding the progress of the Secretary in implementing such payment system.