FEE AUTHORITY AND REPEAL OF PROHIBITION.
Authority.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') may permit, under terms and conditions considered necessary by the Secretary, the use of lands and facilities administered by the Secretary for the making of any motion picture, television production, soundtrack, or similar project, if the Secretary determines that such use is appropriate and will not impair the values and resources of the lands and facilities.
Fees.--(A) Any permit under this section shall require the payment of fees to the Secretary in an amount determined to be appropriate by the Secretary sufficient to provide a fair return to the government in accordance with subparagraph (B), except as provided in subparagraph (C).
The amount of the fee shall be not less than the direct and indirect costs to the Government for processing the application for the permit and the use of lands and facilities under the permit, including any necessary costs of cleanup and restoration, except as provided in subparagraph (C).
The authority of the Secretary to establish fees under this paragraph shall include, but not be limited to, authority to issue regulations that establish a schedule of rates for fees under this paragraph based on such factors as-- (i) the number of people on site under a permit; (ii) the duration of activities under a permit; (iii) the conduct of activities under a permit in areas designated by statute or regulations as special use areas, including wilderness and research natural areas; and (iv) surface disturbances authorized under a permit.
The Secretary may, under the terms of the regulations promulgated under paragraph (4), charge a fee below the amount referred to in subparagraph (A) if the activity for which the fee is charged provides clear educational or interpretive benefits for the Department of the Interior.
Bonding and insurance.--The Secretary may require a bond, insurance, or such other means as may be necessary to protect the interests of the United States in activities arising under such a permit.
Regulations.--(A) The Secretary shall issue regulations implementing this subsection by not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Within 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall review and, as appropriate, revise regulations issued under this paragraph.
After that time, the Secretary shall periodically review the regulations and make necessary changes.
Collection of Fees.--Fees shall be collected under subsection (a) whenever the proposed filming, videotaping, sound recording, or still photography involves product or service advertisements, or the use of models, actors, sets, or props, or when such filming, videotaping, sound recording, or still photography could result in damage to resources or significant disruption of normal visitor uses.
Filming, videotaping, sound recording or still photography, including bona fide newsreel or news television film gathering, which does not involve the activities or impacts identified herein, shall be permitted without fee.
Existing Regulations.--The prohibition on fees set forth in paragraph (1) of section 5.1(b) of title 43, Code of Federal Regulations, shall cease to apply upon the effective date of regulations under subsection (a).
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the regulations set forth in part 5 of such title, other than paragraph (1) thereof.
Proceeds.--Amounts collected as fees under this section shall be available for expenditure without further appropriation and shall be distributed and used, without fiscal year limitation, in accordance with the formula and purposes established for the Recreational Fee Demonstration Program under section 315 of Public Law 104-134.
Penalty.--A person convicted of violating any regulation issued under subsection (a) shall be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than 6 months, or both, and shall be ordered to pay all costs of the proceedings.
Effective Date.--This section and the regulations issued under this section shall become effective 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, except that this subsection and the authority of the Secretary to issue regulations under this section shall be effective on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives September 15, 1998.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.