This Act may be cited as the ``Medicaid Flexibility Act of 1995''.
BLOCK GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR HEALTH CARE SERVICES TO NEEDY INDIVIDUALS.
Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396-1396V) is amended to read as follows: ``TITLE XIX--BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES FOR HEALTH CARE SERVICES TO NEEDY INDIVIDUALS ``purpose; implementation ``Sec.
Purpose.--The purpose of this title is to strengthen families by helping them move from dependence on government benefits to economic independence by consolidating Federal assistance to the States for health care services and assistance to needy individuals into a single grant for such purpose, thereby giving States maximum flexibility to-- ``(1) require beneficiaries who are parents to ensure that their school-age children attend school; ``(2) require minors who are beneficiaries to attend school; ``(3) require parent beneficiaries to ensure that their children receive the full complement of childhood immunizations; ``(4) limit the amount of time able-bodied beneficiaries may receive assistance; ``(5) require beneficiaries not to use illegal drugs or abuse other drugs; ``(6) require each mother to identify the father of any child for whom she seeks assistance; ``(7) deny assistance to illegal aliens; ``(8) require individuals who sponsor the residency of legal aliens to support those they sponsor; and ``(9) involve religious and charitable organizations, voluntary associations, civic groups, community organizations, nonprofit entities, benevolent and fraternal orders, philanthropic entities, and other groups in the private sector, as appropriate, in the provision of health care services and assistance to needy individuals with the funding States receive under this title.
Implementation.--This purpose shall be implemented in accordance with conditions in each State and as determined by State law.
``payments to states ``Sec.
Amount.-- ``(1) In general.--Each State shall, subject to the requirements of this title, be entitled to receive quarterly payments for fiscal years 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000 in an amount equal to 25 percent of the annual amount determined under paragraph (2) for such fiscal year for carrying out the purpose described in section 1901.
Annual amount.--The annual amount determined under this paragraph is equal to-- ``(A) in fiscal year 1996, 105 percent of the amount received by a State in fiscal year 1995 under this title (as in effect in fiscal year 1995); and ``(B) in each fiscal year thereafter, 105 percent of the amount received by a State in the preceding fiscal year under this title (as in effect in such preceding fiscal year).
Funding Requirements.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall make quarterly payments described in subsection (a)(1) directly to each State in accordance with section 6503 of title 31, United States Code.
Expenditure of Funds; Rainy Day Fund.--Amounts received by a State under this title for any fiscal year shall be expended by the State in such fiscal year or in the succeeding fiscal year; except for such amounts as the State deems necessary to set aside in a separate account to provide, without fiscal limitation, for unexpected levels of assistance during periods of high unemployment or other events which cause unexpected increases in the need for health care services or assistance for needy individuals.
Any amounts remaining in such segregated accounts after fiscal year 2000 shall be expended by a State for the purpose described in section 1901 of this title as in effect in fiscal year 2000.
Authority To Use Portion of Grant for Other Purposes.-- ``(1) In general.--A State may use not more than 30 percent of the annual amount paid to the State under this title for a fiscal year to carry out a State program pursuant to any or all of the following provisions of law: ``(A) Part A of title IV of this Act.
Title XVI of this Act.
The Food Stamp Act.
Applicable rules.--Any amount paid to the State under this title that is used to carry out a State program pursuant to a provision of law specified in paragraph (1) shall not be subject to the requirements of this title, but shall be subject to the requirements that apply to Federal funds provided directly under the provision of law to carry out the program.
``administrative and fiscal accountability ``Sec.
Audits; Reimbursement.-- ``(1) Audits.-- ``(A) In general.--A State shall, not less than annually, audit the State expenditures from amounts received under this title.
Such audit shall-- ``(i) determine the extent to which such expenditures were or were not expended in accordance with this title; and ``(ii) be conducted by an approved entity (as defined in subparagraph (B)) in accordance with generally accepted auditing principles.
Approved entity.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `approved entity' means an entity that is-- ``(i) approved by the Secretary of the Treasury; ``(ii) approved by the chief executive officer of the State; and ``(iii) independent of any agency administering activities or services funded under this title.
Reimbursement.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 30 days following the completion of an audit under this subsection, a State shall submit a copy of the audit to the State legislature and to the Secretary of the Treasury.
Repayment.--Each State shall pay to the United States amounts ultimately found by the approved entity under paragraph (1)(A) not to have been expended in accordance with this title plus 10 percent of such amount as a penalty, or the Secretary of the Treasury may offset such amounts plus the 10 percent penalty against any other amount in any other year that the State may be entitled to receive under this title.
Additional Accounting Requirements.--The provisions of chapter 75 of title 31, United States Code, shall apply to the audit requirements of this section.
Reporting Requirements; Form, Contents.-- ``(1) Annual reports.--A State shall prepare comprehensive annual reports on the activities carried out with amounts received by the State under this title.
Content.--Reports prepared under this section-- ``(A) shall be for the most recently completed fiscal year; ``(B) shall be in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, including the provisions of chapter 75 of title 31, United States Code; ``(C) shall include the results of the most recent audit conducted in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section; and ``(D) shall be in such form and contain such other information as the State deems necessary-- ``(i) to provided an accurate description of such activities; and ``(ii) to secure a complete record of the purposes for which amounts were expended in accordance with this title.
Copies.--A State shall make copies of the reports required under this section available for public inspection within the State.
Copies also shall be provided upon request to any interested public agency, and each such agency may provide its views on such reports to the Congress.
Administrative Supervision.-- ``(1) Role of the secretary of the treasury.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall supervise the amounts received under this title in accordance with subparagraph (B).
Limited supervision--The supervision by the Secretary of the Treasury shall be limited to-- ``(i) making quarterly payments to the States in accordance with section 1902(b); ``(ii) approving the entities referred to in subsection (a)(1)(B); and ``(iii) withholding payment to a State based on the findings of such an entity in accordance with subsection (a)(2)(B).
Other federal supervision.--No administrative officer or agency of the United States, other than the Secretary of the Treasury and, as provided for in section 1904, the Attorney General, shall supervise the amounts received by the States under this title or the use of such amounts by the States.
Limited Federal Oversight.--With the exception of the Department of the Treasury as provided for in this section and section 1904 of this title, no Federal department or agency may promulgate regulations or issue rules regarding the purpose of this title.
No Discrimination Against Individuals.--No individual shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with amounts received under this title on the basis of such individual's-- ``(1) disability under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794); ``(2) sex under title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 United States Code 1681 et sequentes); or ``(3) race, color, or national origin under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000d et sequentes).
Compliance.--If the Secretary of the Treasury determines that a State, or an entity that has received funds from amounts received by the State under this title, has failed to comply with a provision of law referred to in subsection (a), except as provided for in section 1905 of this title, the Secretary of the Treasury shall notify the chief executive officer of the State and shall request the officer to secure compliance with such provision of law.
If, not later than 60 days after receiving such notification, the chief executive officer fails or refuses to secure compliance, the Secretary of the Treasury may-- ``(1) refer the matter to the Attorney General with a recommendation that an appropriate civil action be instituted; ``(2) exercise the powers and functions provided under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000d et seq.
), title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 United States Code 1681 et sequentes); or section 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794a), (as applicable); or ``(3) take such other action as may be provided by law.
Authority of Attorney General; Civil Actions.--When a matter is referred to the Attorney General pursuant to subsection (b)(1), or if the Attorney General has reason to believe that an entity is engaged in a pattern or practice in violation of a provision of law referred to in subsection (a), the Attorney General may bring a civil action in an appropriate district court of the United States for such relief as may be appropriate, including injunctive relief.
``nondiscrimination and institutional safeguards for religious providers ``Sec.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to allow the participation of religious and charitable organizations as providers of health care services and assistance under this title without impairing or diminishing the religious character or freedom of such organizations.
Nondiscrimination.--Religious organizations are eligible as providers of health care services and assistance as provided for under this title.
Neither the Federal Government nor a State receiving funds under this title shall discriminate against an organization which is or applies to be a provider of health care services and assistance on the basis that the organization has a religious mission or purpose.
Religious Character and Freedom.-- ``(1) In general.--Nothwithstanding any other provision of law, any religious organization participating as a provider of health care services and assistance funded under this title shall retain its independence from Federal, State, and local governments, including such organization's control over the definition, development, practice, and expression of its religious beliefs.
Such an organization may select, employ, promote, discipline, and dismiss its clerics and other ecclesiastics, directors, officers, employees, and volunteers on the basis of religion, a religious belief, or a religious practice.
However, a religious organization shall not deny a needy individual health care services and assistance funded under this title on the basis of religion, a religious belief, or refusal to participate in a religious practice.
Additional safeguards.--Neither the Federal Government nor a State shall require a religious provider of health care services and assistance to-- ``(A) alter its form of internal governance, or form a separate, nonprofit corporation to receive and administer the assistance funded under this title; or ``(B) alter real estate of facilities used to provide such assistance, including but not limited to the removal of religious art, icons, scripture, or other symbols; in order to be eligible to be a provider of health care services and assistance funded under this title.
Fiscal accountability.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any religious organization providing assistance funded under this title shall be subject to the same regulations as other providers to account in accord with generally accepted auditing principles for the use of such funds provided under this title.
Limited audit.--Religious organizations may segregate Federal funds provided under this title into separate accounts, and then only the financial assistance provided with those funds shall be subject to audit.
Compliance.--A religious organization which has its rights under this section violated may enforce its claim by asserting a civil action for such relief as may be appropriate, including injunctive relief or damages, in an appropriate district court of the United States against the entity or agency that commits such violation.
Rights of Beneficiaries of Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--If a beneficiary has a bona fide objection to the religious character of the organization or institution from which the beneficiary is receiving health care services and assistance funded under this title, each State shall provide such beneficiary a certificate, redeemable with any other provider of assistance funded under this title, for services the value of which is no less than the value of the funding received by the religious provider from a State to provide assistance funded under this title for such individual.
Prohibition on providing cash in exchange for certificates.--No provider of assistance funded under this title shall provide a beneficiary a cash amount in exchange for a certificate provided for under paragraph (1).
In General.--Health care services and assistance funded under this title must be provided to a citizen, legal resident, or an alien who is not lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise permanently residing in the United States under color of law, if-- ``(1) such services and assistance are necessary for the treatment of an emergency medical condition; ``(2) such person otherwise meets the eligibility requirements for health care services and assistance under the State program funded under this title; and ``(3) such services and assistance are not related to an organ transplant procedure.
Emergency Medical Condition.--For purposes of this section, the term `emergency medical condition' means a medical condition (including emergency labor and delivery) manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain) such that the absence of immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to result in-- ``(1) placing the patient's health in serious jeopardy; ``(2) serious impairment to bodily functions; or ``(3) serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.''.
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE BUDGET ACT.
Section 255(h) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 905(h)) is amended by striking ``Grants to States for Medicaid (75-0512-0-1-551);'' and inserting ``Block grants to States for health care services to needy individuals;''.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on October 1, 1995.