This Act may be cited as the ``TVA Customer Protection Act of 1999''.
INCLUSION IN DEFINITION OF PUBLIC UTILITY.
In General.--Section 201(e) of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824(e)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, and includes the Tennessee Valley Authority''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 201(f) of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824(f)) is amended by striking ``foregoing, or any corporation'' and inserting ``foregoing (other than the Tennessee Valley Authority) or any corporation''.
Section 203 of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824b) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) TVA Exception.--This section does not apply to a disposition of the whole or any part of the facilities of the Tennessee Valley Authority if-- ``(1) the Tennessee Valley Authority discloses to the Commission (on a form, and to the extent, that the Commission shall prescribe by regulation) the sale, lease, or other disposition of any part of its facilities that-- ``(A) is subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission under this Part; and ``(B) has a value of more than $50,000; and ``(2) all proceeds of the sale, lease, or other disposition under paragraph (1) are applied by the Tennessee Valley Authority to the reduction of debt of the Tennessee Valley Authority.''.
Section 208 of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824g) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Tennessee Valley Authority.-- ``(1) Limit on charges.-- ``(A) No authorization or permit.--The Commission shall issue no order under this Act that has the effect of authorizing or permitting the Tennessee Valley Authority to make, demand, or receive any rate or charge, or impose any rule or regulation pertaining to a rate or charge, that includes any costs incurred by or for the Tennessee Valley Authority in the conduct of any activities or operations outside the United States.
Unlawful rate.-- ``(i) In general.--Any rate, charge, rule, or regulation described in subparagraph (A) shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be unjust, unreasonable, and unlawful.
No limitation on authority.--Clause (i) does not limit the authority of the Commission under any other provision of law to regulate and establish just and reasonable rates and charges for the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Annual report.--The Tennessee Valley Authority shall annually-- ``(A) prepare and file with the Commission, in a form that the Commission shall prescribe by regulation, a report setting forth in detail any activities or operations engaged in outside the United States by or on behalf of the Tennessee Valley Authority; and ``(B) certify to the Commission that the Tennessee Valley Authority has neither recovered nor sought to recover the costs of activities or operations engaged in outside the United States by or on behalf of the Tennessee Valley Authority in any rate, charge, rule, or regulation on file with the Commission.''.
TVA POWER SALES AND PROPERTY VALUATION.
In General.--Part II of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--The Tennessee Valley Authority shall not sell electric power to a retail customer that will consume the power within the area that, on the date of enactment of this section, is assigned by law as the distributor service area, unless-- ``(1) the customer (or predecessor in interest to the customer) was purchasing electric power directly from the Tennessee Valley Authority as a retail customer on that date; ``(2) the distributor is purchasing firm power from the Tennessee Valley Authority in an amount that is equal to not more than 50 percent of the total retail sales of the distributor; or ``(3) the distributor agrees that the Tennessee Valley Authority may sell power to the customer.
Retail Sales.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the rates, terms, and conditions of retail sales of electric power by the Tennessee Valley Authority that are not prohibited by subsection (a) shall be subject to regulation under State law applicable to public utilities in the manner and to the extent that a State commission or other regulatory authority determines to be appropriate.
Assurance of Adequate Electric Generation Capacity.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, after the date of enactment of this section, the Tennessee Valley Authority shall not construct or acquire by any means electric generation capacity, or sell the output of electric generation capacity constructed or acquired after that date, unless the Commission has issued to the Tennessee Valley Authority a certificate of public convenience and necessity authorizing the construction or acquisition of electric generation capacity.
Criteria for issuance of certificate.--The Commission shall issue a certificate of public convenience and necessity under paragraph (1) only if the Commission finds, after affording an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing, that-- ``(A) the reserve power margin of the Tennessee Valley Authority for the area within which the Tennessee Valley Authority is permitted by law to be a source of supply-- ``(i) is less than 15 percent; and ``(ii) is expected to remain less than 15 percent for a period of at least 1 year unless new capacity is constructed or acquired; ``(B) the Energy Information Administration has submitted to the Commission, with respect to issuance of the certificate of public convenience and necessity, a determination that-- ``(i) there is no commercially reasonable option for the purchase of power from the wholesale power market to meet the needs of the area within which the Tennessee Valley Authority is permitted by law to be a source of supply; and ``(ii) the proposed construction or acquisition is the only commercially reasonable means to meet the firm contractual obligations of the Tennessee Valley Authority with respect to the area within which the Tennessee Valley Authority is permitted by law to be a source of supply; ``(C) the electric generation capacity or the output of the capacity proposed to be authorized will not make the Tennessee Valley Authority a direct or indirect source of supply in any area with respect to which the Authority is prohibited by law from being, directly or indirectly, a source of supply; and ``(D) the electric generation capacity proposed to be authorized is completely subscribed in advance for use by customers only within the area for which the Tennessee Valley Authority or distributors of the Authority were the primary source of power supply on July 1, 1957.
VALUATION OF CERTAIN TVA PROPERTY.
Evidentiary Hearing.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this section, notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Commission shall commence a hearing on the record for the purpose of determining the value of the property owned by the Tennessee Valley Authority-- ``(1) that is used and useful; and ``(2) the cost of which was prudently incurred in providing electric service, as of July 1, 1999, to-- ``(A) the distributors of the Authority; and ``(B) the customers that directly purchased power from the Authority.
Procedures and Standards.--In making the determination under subsection (a), the Commission shall use, to the maximum extent practicable, the procedures and standards that the Commission uses in making similar determinations with respect to public utilities.
Timing of Final Order.--The Commission shall issue a final order with respect to the determination under subsection (a)-- ``(1) not later than 1 year after the date of commencement of the hearing under subsection (a); or ``(2) not later than a date determined by the Commission by an order supported by the record.
Timing of Order Awarding Recovery of Stranded Costs.--The Commission may issue an order awarding recovery to the Tennessee Valley Authority of costs rendered uneconomic by competition not earlier than the date on which the Commission issues a final order with respect to the determination under subsection (a).''.
Transition.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Tennessee Valley Authority shall file all rates and charges for the transmission or sale of electric energy and the classifications, practices, and regulations affecting those rates and charges, together with all contracts that in any manner affect or relate to contracts that are required to be filed under Part II of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824 et sequentes) (as amended by subsection (a)) and that are in effect as of the date of enactment of this Act.
FILING AND FULL DISCLOSURE OF TVA DOCUMENTS.
Part III of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 825 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 319 through 321 as sections 320 through 322, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 318 the following: ``SEC.
FILING AND FULL DISCLOSURE OF TVA DOCUMENTS.
In General.--The Tennessee Valley Authority shall file and disclose the same documents and other information that other public utilities are required to file under this Act, as the Commission shall require by regulation.
Regulation.-- ``(1) Timing.--The regulation under subsection (a) shall be promulgated not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section.
Considerations.--In promulgating the regulation under subsection (a), the Commission shall take into consideration the practices of the Commission with respect to public utilities other than the Tennessee Valley Authority.''.
APPLICABILITY OF THE ANTITRUST LAWS.
The Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933 (16 United States Code 831 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 16 the following: ``SEC.
APPLICABILITY OF THE ANTITRUST LAWS.
Definition of Antitrust Laws.--In this section, the term `antitrust laws' means-- ``(1) an antitrust law (within the meaning of section (1) of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 12)); ``(2) the Act of June 19, 1936 (commonly known as the `Robinson Patman Act') (49 United States Statutes at Large 1526, chapter 323; 15 United States Code 13 et sequentes); and ``(3) section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45), to the extent that the section relates to unfair methods of competition.
Applicability.--Nothing in this Act modifies, impairs, or supersedes the antitrust laws.
Antitrust Laws.-- ``(1) TVA deemed a person.--The Tennessee Valley Authority shall be deemed to be a person, and not government, for purposes of the antitrust laws.
Applicability.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the antitrust laws (including the availability of any remedy for a violation of an antitrust law) shall apply to the Tennessee Valley Authority notwithstanding any determination that the Tennessee Valley Authority is a corporate agency or instrumentality of the United States or is otherwise engaged in governmental functions.''.
Definition of TVA Distributor.--In this section, the term ``TVA distributor'' means a cooperative organization or publicly owned electric power system that, on January 2, 1998, purchased electric power at wholesale from the Tennessee Valley Authority under an all- requirements power contract.
Effect of Act.--Nothing in this Act or any amendment made by this Act-- (1) subjects any TVA distributor to regulation by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; or (2) abrogates or affects any law in effect on the date of enactment of this Act that applies to a TVA distributor.
PROVISION OF CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT, CONTRACTING, AND ENGINEERING SERVICES.
Section 4 of the Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933 (16 United States Code 831c) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(m) Provision of Construction Equipment, Contracting, and Engineering Services.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, except as provided in this subsection, the Corporation shall not have power to-- ``(A) rent or sell construction equipment; ``(B) provide a construction equipment maintenance or repair service; ``(C) perform contract construction work; or ``(D) provide a construction engineering service; to any private or public entity.
Electrical contractors.--The Corporation may provide equipment or a service described in subparagraph (1) to a private contractor that is engaged in electrical utility work on an electrical utility project of the Corporation.
Customers, distributors, and governmental entities.-- The Corporation may provide equipment or a service described in subparagraph (1) to-- ``(A) a power customer served directly by the Corporation; ``(B) a distributor of Corporation power; or ``(C) a Federal, State, or local government entity; that is engaged in work specifically related to an electrical utility project of the Corporation.
Used construction equipment.-- ``(A) Definition of used construction equipment.-- In this paragraph, the term `used construction equipment' means construction equipment that has been in service for more than 2,500 hours.
Disposition.--The Corporation may dispose of used construction equipment by means of a public auction conducted by a private entity that is independent of the Corporation.
Debt reduction.--The Corporation shall apply all proceeds of a disposition of used construction equipment under subparagraph (B) to the reduction of debt of the Corporation.''.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.