This Act may be cited as the ``Ready To Educate All Children Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) An estimated 2,000,000 new teachers will be needed over the next decade.
Under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, States must recruit highly qualified teachers by 2006, yet schools in rural areas and high poverty schools have trouble attracting and retaining such teachers.
A 2000 study by the Education Trust reports that high poverty schools are twice as likely not to have teachers certified in the fields in which they teach as schools that are not high poverty schools, which highlights that high poverty schools will need special help to meet the goals of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001.
If the Nation is to improve student achievement and success in school, the United States must encourage and support the training and development of our Nation's teachers, who are the single most important in-school influence on student learning.
A majority of graduates of schools of education believe that traditional teacher preparation programs left them ill prepared for the challenges and rigors of the classroom.
Fewer than 36 percent of new teachers feel very well prepared to implement curriculum and performance standards.
Highly qualified teachers are more effective in impacting student academic achievement because such teachers have high verbal abilities, high content knowledge, and an enhanced ability to know how to teach the content using appropriate pedagogical strategies.
The difference in annual student achievement growth between having an effective and ineffective teacher can be more than 1 grade level of achievement in academic performance.
Studies have consistently documented the important connection between a teacher's verbal and cognitive abilities and student achievement.
Research has shown that there is a positive effect on student achievement when students are taught by teachers with a strong subject-matter background.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide grants to teacher preparation programs to better prepare teachers to educate all children.
In this Act: (1) Beginning teacher.--The term ``beginning teacher'' means a highly qualified teacher who has taught for not more than 3 years.
Core academic subjects.--The term ``core academic subjects'' means-- (A) mathematics; (B) science; (C) reading (or language arts) and English; (D) social studies, including history, civics, political science, government, geography, and economics; (E) foreign languages; and (F) fine arts, including music, dance, drama, and the visual arts.
High poverty local educational agency.--The term ``high poverty local educational agency'' means a local educational agency for which the number of children who are served by the agency, aged 5 though 17, and from families with incomes below the poverty line-- (A) is not less than 40 percent of the number of all children served by the agency; or (B) is more than 15,000.
High poverty school.--The term ``high poverty school'' means an elementary school or secondary school that serves a high number or percentage of children from families with incomes below the poverty line.
Highly qualified.--The term ``highly qualified'' has the meaning given such term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education''-- (A) has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)); and (B) if such an institution prepares teachers and receives Federal funds, means such an institution that-- (i) is in full compliance with the requirements of section 207 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1027); and (ii) does not have a teacher preparation program identified by a State as low- performing.
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given such term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Local partner.--The term ``local partner'' means a high poverty local educational agency or a high poverty school.
Mentoring.--The term ``mentoring'' means activities that consist of structured guidance and regular and ongoing support for beginning teachers.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants on a competitive basis to institutions of higher education to establish a partnership with a local partner to-- (1) establish a clinically-based elementary school or secondary school teacher training program; or (2) enhance such institution's clinically-based elementary school or secondary school teacher training program.
Application.-- (1) In general.--An institution of higher education that desires to receive a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Development.--The institution of higher education shall develop the application in collaboration with 1 or more local partners.
Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall include-- (A) a description of any shortages in the State, where the institution of higher education is located, of highly qualified teachers in high poverty schools in core academic subjects; (B) an assessment of the needs of beginning teachers in high poverty schools to be effective in the classroom that is-- (i) developed with the involvement of the local partner; and (ii) based on-- (I) student achievement data in core academic subjects; and (II) other indicators of the need to fully prepare beginning teachers; (C) a description of how the institution of higher education will use funds made available pursuant to a grant awarded under this Act to-- (i) improve the quality of the teaching force; and (ii) decrease the use of out-of-field placement of teachers; (D) a description of how the institution of higher education will align activities assisted under this Act with challenging State academic content standards and student academic achievement standards, and State assessments, by setting numerical, annual improvement goals; (E) a plan, developed with the extensive participation of the local partner, for addressing long-term teacher recruitment, retention, professional development, and mentoring needs; (F) a description of how the institution of higher education will assist local educational agencies in implementing effective and sustained mentoring and other professional development activities for beginning teachers; (G) a description of how the institution of higher education will work with individuals who successfully complete a teacher education program to become certified or licensed; and (H) a description of how the institution of higher education will prepare teachers to succeed in the classroom.
Approval.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall approve an application submitted pursuant to subsection (a) if the application meets the requirements of this section and holds reasonable promise of achieving the purpose of this Act.
Equitable distribution.--To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall ensure an equitable geographic distribution of grants under this section among the regions of the United States.
Duration of grants.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants under this section for a period of 5 years.
At the end of the 5-year period, the grant recipient may apply for an additional grant under this section.
Uses of Funds.-- (1) Mandatory uses.--An institution of higher education that receives a grant under this section shall use the grant funds to-- (A) establish a partnership with a local partner to establish, or enhance an existing, clinically-based elementary school or secondary school teacher training program to better train teachers for challenges in the classroom; (B) facilitate a partnership among departments of the institution to ensure that future teachers are prepared to teach; and (C) implement a project-based assessment that facilitates the program evaluation developed under subsection (f) and that assesses the impact of the activities undertaken with grant funds awarded under this Act on achieving the purpose of this Act, as well as on institutional policies and practices.
Additional activities.--An institution of higher education that receives a grant under this section shall use the grant funds for not less than 3 of the following activities: (A) The enhancement of high caliber teaching, including-- (i) enabling faculty to spend additional time in smaller class settings teaching students pursuing teaching degrees; (ii) providing-- (I) summer school teaching opportunities for students pursuing teaching degrees; (II) additional salary for faculty members who serve as advisors to students pursuing teaching degrees; or (III) stipends for students pursuing teaching degrees.
Opportunities to develop new pedagogical approaches to teaching, including a focus on content knowledge in academic areas such as mathematics, science, foreign language development, history, political science, and special education.
Creation of multidisciplinary courses or programs that formalize collaborations for the purpose of improved student instruction.
Expansion of innovative mentoring or tutoring programs proven to enhance recruitment of students pursuing teaching degrees or persistence in obtaining a teaching degree.
Improvement of undergraduate science, mathematics, engineering, and technology education for nonmajors, including teacher education majors.
Matching Funds.--Each institution of higher education that receives a grant under this section shall demonstrate a financial commitment to such institution's school of education by contributing, either directly or through private contributions, non-Federal matching funds equal to 20 percent of the amount of the grant.
Assessment, Evaluation, and Dissemination of Information.-- (1) Program evaluation.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall award not less than 1 grant or contract to an independent evaluative organization to-- (A) develop metrics for measuring the impact of the activities authorized under this section on-- (i) the number of students enrolled in education classes; (ii) academic achievement of students pursuing teaching degrees, including quantifiable measurements of students' mastery of content and skills; (iii) persistence in completing a teaching degree, including students who transfer from departments of education to programs in other academic disciplines; and (iv) placement during the 2 years after degree completion in public schools and an evaluation of the teachers' performance; (B) conduct an evaluation of the impacts of the activities authorized under this section, including a comparison of the funded projects to identify best practices with respect to achieving the purpose of this Act.
Dissemination of information.--The Secretary shall disseminate, biannually, information on the activities and the results of the projects assisted under this section, including best practices, to institutions of higher education that receive a grant under this section and other interested institutions of higher education.
Student Loan Eligibility.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a student who participates in a clinically-based teacher training program funded under this Act shall be eligible for student assistance under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes) during such student's fifth year of a program of study for obtaining a teaching degree, if the fifth year of the program of study is required under such clinically-based program in order for students to obtain the teaching degree.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.