This Act may be cited as the ``FHA-Insured Hospital Conversion and Re-Utilization Act''.
GRANTS FOR FHA-INSURED HOSPITALS.
Section 242 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1715z-7) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(i) Grants for Hospital Conversion and Re-Utilization.-- ``(1) In general.--To the extent amounts are made available for grants under this subsection, the Secretary may make grants in accordance with this subsection to owners of eligible hospitals under paragraph (3) for use only for carrying out activities designed to convert hospitals (or portions thereof) to facilities described in paragraph (4).
Form and use of grants.--Grants under this subsection may be made only in the following forms for the following uses: ``(A) Capital grants.--In the form of a capital grant for use only for the capital costs of conversion activities.
Interest subsidies.--In the form of periodic payments of interest subsidies in connection with any loan made to finance such conversion activities.
Eligible hospitals.--An eligible hospital under this paragraph is a hospital that-- ``(A) is subject to a mortgage that is insured under this section; ``(B)(i) is located in an area that the Secretary determines has excess hospital capacity; or ``(ii) would, in the determination of the Secretary, improve its financial soundness as a result of the proposed conversion and re-utilization activities; and ``(C) has submitted an application to the Secretary for a grant under this subsection, which has been approved by the Secretary.
Eligible health care facilities.--The Secretary shall determine, for purposes of this subsection, the types of facilities providing health care and supportive housing for elderly persons and families to which hospitals (or portions thereof) may be converted using grant amounts under this subsection.
Such facilities shall include assisted living facilities, nursing homes, supportive housing for the elderly, and any other facilities that the Secretary considers appropriate.
Applications.--The Secretary shall provide for owners of eligible hospitals under paragraph (3) to submit to the Secretary applications for grants under this subsection in such form and in accordance with such procedures as the Secretary shall provide.
An application shall contain-- ``(A) a description of the proposed conversion activities for which a grant under this subsection is requested and the type of facility to be established by such activities; ``(B) a statement of the amount of the grant requested for such conversion activities; ``(C) a description of the resources that are expected to be made available, if any, in conjunction with the grant under this subsection; and ``(D) such other information or certifications that the Secretary determines to be necessary or appropriate.
Selection criteria.--The Secretary shall select applications for grants under this subsection based upon selection criteria, which shall be established by the Secretary and shall include-- ``(A) the extent to which the conversion is likely to meet health care and supportive housing needs in the local community in which the hospital (or portion thereof) to be converted is located; ``(B) the inability of the applicant to fund the conversion activities from existing financial resources, as evidenced by the applicant's financial records; ``(C) the extent to which the applicant has evidenced community support for the conversion, by such indicators as letters of support from the local community for the conversion and financial contributions from public and private sources; ``(D) the capability of the applicant of providing for the sound operation of the proposed facility; and ``(E) such other criteria as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to ensure that amounts made available for grants under this subsection are used effectively.
Treatment of mortgage insurance.--Notwithstanding any provision of this section or of any contract for mortgage insurance provided pursuant to this section, an eligible hospital (or a portion thereof) under paragraph (3) that is subject to a mortgage insured pursuant to this section may be converted using grant amounts under this subsection.
The Secretary shall provide for the uninterrupted continuation of the mortgage insurance coverage for the hospital that is subject to the conversion activities for the duration of the original term of the mortgage insurance contract.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this subsection: ``(A) Assisted living facility; nursing home.--The terms `assisted living facility' and `nursing home' have the meanings given such terms in section 232(b) (12 United States Code 1715w(b)).
Others.--The definitions in section 202(k) of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 United States Code 1701q(k)) shall apply.
Funding.--Amounts shall be available for grants under this subsection as provided in sections 519(g) and 205(i).
Grants for Hospital Debt Service Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--To the extent amounts are made available for grants under this subsection, the Secretary may make grants in accordance with this subsection to owners of eligible hospitals under paragraph (2) for use only to assist in paying debt service on debt insured under this section.
Grants under this section shall be made only in the form of periodic payments of interest subsidies.
Eligible hospitals.--An eligible hospital under this paragraph is a hospital that-- ``(A) is subject to a mortgage that is insured under this section; ``(B) in the determination of the Secretary, is in a distressed financial condition; and ``(C) has submitted an application to the Secretary for a grant under this subsection, as the Secretary shall require, which has been approved by the Secretary.
Funding.--Amounts shall be available for grants under this subsection as provided in sections 519(g) and 205(i).''.
FUNDING OF GRANTS FROM GENERAL INSURANCE FUND SURPLUS.
Section 519 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1735c) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Availability of Amounts for Hospital Conversion Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of any negative credit subsidy that is determined for any fiscal year, for purposes of title V of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 661 et sequentes), and is attributable to the programs referred to in paragraph (2) shall be considered to be new budget authority and shall be available, without fiscal year limitation, for grants under subsections (i) and (j) of section 242.
Covered programs.--The programs referred to in this paragraph are the programs under this Act for insurance of mortgages and loans that, on page 515 of the Appendix to the Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2001 (H. Doc.
, in the table entitled `Summary of Loan Levels, Subsidy Budget Authority and Outlays by Program', are classified under budget account number 86-0200-0-1-371 and are referred to as `FHA Full Insurance for Health Care Facilities (plus 241/232)', `Health Care Refinances', and `Hospitals'.''.
FUNDING OF GRANTS FROM MUTUAL MORTGAGE INSURANCE FUND SURPLUS.
Section 205 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1711) is amended-- (1) in subsection (e), by inserting ``or for use for grants pursuant to subsection (i)'' before the comma; (2) in subsection (h)(1), by inserting ``may not make grants pursuant to subsection (i),'' after the 4th comma; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Availability of Surplus Amounts for Hospital Conversion Grants.--Any amounts in the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund that are determined by the Secretary to be surplus to the amount required to meet the operational goals under subsection (h)(2) shall be available, without fiscal year limitation, for grants under subsections (i) and (j) section 242.