This Act may be cited as the ``Adoption Does Offer Potential Treasures Act of 2000''.
TITLE I--ADOPTION PROMOTION SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Adoption Promotion Act''.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this title as the ``Secretary'') shall establish an adoption awareness program.
The Secretary shall make grants through the program to eligible private entities to pay for the Federal share of the cost of developing and distributing materials promoting adoption.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--An entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds made available through the grant to develop and carry out an adoption public promotion campaign, including-- (A) developing and placing public service announcements regarding adoption on television, radio, and billboards; and (B) developing and distributing brochures regarding adoption through federally funded family planning clinics in the United States, including coordinating the distribution of the brochures with the distribution of educational materials under title X of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300 et sequentes).
Limitation.--The entity may not place a public service announcement, as described in paragraph (1)(A), or distribute a brochure, as described in paragraph (1)(B), until the Secretary has reviewed the announcement or brochure, reviewed the recommendation described in section 103(d)(2)(B) regarding the announcement or brochure, and approved the announcement or brochure.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), an entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and including such information as the Secretary may require.
Selection.--The Secretary shall make grants under subsection (a) to recipients selected from among applicants receiving favorable recommendations from the Adoption Awareness Commission under section 103(d)(1)(B).
Federal Share.-- (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost described in subsection (a) shall be 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost may be contributed in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Adoption Awareness Commission (referred to in this title as the ``Commission'').
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 7 members, of whom-- (1) 1 shall be appointed by the President; (2)(A) 2 shall be appointed by the President, from among not fewer than 6 persons nominated by the majority leader of the Senate; and (B) 1 shall be appointed by the President, from among not fewer than 4 persons nominated by the minority leader of the Senate; and (3)(A) 2 shall be appointed by the President, from among not fewer than 6 persons nominated by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; and (B) 1 shall be appointed by the President, from among not fewer than 4 persons nominated by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Duties.--The Commission shall-- (1)(A) review the applications submitted under section 102; and (B) by majority vote, make recommendations to the Secretary regarding which applicants should receive grants made under section 102; and (2)(A) review the public service announcements and brochures developed by the recipients of the grants made under section 102; and (B) by majority vote, make recommendations to the Secretary regarding approval of the announcements and brochures.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at least 4 times in each fiscal year.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on September 30, 2005.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $25,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
TITLE II--ADOPTION CREDIT, AND EXCLUSION FOR ADOPTION ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS, EXPANDED AND MADE PERMANENT SEC.
ADOPTION CREDIT, AND EXCLUSION FOR ADOPTION ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS, EXPANDED AND MADE PERMANENT.
Increase in Maximum Benefit.-- (1) Section 23(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to dollar limitation) is amended by striking ``$5,000 ($6,000'' and inserting ``$7,500 ($10,000''.
Section 137(b)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``$5,000 ($6,000'' and all that follows and inserting ``the dollar limit applicable under section 23(b)(1).''.
Higher Income Taxpayers Eligible for Benefits.-- (1) Section 23(b)(2)(A)(i) of such Code (relating to income limitation) is amended by striking ``$75,000'' and inserting ``$150,000''.
Section 137(b)(2)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``$75,000'' and inserting ``the dollar limit applicable under section 23(b)(2)(A)(i)''.
Benefits Made Permanent for All Children.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 23(d) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Eligible child.--The term `eligible child' means any individual who-- ``(A) has not attained age 18, or ``(B) is physically or mentally incapable of caring for himself.''.
Section 137 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (f) (relating to termination).
Cost-of-Living Adjustment of Dollar Limitations.--Section 23 of such Code is amended by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i) and by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection: ``(h) Cost-of-Living Adjustment.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of an adoption which becomes final in any calendar year after 2001, the dollar amounts in subsection (b)(1) and the $150,000 amount in subsection (b)(2)(A)(i) with respect to such adoption shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for such calendar year by substituting `calendar year 2000' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
Rounding.-- ``(A) Maximum credit amounts.--If any dollar amount in subsection (b)(1) as adjusted under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $100, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $100.
Income limitation.--If the $150,000 amount as adjusted under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $1,000, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $1,000.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.