This Act may be cited as the ``Science of Stem Cell Research Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) President George W. Bush, after much thoughtful consideration, decided to move forward with Federal funding for human embryonic stem cell research on existing stem cell lines.
President George W. Bush established the President's Council on Bioethics, which advises the President on the ethical significance of emerging biomedical science and technology.
The principal mission of the President's Council on Bioethics is to explore the ethical issues connected with advances in biotechnology.
Advances in biomedicine are guiding scientists to improved medical treatments for people suffering from many debilitating and life-threatening diseases and injuries, such as Parkinson's disease, juvenile diabetes, and spinal cord injuries.
The advancement of science is paramount in the alleviation and eradication of diseases and other medical disorders.
There are a finite number of human embryonic stem cell lines designated on the Human Embryonic Stem Cell Registry of the National Institutes of Health.
These lines will provide much opportunity for researching the potential of embryonic stem cells.
However, this number of lines may not be enough to meet the Nation's research needs.
Federal funds are crucial for researchers to proceed with stem cell research and technologies.
The ability to use pluripotent stem cells derived from human embryos provides an opportunity for doctors to learn to generate specialized cells that are destroyed or damaged by diseases or disabilities, such as the dopamine-producing cells that are degenerated in Parkinson's disease and the insulin- producing cells that are impaired in diabetes.
Pluripotent stem cell research could lead to vastly improved treatments or cures for AIDS, Alzheimer's disease, anemia, arthritis, birth defects, blindness, brain injury, cancer, deafness, diabetes, heart disease, kidney disease, liver disease, Lou Gehrig's disease, lung disease, multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, Parkinson's disease, severe burns, sickle cell anemia, spinal cord injury, and stroke, and could also lead to improved success of organ transplantation.
Federal funding through the National Institutes of Health ensures that research will be conducted in accordance with the highest scientific and ethical standards.
According to the National Academy of Sciences: (A) Current scientific data indicate that there are important biological differences between adult and embryonic stem cells and among adult stem cells found in different types of tissue.
The therapeutic implications of these biological differences are not clear, and additional scientific data are needed on all stem cell types.
Over time all cell lines in tissue culture change, typically accumulating harmful genetic mutations.
Most existing stem cell lines have been cultured in the presence of nonhuman cells or serums that could lead to potential human health risks.
Changing genetic and biological properties of these stem cell lines necessitate continued monitoring as well as the development of new stem cell lines in the future.
Human stem cell research that is publicly funded and conducted under the established standards of open scientific exchange, peer review, and public oversight offers the most efficient and responsible means to fulfill the promise of stem cells to meet the need for regenerative medical therapies.
There is established in the legislative branch a bipartisan commission to be known as the Stem Cell Research Board (in this Act referred to as the ``Board'').
Research.--The Board shall conduct research on the following: (1) The effects, whether positive or negative, of the President's August 9, 2001, stem cell research directive, on the following: (A) The progress of advances in curing or remediating diseases or other medical conditions, including AIDS, Alzheimer's disease, anemia, arthritis, birth defects, blindness, brain injury, cancer, deafness, diabetes, heart disease, kidney disease, liver disease, Lou Gehrig's disease, lung disease, multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, Parkinson's disease, severe burns, sickle cell anemia, spinal cord injury, and stroke.
The progress of improvements in successful organ transplantation.
The development of any medical technology, including any halt or delay in such development.
The effect of limiting Federal funding on the private stem cell research sector.
All aspects of the funding process of the National Institutes of Health for human adult and embryonic stem cell research.
Recommendations.--In reports submitted under section 9, the Board shall make recommendations to the Congress on any legislation needed to reduce any inefficiencies in Federal funding of human embryonic stem cell research or to facilitate a more timely implementation of such research.
Public Forums.--The Board shall conduct periodic public forums to review the status of stem cell research funding by the National Institutes of Health.
Standards of Conduct.--The Board shall develop its own standards of conduct in consultation with the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives or the Select Committee on Ethics of the Senate, as applicable.
Number and Appointment.--The Board shall be composed of 8 members, appointed not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
To ensure that the membership of the Board is bipartisan and subject to subsection (b), the 8 members shall be appointed as follows: (1) 4 members appointed by the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the minority leader of the Senate as follows: (A) 2 members appointed by the President.
1 member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
4 members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate as follows: (A) 2 members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
2 members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
Political Party.--No more than 4 of the members of the Board may be appointed by officials of the same political party.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Board.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Board shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Members shall serve without pay for their service on the Board.
Travel expenses.--Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Co-Chairpersons.--The Board shall have-- (1) a co-chairperson who shall be appointed jointly by the members appointed under subsection (a)(1); and (2) a co-chairperson who shall be appointed jointly by the members appointed under subsection (a)(2).
Meetings.--The Board shall meet at the call of either co- chairperson.
Regulations.--The Board may promulgate any regulations necessary to carry out its duties.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS; STAFF; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Executive Directors.-- (1) Appointment.--The Board shall have-- (A) an executive director who shall be appointed jointly by the members appointed under section 5(a)(1); and (B) an executive director who shall be appointed jointly by the members appointed under section 5(a)(2).
Pay.--Each of the executive directors of the Board shall be paid at a rate not to exceed level IV of the Executive Schedule.
Staff; Experts.-- (1) Appointment; pay.--Subject to such rules as the Board may prescribe, each executive director-- (A) may appoint such additional personnel as that executive director considers appropriate; and (B) may procure temporary and intermittent services of experts or consultants at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of pay payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Sharing of resources.--The rules referred to in paragraph (1) shall include provisions to ensure an equitable division or sharing of resources, as appropriate, between the respective staffs of the Board.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The executive directors and the staff of the Board shall not be considered civil service positions in the executive branch.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon the request of the Board, the head of any Federal agency may detail, without reimbursement, any employee of such agency to the Board to assist the Board in carrying out its duties.
Any such detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of the employee.
Technical Assistance.--Upon the request of the Board, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical assistance to the Board as the Board determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Board may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings (at the call of either co- chairperson), sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Board considers appropriate.
Oaths or Affirmations.--The Board may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Board may, if authorized by the Board, take any action which the Board is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--Subject to sections 552 and 552a of title 5, United States Code, the Board or the co-chairpersons of the Board acting jointly may secure directly from any other Federal agency all information that the Board considers necessary to enable the Board to carry out its duties.
Upon request of the Board or both co- chairpersons, the head of that agency (or other person duly designated for purposes of this subsection) shall furnish that information to the Board.
Mails.--The Board may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies and shall, for purposes of the frank, be considered a commission of the Congress as described in section 3215 of title 39, United States Code.
Administrative Support Services.--The Public Printer of the Government Printing Office shall provide to the Board on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services, including accounting services, as the Board may request.
Office Space.--The Administrator of General Services, in coordination with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall locate suitable office space for the operation of the Board at the National Institutes of Health campus in Bethesda, Maryland.
The facilities shall serve as the headquarters of the Board and shall include all necessary equipment and incidentals required for the proper functioning of the Board.
Advice and Assistance of Other Federal Executive Agencies.--The Board or members of the Board may seek the advice of the National Science Foundation, the National Academy of Sciences, or any Federal executive agency with expertise in stem cell research.
The National Science Foundation, the National Academy of Sciences, and any such Federal executive agency shall, if requested, provide assistance to the Board.
Printing and Binding.--For purposes of costs relating to printing and binding, including the cost of personnel detailed from the Government Printing Office, the Board shall be deemed to be a committee of the Congress.
Disclosure of Information to Congress.--Any data or other information obtained by the Board under this section shall be made available to any committee or subcommittee of the Congress of appropriate jurisdiction upon request of the chairperson or ranking minority member of such committee or subcommittee.
Contract Authority.--To the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriation Acts, the Board may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies and other services.
In General.--The Public Printer shall conduct-- (1) an interim audit of the financial transactions of the Board not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) a final audit of the financial transactions of the Board not later than 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Access.--The Board shall maintain records of its financial transactions and shall ensure that the Public Printer has access to all such records, and to property in use by the Board, as necessary to facilitate an audit under subsection (a).
In accordance with section 4(b), the Board shall transmit to the Congress-- (1) an interim report each year; and (2) not later than the date of the Board's termination under section 10, a final report containing a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Board with respect to the matters described in section 4.
In General.--The Board shall terminate on the date that is 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Transfer of Records.--Upon the termination of the Board under this section, the Board shall transfer all of its records to the Public Printer.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Board $16,000,000 to carry out this Act.