This Act may be cited as the ``Homeless Children's Immunization Assistance Act''.
EMERGENCY SHELTER GRANTS PROGRAM.
Definition.--Section 411 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11371) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) The term `child immunization' means immunization of children who have not attained the age of 6 years, in accordance with recommendations issued by the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service.''.
Eligible Activities.--Section 414(a) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11374(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) The provision of services relating to child immunization, as follows: ``(A) Providing transportation for children occupying facilities assisted under this subtitle to locations where child immunization is available.
Providing information and counseling to families occupying such facilities regarding the benefits and availability of child immunization.
Providing child immunization for children occupying such facilities at the facility (subject to the limitations under paragraph (2)) or coordinating and arranging for child immunization at the facility.
Any assistance used for the purposes under this paragraph shall be considered to have been used for activities under paragraph (2) for purposes of the limitation under paragraph (2)(B).''.
Requirements To Assist in Obtaining Child Immunizations.-- Section 415 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11375) is amended-- (1) in subsection (c)(3)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) in the case of children who have not attained the age of 6 years and occupy a facility assisted under this subtitle, immunizations (to the extent that such children have not been immunized in accordance with recommendations issued by the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service); and''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Determination of Immunization Record of Children Occupying Facilities.--For any child who has not attained the age of 6 and is occupying a facility assisted under this subtitle, not later than 60 days after such initial occupancy the recipient of such assistance shall-- ``(1) make reasonable efforts to obtain from the family of such child or the appropriate State or local health agency information sufficient to determine whether the child has been immunized in accordance with recommendations issued by the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service; and ``(2) for any child that has not been so immunized or for which insufficient information is available to determine whether the child has been so immunized, provide the family of the child with information regarding the benefits and availability of child immunization.''.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING UNDER SUPPORTIVE HOUSING PROGRAM.
Definition.--Section 422 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11382) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (14) as paragraphs (3) through (15), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) The term `child immunization' means immunization of children who have not attained the age of 6 years, in accordance with recommendations issued by the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service.''.
Requirement To Assist in Obtaining Child Immunizations.-- Section 425 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11385) is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following new subsection: ``(b) Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--Supportive services provided in connection with a project shall address the special needs of individuals (such as homeless persons with disabilities and homeless families with children) intended to be served by a project.
Determination of immunization record of children occupying transitional housing.--For any child who has not attained the age of 6 and is occupying a project that is transitional housing, not later than 60 days after such initial occupancy the recipient of such assistance shall-- ``(A) make reasonable efforts to obtain from the family of such child or the appropriate State or local health agency information sufficient to determine whether the child has been immunized in accordance with recommendations issued by the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service; and ``(B) for any child that has not been so immunized or for which insufficient information is available to determine whether the child has been so immunized, provide the family of the child with information regarding the benefits and availability of child immunization.''.
Eligible Services.--Section 425(c) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11385(c)) is amended by striking ``and (G)'' and inserting the following: ``(G) providing (i) transportation for children occupying projects that are supportive housing to locations where child immunization is available, (ii) information and counseling to families occupying such projects regarding the benefits and availability of child immunization, and (iii) child immunization for children occupying such projects at the project or coordinating and arranging for the provision of such services at the project, and (H)''.
Required Agreements.--Section 426(c) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11386(c)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) in the case of any project that is supportive housing, to assist children who have not attained the age of 6 years and occupy the project to obtain immunizations (to the extent that such children have not been immunized in accordance with recommendations issued by the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service); and''.