This Act may be cited as the ``National Coast Guard Museum Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) There is no national museum to commemorate and honor the Coast Guard's history, mission, personnel, and traditions or those of its predecessor services and agencies.
There should be established a National Coast Guard Museum to commemorate the 210 years of national maritime and military history of the Coast Guard and its predecessor services and agencies.
In this Act: (1) Association.--The term ``Association'' means the National Coast Guard Museum Association (a nonprofit corporation established under the laws of the State of Massachusetts), or a similar organization.
Museum.--The term ``Museum'' means the National Coast Guard Museum established under sections 4(a).
Commandant.--The term ``Commandant'' means the Commandant of the Coast Guard.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the National Coast Guard Museum Fund established under section 5(a).
NATIONAL COAST GUARD MUSEUM.
Establishment.--The Commandant may, in accordance with this section, establish, operate, and maintain a National Coast Guard Museum on Federal lands that are administered by the Coast Guard and specified by the Commandant.
Construction.-- (1) License.--The Commandant may grant a license to the Association authorizing the Association to construct facilities for the Museum on the land specified under subsection (a).
Terms.--The license under this subsection shall include terms that establish the following: (A) Upon completion of construction of facilities under the license, the Association shall donate such facilities, including any associated improvements, fixtures, and related personal property, as a gift to Coast Guard.
The United States shall have no responsibility for project management.
The Association shall be responsible for preparation of the design and plans for facilities constructed under the license, except that the design and plans shall be subject to the approval of the Commandant (3) Funding.--(A) The Commandant shall not allow construction of facilities for the Museum to begin, and may not provide any Federal funds for that construction, unless the Commandant determines that sufficient amounts, not less than $10,000,000, are available from non-Federal sources to complete construction of the Museum in accordance with the design and plans approved under paragraph (2)(C).
For the purposes of constructing the Museum, and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Commandant may transfer to the Association up to $10,000,000.
The Commandant shall require that amounts transferred under subparagraph (B) that are not expended on the construction of the Museum shall be returned to the Coast Guard and deposited into the Fund.
Liability.--The United States shall not be liable for any act or omission relating to construction under the license.
Commandant's Authorities.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in connection with the establishment, operation, and maintenance of the Museum, the Commandant may-- (1) rent or lease space within the Museum for gift shops, food concessions, meeting or special event spaces, and similar purposes or activities, under such terms and conditions, and for such periods of time, as the Commandant considers appropriate; (2) accept, hold, administer, and, without further Act of appropriation, spend any gift, devise, or bequest of real or personal property (including funds) that is made on the condition that it be used for the benefit of, or in connection with the establishment, operation, or maintenance of, the Museum; (3) pay necessary expenses in connection with the conveyance or transfer of any such gift, devise or bequest; and (4) perform other acts as the Commandant deems reasonable and appropriate.
Treatment of Gifts.--For the purposes of Federal income, estate, and gift taxes, property that is accepted under subsection (c)(2) shall be considered as a gift, devise, or bequest to or for the use of the United States.
NATIONAL COAST GUARD MUSEUM FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury a separate account that shall be known as the ``National Coast Guard Museum Fund''.
Contents.--The Fund shall consist of the following: (1) Gifts, devises, and bequests of funds accepted under section 4(c)(2).
Amounts received by the United States from the rental or leasing of space within the Museum under section 4(a).
Interest credited under subsection (d).
Amounts deposited under section 4(b)(3)(C).
Use.--The Commandant may make disbursements from the Fund for the establishment, operation, or maintenance of the Museum, without further Act of appropriation and without fiscal year limitation.
Investment.-- (1) In general.--Upon request of the Commandant, the Secretary of the Treasury may invest amounts in the Fund in securities of, or in securities whose principal and interest are guaranteed by, the United States Government.
Interest.--The interest and profits accruing from investments under this subsection shall be deposited to the credit of the Fund.