This Act may be cited as the ``Freedom and Self-Determination for the Former Soviet Union Act''.
PROHIBITION ON FOREIGN ASSISTANCE TO RUSSIA.
In General.--Foreign assistance may not be obligated or expended for Russia for any fiscal year unless the President certifies to the Congress for such fiscal year the following: (1) The President has received satisfactory assurances from the Government of Russia, which have been confirmed by the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, that the intelligence activities of Russia in the United States are confined to what is considered routine, non-adversarial information gathering activities.
Russia has begun, and is making continual progress toward, the unconditional implementation of the Russian- Moldovan troop withdrawal agreement, signed by the prime ministers of Russia and Moldova on October 21, 1994.
Russia is not providing military assistance to any military forces in the Transdniestra region of Moldova.
Russian troops in the Kaliningrad region of Russia are respecting the sovereign territory of Lithuania and other neighboring countries and such troops are not offensively postured against any other country.
The activities of Russia in the other independent states of the former Soviet Union do not represent an attempt by Russia to violate or otherwise diminish the sovereignty and independence of such states.
Russia is not providing military assistance to any Bosnian Serb military units or combatants or to the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The Government of Russia has ceased the unilateral demarcation of the border between Russia and Estonia begun in 1994, is engaged in dialogue with the Government of Estonia to resolve this border dispute, and has demonstrated a willingness to submit this issue to international arbitration.
Russia is not providing any intelligence information to Cuba and is not providing any assistance to Cuba with respect to the signal intelligence facility at Lourdes.
(A) Russia is not providing to the countries described in subparagraph (B) goods or technology, including conventional weapons, which could materially contribute to the acquisition by these countries of chemical, biological, nuclear, or destabilizing numbers and types of advanced conventional weapons.
The countries described in this subparagraph are Iran, Iraq, Syria, or any country, the government of which the Secretary of State has determined, for purposes of section 6(j)(1) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 United States Code app.
2405(6)(j)(1)), has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.
Russia is in compliance with the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, signed at Washington, London, and Moscow on April 10, 1972 (TIAS 8062).
Russia is in compliance with the 1989 Wyoming Memorandum of Understanding relating to the restriction of chemical weapons.
The Government of Russia is committed to reforming the Russian economy along free-market lines, and is taking concrete steps in this direction.
Certifications for Fiscal Year 1995 and 1996.--In addition to the requirements contained in subsection (a), with respect to each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996, foreign assistance may not be obligated or expended for Russia unless the President certifies to the Congress for each such fiscal year that the Government of Russia-- (1) has ceased its military offensive in Chechnya and is committed to resolving the problem of the status of Chechnya through negotiations; and (2) has provided the President with a full and accurate accounting of the espionage activities relating to the case of Aldrich Hazen Ames of the Central Intelligence Agency and has reimbursed the United States Government for all amounts paid by Russia to Rosario Ames since her arrest in 1994.
Report.--The President shall submit to the Congress for each fiscal year a report containing the certifications required by subsection (a), and with respect to each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996, subsections (a) and (b).
Such report shall be submitted in unclassified and classified versions.
At the beginning of each fiscal year, the President and the Comptroller General of the United States shall each submit to the Congress a report containing the following: (1) The amount of foreign assistance provided to Russia for the preceding fiscal year, including-- (A) the name of each organization or entity to which such assistance was provided; (B) the purpose of such assistance; and (C) an assessment of the effectiveness of such assistance.
A detailed accounting of the amount of foreign assistance appropriated for Russia which has not been expended and the status of such assistance.
An estimate of the total amount of capital exported from Russia during the previous fiscal year and an analysis of the reasons for the export of such capital.
REQUIREMENT TO OPPOSE ASSISTANCE TO RUSSIA FROM INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
The President shall instruct the United States executive director of each international financial institution to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose any assistance from that financial institution to Russia unless Russia is in compliance with the requirements contained in section 2.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Foreign assistance.--The term ``foreign assistance'' means assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) or the Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian Democracies and Open Markets Support Act of 1992 (22 United States Code 5801 et sequentes), except that such term does not include-- (A) humanitarian assistance; (B) educational and cultural exchanges between the United States and Russia; (C) assistance provided by the National Endowment for Democracy; and (D) assistance for the purpose of destroying nuclear weapons, chemical weapons, and other weapons, and related assistance.
Goods or technology.--The term ``goods or technology'' has the meaning given such term in section 1608(3) of the Iran- Iraq Arms Non-Proliferation Act of 1992 (50 United States Code 1701 note).
International financial institution.--The term ``international financial institution'' means the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the International Financial Corporation, or the International Monetary Fund.
Other independent states of the former soviet union.-- The term ``other independent states of the former Soviet Union'' means the following: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act shall apply only with respect to fiscal years beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Exceptions.--In the case of the fiscal year in which this Act is enacted-- (1) the prohibition contained in subsections (a) and (b) of section 2 shall apply with respect to the obligation or expenditure of foreign assistance on or after the date of the enactment of this Act (including foreign assistance which has been obligated but not expended before the date of the enactment of this Act); and (2) the requirement contained in section 4 shall apply with respect to the provision of assistance by an international financial institution on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.