This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Protective Service Reform Act of 1998''.
DESIGNATION OF POLICE OFFICERS.
The Act of June 1, 1948 (40 United States Code 318-318d), is amended-- (1) by striking ``special policemen'' each place it appears in the Act and inserting ``police officers''; (2) in section 1 by striking the section heading and inserting the following: ``SECTION 1.
''; (3) in section 1(b) by striking ``Special policemen'' and inserting ``Police officers''; and (4) in section 5 by striking ``special policeman'' and inserting ``police officer''.
In General.--Section 1(b) of the Act of June 1, 1948 (40 United States Code 318(b)), is amended-- (1) by inserting ``, and subject to paragraph (3) in any area within 500 feet from such property,'' after ``subsection (a)''; and (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``and shall be concurrent with State and local law enforcement authorities in the area in which the property is located''.
Additional Powers.--Section 1(b) of such Act is further amended-- (1) by striking ``Police officers'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--Police officers''; (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Additional powers.--A police officer appointed under this section is authorized-- ``(A) to carry firearms in any State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any territory or possession of the United States, subject to conditions contained in regulations to be prescribed by the Commissioner of the Federal Protective Service; ``(B) to petition Federal courts for arrest and search warrants and to execute such warrants; ``(C) to arrest an individual without a warrant if the individual commits a crime in the officer's presence or if the officer has probable cause to believe that the individual has committed a crime or is committing a crime; ``(D) to conduct investigations, on and off the property in question, of offenses that have been or may be committed against property under the charge and control of the Administrator or against persons on such property; and ``(E) to coordinate with other law enforcement agencies that have intelligence gathering authority for the protection of persons and property described in subparagraph (D).
Authority outside federal property.--A police officer appointed under this section is authorized to exercise any power granted under this section in an area that is within 500 feet of an area owned or occupied by the United States and under the charge and control of the Administrator if-- ``(A)(i) the officer reasonably believes that the action is necessary to prevent or stop a felony in progress that threatens life, limb, or property; ``(ii) the felony is being committed in the presence of the officer; and ``(iii) there is insufficient time to contact local law enforcement authorities; or ``(B) there is a known, immediate threat directed at property under the charge and control of the Administrator or against persons on such property.
''; and (3) by moving the left margin of paragraph (1), as designated by paragraph (1) of this subsection, so as to appropriately align with paragraphs (2) and (3), as designated by paragraph (2) of this subsection.
Section 4 of the Act of June 1, 1948 (40 United States Code 318c), is amended by striking ``not more $50'' and inserting ``not more than $5,000''.
NONUNIFORMED SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
Section 5 of the Act of June 1, 1948 (40 United States Code 318d), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Any such special law enforcement officer shall have the same authority outside Federal property as police officers have under section 1(b)(3).''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL PROTECTIVE SERVICE.
In General.--The Act of June 1, 1948 (40 United States Code 318-318d), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL PROTECTIVE SERVICE.
In General.--The Administrator of General Services shall establish the Federal Protective Service as a separate operating service of the General Services Administration.
Appointment of Commissioner.-- ``(1) In general.--The Federal Protective Service shall be headed by a Commissioner who shall be appointed by and report directly to the Administrator.
Qualifications.--The Commissioner shall be appointed from among individuals who have at least 5 years of professional law enforcement experience in a command or supervisory position.
Duties of the Commissioner.--The Commissioner shall-- ``(1) assist the Administrator in carrying out the duties of the Administrator under this Act; ``(2) serve as the principal law enforcement officer and security official of the United States with respect to the protection of Federal officers and employees in buildings and areas that are owned or occupied by the United States and under the charge and control of the Administrator; and ``(3) render necessary assistance, as determined by the Commissioner, to other Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies upon request.
Appointment of Regional Directors and Assistant Commissioners.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commissioner may appoint regional directors and assistant commissioners of the Federal Protective Service.
Qualifications.--The Commissioner shall select individuals for appointments under paragraph (1) from among individuals who have at least 5 years of direct law enforcement experience, including at least 2 years in a supervisory position.
Coordination With Public Buildings Service.--The Commissioner shall carry out the duties of the Commissioner in coordination with the Commissioner of the Public Buildings Service.''.
Pay Level of Commissioner.--Section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the paragraph relating to the Commissioner of the Public Buildings Service the following: ``Commissioner, Federal Protective Service, General Services Administration.''.
In General.--The Act of June 1, 1948 (40 United States Code 318-318d), is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
``Notwithstanding any other provision of law or any other rule or regulation, the pay and benefits for police officers and criminal investigators in the Federal Protective Service shall be determined in accordance with a pay and benefits package established and maintained by the Administrator of General Services that is equivalent to the pay scale and benefits package applicable to members of the United States Secret Service Uniformed Division.
Such pay scale and benefits package shall be established by regulation, shall apply with respect to pay periods beginning after January 1, 1999, and shall not result in a decrease in the pay or benefits of any individual.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1(a) of such Act (40 United States Code 318(a)), is amended by striking ``without additional compensation''.
NUMBER OF POLICE OFFICERS.
In General.--The Act of June 1, 1948 (40 United States Code 318-318d), is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
NUMBER OF POLICE OFFICERS.
Reductions Not Permitted.--After the 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this section, there shall be at least 730 full-time equivalent police officers in the Federal Protective Service.
This number shall not be reduced unless specifically authorized by law.
Consolidation of Building Security Forces.-- ``(1) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study to determine the feasibility of merging all building security forces of the Executive branch within, and under the supervision of, the Federal Protective Service.
Report.--Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this section, the Comptroller General shall transmit to Congress a report containing the results of the study conducted under paragraph (1).''.
EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS AND TRAINING.
The Act of June 1, 1948 (40 United States Code 318-318d), is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS AND TRAINING.
``The Commissioner of Federal Protective Service shall prescribe standards for the contracting of security personnel for buildings and areas that are owned or occupied by the United States and under the charge and control of the Administrator of General Services.
Such standards shall ensure that contract personnel receive adequate training and are subject to the same background check requirements as police officers of the Federal Protective Service.