This Act may be cited as the ``Regulatory Accounting Act of 1995''.
In General.--Every 2 years after the enactment of this Act the President shall prepare and submit to Congress an accounting statement that estimates the costs of Federal regulatory programs and corresponding benefits in accordance with this section.
Years Covered By Accounting Statement.--Each accounting statement shall cover, at a minimum, the 5 fiscal years beginning on October 1 of the year in which the report is submitted and may cover any fiscal year preceding such fiscal years for purposes of revising previous estimates.
Timing and Procedures.-- (1) Notice and comment.--The President shall provide notice and opportunity for comment for each accounting statement.
The President may delegate to an agency the requirement to provide notice and opportunity for comment for the portion of the accounting statement relating to that agency.
Deadlines for first statement.--The President shall propose the first accounting statement under this section not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall issue the first accounting statement in final form not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Such statement shall cover, at a minimum, each of the 8 fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Content of Accounting Statement.-- (1) In general.--Each accounting statement shall contain estimates of costs and benefits with respect to each fiscal year covered by the statement in accordance with this subsection.
For each such fiscal year for which estimates were made in a previous accounting statement, the statement shall revise those estimates and state the reasons for the revisions.
Statement of costs.-- (A) In general.--An accounting statement shall estimate the costs of Federal regulatory programs by setting forth, for each year covered by the statement-- (i) the annual expenditure of national economic resources for the regulatory program; and (ii) such other quantitative and qualitative measures of costs as the President considers appropriate.
Costs shall be quantified to the extent feasible and appropriate and otherwise shall be qualitatively described.
National economic resources.--For purposes of the estimate of costs in the accounting statement, national economic resources include, and shall be listed under, at least the following categories: (i) Private sector costs, including direct costs and appropriate indirect costs.
Federal sector administrative costs.
Federal sector compliance costs.
State government administrative costs.
Local government administrative costs.
State government compliance costs.
Local government compliance costs.
Statement of corresponding benefits.--An accounting statement shall estimate the benefits of Federal regulatory programs by setting forth, for each year covered by the statement, quantitative and qualitative measures of benefits.
Costs shall be quantified to the extent feasible and appropriate and otherwise shall be qualitatively described.
Any quantitative estimate of benefits concerning reduction in human health, safety, or environmental risks shall, to the extent feasible and appropriate, present the most plausible level of risk, along with a statement of the reasonable degree of scientific uncertainty.
ASSOCIATED REPORT TO CONGRESS.
In General.--At the same time as the President submits an accounting statement under section 2, the President, acting through the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall submit to Congress a report associated with the accounting statement (hereinafter referred to as the ``associated report'').
The associated report shall contain an analyses of impacts prepared in, in accordance with subsection (b).
Analyses of Impacts.--The President shall include in the associated report the following: (1) Analyses prepared by the President of the cumulative impact of Federal regulatory programs covered in the accounting statement on the following: (A) The ability of State and local governments to provide essential services, including police, fire protection, and education.
Consumer prices for goods and services.
Such other factors considered appropriate by the President.
A summary of any independent analyses of impacts prepared by persons commenting during the comment period on the accounting statement.
GUIDANCE FROM OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall provide guidance to agencies-- (1) to standardize measures of costs and benefits in accounting statements prepared pursuant to this Act; and (2) to standardize the format of the accounting statements.
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE.
After each accounting statement and associated report are submitted to Congress, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall make recommendations to the President-- (1) for improving accounting statements prepared pursuant to this Act, including recommendations on level of detail and accuracy; and (2) for improving associated reports prepared pursuant to this Act, including recommendations on the quality of analysis.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) The term ``Federal regulatory program'' means a program carried out pursuant to a related group of Federal statutes and regulations, as determined by the President.
The term ``regulation'' means an agency statement of general applicability and future effect designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy or describing the procedure or practice requirements of an agency.
The term does not include-- (A) administrative actions governed by sections 556 and 557 of title 5, United States Code; (B) regulations issued with respect to a military or foreign affairs function of the United States; or (C) regulations related to agency organization, management, or personnel.
The term ``agency'' means any executive department, military department, Government corporation, Government controlled corporation, or other establishment in the executive branch of the Government (including the executive Office of the President), but does not include the General Accounting Office, Federal Election Commission, the governments of the District of Columbia and of the territories and possessions of the United States, and their various subdivisions, or Government-owned contractor-operated facilities including laboratories engaged in national defense research and production activities.