This Act may be cited as the ``Improving Access to Nurse-Midwifery Care Act of 2005''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Since 1988, Congress has authorized certified nurse- midwives (in this section referred to as ``CNMs'') to provide maternity-related services to Medicare-eligible women who are of childbearing age.
Approximately 3,000,000 disabled women are Medicare-eligible beneficiaries.
In 1993, Congress authorized CNMs to also provide additional services outside the maternity cycle.
Medicare reimburses CNMs for primary care services if those services are part of the practitioner's State-regulated scope of practice.
In its June 2002 report to Congress, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) unanimously recommended that the percentage of part B reimbursement for certified nurse-midwife services to be increased.
In this same report, MedPAC also stated that research shows the quality of care and outcomes for services provided by CNMs are at least comparable to obstetricians and gynecologists.
A 1998 study from the National Center for Health Statistics published Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health found the risk of experiencing an infant death was 19 percent lower for births attended by CNMs than for births attended by physicians.
The risk of neonatal mortality (an infant death occurring in the first 28 days of life) was 33 percent lower, and the risk of delivering a low birth weight infant was 31 percent lower.
Mean birth weight was 37 grams heavier for the CNM-attended than for the physician-attended births.
Low birth weight is a major predictor of infant mortality, subsequent disease, or developmental disabilities.
The study also found that CNMs attended a greater proportion of women who are at higher risk for poor birth outcome: African Americans, American Indians, teenagers, unmarried women, and those with less than a high school education.
Physicians attended a slightly higher proportion of births with medical complications.
However, birth outcomes for CNMs were better even after socio-demographic and medical risk factors were controlled for in statistical analyses.
Medicare covers 3,000,000 women with disabilities that are of childbearing age.
These women give birth to approximately 50,000 infants annually within the program.
CNMs and certified midwives (in this section referred to as ``CMs'') are highly educated health professionals.
Completion of a post-baccalaureate educational program, licensure, and passage of a national certification examination are required to become CNMs and CMs.
Inequitable reimbursement for obstetrical and gynecological services provided by CNMs or CMs jeopardizes access for women (particularly those covered by Medicare) to the health care provider of their choice.
MEDICARE PAYMENT FOR CERTIFIED NURSE-MIDWIFE AND MIDWIFE SERVICES.
Certified Midwife, Certified Midwife Services Defined.--(1) Section 1861(gg) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(gg)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(3) The term `certified midwife services' means such services furnished by a certified midwife (as defined in paragraph (4)) and such services and supplies furnished as an incident to the certified midwife's service which the certified midwife is legally authorized to perform under State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by State law) as would otherwise be payable under this title if furnished by a physician or as an incident to a physician's service.
The term `certified midwife' means an individual who has successfully completed a bachelor's degree from an accredited educational institution and a program of study and clinical experience meeting guidelines prescribed by the Secretary, or has been certified by an organization recognized by the Secretary.''.
The heading in section 1861(gg) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(gg)) is amended to read as follows: ``Certified Nurse-Midwife Services; Certified Midwife Services''.
Certified Midwife Service Benefit.-- (1) Medical and other services.--Section 1861(s)(2)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)(L)) is amended by inserting ``and certified midwife services'' before the semicolon.
Payment to hospital for patients under care of certified nurse-midwife or certified midwife.--Section 1861(e)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(e)(4)) is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``except that''; and (B) by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``and (ii) a patient receiving certified nurse-midwife services or certified midwife services (as defined in paragraphs (1) and (3), respectively, of subsection (gg)) may be under the care of a certified nurse-midwife or certified midwife with respect to such services to the extent permitted under State law''.
Inpatient hospital service at teaching hospitals.-- Section 1861(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(b)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``certified midwife services,'' after ``certified nurse-midwife services,''; (B) in paragraph (6), by striking ``; or'' and inserting ``or in the case of services in a hospital or osteopathic hospital by an intern or resident-in- training in the field of obstetrics and gynecology, nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to preclude a certified nurse-midwife or certified midwife (as defined in paragraphs (1) and (3), respectively, of subsection (gg)) from teaching or supervising such intern or resident-in-training, to the extent permitted under State law and as may be authorized by the hospital; or''; (C) in paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and (D) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) a certified nurse-midwife or a certified midwife where the hospital has a teaching program approved as specified in paragraph (6), if (A) the hospital elects to receive any payment due under this title for reasonable costs of such services, and (B) all certified nurse-midwives or certified midwives in such hospital agree not to bill charges for professional services rendered in such hospital to individuals covered under the insurance program established by this title.''.
Benefit under part b.--Section 1832(a)(2)(B)(iii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395k(a)(2)(B)(iii)) is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(I)'' after ``(iii)'', (B) by inserting ``certified midwife services,'' after ``certified nurse-midwife services,'', and (C) by adding at the end the following new subclause: ``(II) in the case of certified nurse-midwife services or certified midwife services furnished in a hospital which has a teaching program described in clause (i)(II), such services may be furnished as provided under section 1842(b)(7)(E) and section 1861(b)(8);''.
Amount of payment.--Section 1833(a)(1)(K) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395l(a)(1)(K)) is amended-- (A) by inserting ``and certified midwife services'' after ``certified nurse-midwife services'', and (B) by striking ``65 percent'' each place it appears and inserting ``100 percent''.
Assignment of payment.--The first sentence of section 1842(b)(6) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395u(b)(6)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and (F)'' and inserting ``(F)''; and (B) by inserting before the period the following: ``, and (G) in the case of certified nurse-midwife services or certified midwife services under section 1861(s)(2)(L), payment may be made in accordance with subparagraph (A), except that payment may also be made to such person or entity (or the agent of such person or entity) as the certified nurse-midwife or certified midwife may designate under an agreement between the certified nurse-midwife or certified midwife and such person or entity (or the agent of such person or entity)''.
Clarification regarding payments under part b for such services furnished in teaching hospitals.--(A) Section 1842(b)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395u(b)(7)) is amended-- (i) in subparagraphs (A) and (C), by inserting ``or, for purposes of subparagraph (E), the conditions described in section 1861(b)(8),'' after ``section 1861(b)(7),''; and (ii) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) In the case of certified nurse-midwife services or certified midwife services furnished to a patient in a hospital with a teaching program approved as specified in section 1861(b)(6) but which does not meet the conditions described in section 1861(b)(8), the provisions of subparagraphs (A) through (C) shall apply with respect to a certified nurse-midwife or a certified midwife respectively under this subparagraph as they apply to a physician under subparagraphs (A) through (C).''.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall prescribe regulations to carry out the amendments made by subparagraph (A).
Except as provided in section 3(b)(7)(B), in order to carry out the amendments made by this Act in a timely manner, the Secretary of Health and Human Services may first promulgate regulations, that take effect on an interim basis, after notice and pending opportunity for public comment, by not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.