This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on the Accountability and Review of Federal Agencies Act''.
Establishment.--There is established the Commission on the Accountability and Review of Federal Agencies (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall consist of 12 members, all of whom shall be appointed by the President within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The President shall designate a chairperson and vice chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Definition.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the term ``agency'', as used in this section, has the meaning given the term ``executive agency'' under section 105 of title 5, United States Code.
Exception.--The term ``agency'' does not include the Department of Defense or its subdivisions.
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) evaluate all agencies and programs within those agencies, using the criteria under subsection (c); and (2) submit to Congress-- (A) a plan with recommendations of the agencies and programs that should be realigned or eliminated; and (B) proposed legislation to implement the plan under subparagraph (A).
Criteria.-- (1) Duplicative.--If 2 or more agencies or programs are performing the same essential function and the function can be consolidated or streamlined into a single agency or program, the Commission shall recommend that the agency or program be realigned.
Wasteful or inefficient.--The Commission shall recommend the realignment or elimination of any agency or program that has wasted Federal funds by-- (A) egregious spending; (B) mismanagement of resources and personnel; or (C) use of such funds for personal benefit or the benefit of a special interest group.
Outdated, irrelevant, or failed.--The Commission shall recommend the elimination of any agency or program that-- (A) has completed its intended purpose; (B) has become irrelevant; or (C) has failed to meet its objectives.
Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President and Congress a report that includes-- (A) the plan described under subsection (b)(1) with supporting documentation for all recommendations; and (B) the proposed legislation described under subsection (b)(2).
Use of savings.--The proposed legislation under paragraph (1)(B) shall provide that all funds saved by the implementation of the plan under paragraph (1)(A) shall be used to support other domestic programs.
Relocation of federal employees.--The proposed legislation under paragraph (1)(B) shall provide that if the position of an employee of an agency is eliminated as a result of the implementation of the plan under paragraph (1)(A), the affected agency shall make reasonable efforts to relocate such employee to another position within the agency or within another Federal agency.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission or, at its direction, any subcommittee or member of the Commission, may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act-- (1) hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, receive such evidence, and administer such oaths as any member of the Commission considers advisable; (2) require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony of such witnesses as any member of the Commission considers advisable; and (3) require, by subpoena or otherwise, the production of such books, records, correspondence, memoranda, papers, documents, tapes, and other evidentiary materials relating to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
Issuance and Enforcement of Subpoenas.-- (1) Issuance.--Subpoenas issued under subsection (a) shall bear the signature of the chairperson of the Commission and shall be served by any person or class of persons designated by the chairperson for that purpose.
Enforcement.--In the case of contumacy or failure to obey a subpoena issued under subsection (a), the United States district court for the judicial district in which the subpoenaed person resides, is served, or may be found, may issue an order requiring such person to appear at any designated place to testify or to produce documentary or other evidence.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt of that court.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Compensation of Members.-- (1) Non-federal members.--Except as provided under subsection (b), each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall not be compensated.
Federal officers or employees.--All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--Upon the approval of the chairperson, the executive director may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the maximum rate payable for a position at GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of such title.
Personnel as federal employees.-- (A) In general.--The executive director and any personnel of the Commission who are employees shall be employees under section 2105 of title 5, United States Code, for purposes of chapters 63, 81, 83, 84, 85, 87, 89, and 90 of that title.
Members of commission.--Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed to apply to members of the Commission.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits the report under section 3(d).
CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF REFORM PROPOSALS.
Definitions.--In this section-- (1) the term ``implementation bill'' means only a bill which is introduced as provided under subsection (b), and contains the proposed legislation included in the report submitted to Congress under section 3, without modification; and (2) the term ``calendar day'' means a calendar day other than 1 on which either House is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a date certain.
Introduction; Referral; and Report or Discharge.-- (1) Introduction.--On the first calendar day on which both Houses are in session, on or immediately following the date on which the report is submitted to Congress under section 3, a single implementation bill shall be introduced (by request)-- (A) in the Senate by the Majority Leader of the Senate, for himself and the Minority Leader of the Senate, or by Members of the Senate designated by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate; and (B) in the House of Representatives by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, for himself and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, or by Members of the House of Representatives designated by the Speaker and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Referral.--The implementation bills introduced under paragraph (1) shall be referred to any appropriate committee of jurisdiction in the Senate and any appropriate committee of jurisdiction in the House of Representatives.
A committee to which an implementation bill is referred under this paragraph may report such bill to the respective House without amendment.
Report or discharge.--If a committee to which an implementation bill is referred has not reported such bill by the end of the 15th calendar day after the date of the introduction of such bill, such committee shall be immediately discharged from further consideration of such bill, and upon being reported or discharged from the committee, such bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
Floor Consideration.-- (1) In general.--When the committee to which an implementation bill is referred has reported, or has been discharged under subsection (b)(3), it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the implementation bill, and all points of order against the implementation bill (and against consideration of the implementation bill) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the implementation bill is agreed to, the implementation bill shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Amendments.--An implementation bill may not be amended in the Senate or the House of Representatives.
Debate.--Debate on the implementation bill, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
An amendment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the implementation bill is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the implementation bill is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Vote on final passage.--Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on an implementation bill, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the implementation bill shall occur.
Rulings of the chair on procedure.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to an implementation bill shall be decided without debate.
Coordination With Action by Other House.--If, before the passage by 1 House of an implementation bill of that House, that House receives from the other House an implementation bill, then the following procedures shall apply: (1) Nonreferral.--The implementation bill of the other House shall not be referred to a committee.
Vote on bill of other house.--With respect to an implementation bill of the House receiving the implementation bill-- (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no implementation bill had been received from the other House; but (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the implementation bill of the other House.
Rules of the Senate and the House of Representatives.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of an implementation bill described in subsection (a), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005 for carrying out this Act.