This Act may be cited as the ``Citizenship Promotion Act of 1996''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) American democracy performs best when the maximum number of people subject to its laws participate in the political process, at all levels of government.
Citizenship actively exercised will better assure that individuals both assert their rights and fulfill their responsibilities of membership within our political community, thereby benefiting all citizens and residents of the United States.
AMENDMENT TO THE IMMIGRATION AND NATIONALITY ACT.
Title III of the Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 5--CITIZENSHIP PROMOTION ``SEC.
``As used in this chapter-- ``(1) the term `Agency' means the United States Citizenship Promotion Agency; and ``(2) the term `Board' means the National Advisory Board on Citizenship established by section 373.
THE UNITED STATES CITIZENSHIP PROMOTION AGENCY.
Establishment.--There is established within the Immigration and Naturalization Service an agency to be known as the United States Citizenship Promotion Agency.
Mission.--The Agency shall have as its mission the following: ``(1) To carry out the functions relating to naturalization arising under chapter 2 of this title.
To assist in the implementation of a comprehensive program of encouraging and assisting eligible immigrants to become naturalized citizens as soon thereafter as they become eligible to do so.
Headed by Associate Commissioner.-- ``(1) Appointment.--The Agency shall be headed by an Associate Commissioner for Citizenship.
Reasonable efforts shall be made to fill the position with a naturalized citizen of the United States.
Compensation.--The position of Associate Commissioner for Citizenship shall be a position in the Senior Executive Service.
Powers.--The Agency is authorized to exercise all necessary and appropriate powers and duties to carry out its mission, including the authority-- ``(1) to enter into cooperative agreements with Federal, State, and local governmental entities; ``(2) to enter into contracts, subject to the availability of appropriations; and ``(3) to make grants to private and nonprofit entities.
Role of Advisory Board.--The Commissioner and the Associate Commissioner for Citizenship shall seek the consultation and advice of the Board regarding the policies, practices, and procedures used by the Agency in fulfillment of its duties.
Termination of Existing Offices and Positions.--(1) There are transferred to the Agency all functions being exercised before the date of enactment of the Citizenship Promotion Act of 1996 by the Attorney General, the Commissioner, or the Service relating to the following: ``(A) The naturalization of persons under chapter 2 of this title.
The encouragement and assistance of eligible immigrants to become naturalized citizens.
Upon such date, the Commissioner shall abolish or consolidate, as the case may be, any office or position existing before such date within the Service that performed functions transferred under paragraph (1), if such office or position is not otherwise created by statute.
The personnel employed in connection with, and the assets, liabilities, contracts, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds employed, used, held, arising from, available to, or to be made available in connection with the functions transferred under this paragraph (1), subject to section 1531 of title 31, United States Code, shall be transferred to the Agency.
NATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD ON CITIZENSHIP.
Establishment.--There is established the National Advisory Board on Citizenship to advise the Associate Commissioner for Citizenship, the Attorney General, the President, and Congress regarding the carrying out of the Agency's objectives.
Composition.--(1) The Board shall be composed of 9 voting members, who shall be appointed by the Attorney General, except as otherwise provided, as follows: ``(A) One member drawn from among individuals having extensive academic experience in the study of immigration.
Two members drawn from among individuals having been recently naturalized, including at least one who is engaged in nonprofessional employment.
Two members drawn from among individuals having extensive recent experience in counseling and advising resident aliens to become naturalized citizens.
Two members drawn from among individuals who have extensive experience working with the immigrant community.
One member to be appointed by the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate.
One member to be appointed by the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives.
The Assistant Secretary of Education for Vocational and Adult Education, or his or her designee, shall serve on the Board in a nonvoting capacity.
The voting members shall serve staggered terms in a manner to be prescribed by the Attorney General.
At the first meeting of the Board each year, the members of the Board shall elect a chair and vice chair, who shall serve for a term of one year.
The Board shall meet no more frequently than quarterly each year to carry out its responsibilities under subsection (c).
Responsibilities.--(1) The Board shall have the general responsibility to prepare independent biannual reports relating to the administration of policies of the Agency.
Such reports may include minority reports, if timely submitted.
In the course of carrying out its responsibilities, the Board may do the following: ``(A) Review the policies, plans, and objectives of the Agency, including the effectiveness thereof, both short- and long-term.
Review programs and policies of other Federal and State agencies under the area of oversight of the Agency, as is necessary, including the effectiveness thereof, both short- and long-term.
Assess the resources and funds for the Agency, and make reports and recommendations to the Commissioner and Congress.
The Board shall give an annual oral report to the Attorney General, the Commissioner, and the Associate Commissioner for Citizenship.
Administrative Matters.--The Attorney General shall approve the budget of the Board.
The Attorney General and the Commissioner shall provide administrative support, including staffing, to enable the Board to fulfill its functions.
Compensation.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of duties for the Board, Board members shall be compensated at a rate not to exceed $100 per day and shall be allowed reasonable travel expenses.
Applicability of Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall apply to the Board, except to the extent that this section establishes contrary policies or procedures.
``In order to enable the Agency to fulfill its naturalization outreach duties, the Agency-- ``(1) shall seek the assistance of appropriate community groups, private voluntary agencies, and other appropriate organizations; and ``(2) may enter into cooperative agreements with, or make grants to, such other governmental, private, and nonprofit entities (including entities that encourage or facilitate community service or are engaged in such service) that it considers useful in carrying out such duties.
Naturalization Examinations Fee Account.--There is established in the general fund of the Treasury of the United States a separate account which shall be known as the `Naturalization Examinations Fee Account' (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Account').
Deposits.--(1) There shall be deposited into the Account the following: ``(A) All funds in the Immigration Examinations Fee Account that were collected pursuant to section 344(a) before the date of the enactment of the Citizenship Promotion Act of 1996 and that remain available for obligation on such date.
Except as provided in paragraph (2), all fees paid to the Attorney General pursuant to section 344(a) after such date.
Fees paid after such date pursuant to section 344(a) by applicants residing in the United States Virgin Islands, and in Guam, shall be paid over to the treasury of the Virgin Islands and the treasury of Guam, respectively.
Amount of Fees.--The Attorney General shall establish, and may revise from time to time, the amount of the fees to be collected pursuant to section 344(a) for deposit into the Account.
The amount of such fees may be set at a level that will ensure the full recovery of the costs referred to in subsection (d)(1) and the costs of the administration of such fees.
Use of Funds.--(1) The Attorney General may use funds in the Account to cover the following: ``(A) The costs of the Agency in carrying out naturalization functions under chapter 2 of this title.
The costs of the Agency in encouraging and assisting eligible immigrants in becoming naturalized citizens under this chapter, including the facilitation of instruction of immigrants in the English language.
The costs of the Agency in collecting fees for deposit into the Account and in administering the Account.
Amounts in the Account shall remain available until expended.
Annual Financial Statements.--The Attorney General shall prepare and submit annually to Congress statements of financial condition of the Account, including beginning account balance revenues, withdrawals, and ending account balance and projections for the ensuing fiscal year.''.
The Immigration and Nationality Act is amended-- (1) in section 286 (8 United States Code 1356)-- (A) in the second proviso of subsection (m), by striking ``and naturalization''; and (B) in subsection (n), by striking ``and naturalization''; and (2) in section 332 (8 United States Code 1443)-- (A) in subsection (a), by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: ``The Attorney General shall discharge such provisions through the United States Citizenship Promotion Agency established under chapter 5 of this title.
''; and (B) by striking subsection (h).