This Act may be cited as the ``West Nile Virus and Arboviral Disease Act''.
TEMPORARY PROGRAM FOR WEST NILE VIRUS AND RELATED ARBOVIRAL DISEASES.
Section 319 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247d) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (b) through (d) as subsections (c) through (e), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (a), the following: ``(b) Temporary Program for West Nile Virus and Related Arboviral Diseases.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may make grants to States for the prevention and control of West Nile Virus and related arboviral diseases.
States that receive grants under this subsection are encouraged to work with local health entities to develop prevention and control programs.
Preference in making grants.--In awarding grants under paragraph (1), the Secretary may give preference to State that-- ``(A) have an incidence or prevalence of West Nile Virus or related arboviral diseases, or a population of infected mosquitoes, that is substantial relative to other States; or ``(B) have an increased risk of West Nile Virus or related arboviral diseases.
Use of funds.--Funds made available under a grant under this subsection shall be used for-- ``(A) the development, implementation, and evaluation by States and localities of community-based, comprehensive mosquito control plans, based upon the guidelines developed under paragraph (7); and ``(B) the development and implementation of programs on medical entomology, arbovirology, and other vector-borne diseases, that would support longer term prevention and control efforts, including training to assist in developing a competent workforce to direct and manage local mosquito and vector-borne disease control programs.
Matching funds and limitation on supplanting.-- ``(A) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this subsection a State shall provide assurances to the Secretary that the State shall, with respect to the costs of the program to be carried out by the State under the grant, make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward such costs in an amount that is not less than 50 percent of such costs (or $1 for each $1 of Federal funds provided under the grant).
Determination of amount contributed.--Non- Federal contributions required under subparagraph (A) may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
Amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal Government, may not be included in determining the amount of such non-Federal contributions.
Supplement not supplant.--Amounts provided under a grant under this subsection shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, State and local funds provided for activities of the type funded under this subsection.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirements of subparagraph (A) with respect to a State if the Secretary determines that extraordinary economic conditions in the State justify such a waiver.
Local involvement.-- ``(A) In general.--A State that receives funds under this subsection shall, to the extent practicable, involve localities in the planning, implementation, and evaluation of community-based, comprehensive mosquito control plans.
Local public health improvement.--A State that receives a grant under this subsection shall ensure that not less than 85 percent of the amount received under the grant is expended at the local level or for local public health improvement related to the West Nile Virus or related arboviral diseases.
Technical assistance.-- ``(A) In general.--Amounts appropriated to carry out this subsection may be used to expand the capability of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to provide technical support to State and local health departments in the implementation and evaluation of mosquito control programs and the containment of relevant arboviral diseases.
Such technical assistance may include the development of guidelines, as described in paragraph (7).
Limitation.--Not to exceed 20 percent of the amount appropriated to carry out this subsection for a fiscal year may be used as provided for under subparagraph (A).
Mosquito abatement guidelines.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in consultation with public and private health and mosquito control organizations, shall provide for the development of a plan, together with standard operating procedures, to serve as a guideline for State and local communities for the development, implementation, and evaluation of sustainable, locally managed, integrated mosquito control programs.
The elements of such guidelines shall be limited to those functions determined as appropriate by the Director for building the public health infrastructure.
Such guidelines should include programs to-- ``(A) identify new human cases of disease; ``(B) track the spread of disease through monitoring infection in mosquitoes, birds, horses, and any other creatures that may be involved; ``(C) provide laboratory support for testing; ``(D) increase participation in the existing surveillance system for arboviruses; ``(E) provide for the conduct of educational and public outreach campaigns to reduce exposure to arboviruses; and ``(F) outline appropriate procedures for mosquito control and for monitoring possible health or environmental effects.
Evaluation.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the program established under this subsection.
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of the West Nile Virus and Arboviral Disease Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report concerning the program established under this subsection, that shall include-- ``(i) the results of the evaluation conducted under subparagraph (A); ``(ii) information related to the development of a sustainable mosquito abatement program for those States that have received funds under this subsection; ``(iii) a description of the progress made in the development and implementation of the guidelines under paragraph (7); and ``(iv) an evaluation of the overall costs and benefits of the program established under this subsection.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2003 and 2004.
In the case of control programs carried out in response to the West Nile Virus or related arboviruses that constitute a public health emergency, the authorization of appropriations under the preceding sentence is in addition to applicable authorizations under the Public Health Security and Bioterrorism Response Act of 2002 (or the amendments made by such Act).
Termination.--The program established under this subsection shall terminate on September 30, 2004, except that the Secretary, based on the evaluation conducted under paragraph (6), may extend such program for an additional fiscal year.''.
Part B of title II of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 238 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--The President shall expand, intensify, and enhance research (either directly or through the awarding of grants or contracts) to-- ``(1) identify or develop methods of controlling the population of insects that transmit to humans diseases that have significant adverse health consequences (including the West Nile Virus); ``(2) develop rapid screening tools for West Nile Virus in blood or organs; ``(3) develop pathogen inactivation technologies (technologies that safely and cost-effectively remove RNA and DNA from blood); and ``(4) develop additional methodologies for containing the spread of the West Nile Virus or other related arboviruses.
Scope of Activities.--Activities under subsection (a)(1) may include examining methodologies that have been used or are being used to control insect populations as well as developing new methodologies.
Entities Involved.--Activities under subsection (a) may be carried out through the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, other Institutes at the National Institutes of Health, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
the Food and Drug Administration, or any other relevant Federal Government entity.
To the extent practicable, in carrying out this section, the President shall promote coordination between the relevant Federal agencies, the private sector, and individuals and organizations with appropriate expertise including expertise in public health, entomology, arbovirology, and veterinary health.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007.