This Act may be cited as the ``Alcohol Advertising Accountability Act of 1996''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) In 1995, the Department of Health and Human Services found that there is a significant underage drinking problem and estimated that there are 11 million drinkers of alcoholic beverages who are under the age of 21.
Of that number, 2 million are heavy drinkers of such beverages.
In 1995, the proportion of students having 5 or more drinks in a row during the 2 week period preceding the Monitoring the Future Survey were 15 percent for 8th graders, 24 percent for 10th graders, and 30 percent for 12th graders.
The median age at which children begin drinking alcoholic beverages is just over 13 years.
67 percent of students in the 8th grade have tried an alcoholic beverage.
A 1995 survey found that 50 percent of the teenagers who were asked said that alcohol is a more serious problem among today's youth than illicit drugs.
In 1993, nearly 10 percent (over 110,000) of the clients admitted to State-funded alcohol treatment programs were under the age of 21.
Alcoholic beverage companies spent $2 billion to advertise and promote their products in 1995.
The budget of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism for the same year was $176 million.
According to a study published in the American Journal of Public Health, viewing beer ads on television may predispose young people to drinking beer.
Children who are more aware of beer advertisements hold more favorable beliefs about drinking beer and intend to drink beer more frequently as adults.
Almost half of all adults think that alcohol industry advertising greatly influences underage youth to drink alcoholic beverages, another one-third think industry advertising has some influence.
REPORT OF SECRETARY ON ALCOHOL ADVERTISING.
Action by the Secretary.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall report annually to the Congress on alcohol advertising, its profile and its effects.
To assist the Secretary in gathering information for such report, the Secretary shall establish a panel made up of such individuals as the Secretary, in the Secretary's discretion, may select from individuals in the Department of Health and Human Services or any other Federal agency.
Panel Function.--The panel established by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under subsection (a) shall review alcohol advertising in all media, including broadcast and cable television, other electronic means, and print and outdoor advertising and review promotional activities undertaken to promote the sale of alcoholic beverages.
The Secretary shall convene at least 2 public hearings before the panel established under subsection (a) each year and shall have the panel conduct a hearing in each of the regional offices of the Department of Health and Human Services over the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Report Content.--The report of the Secretary of Health and Human Services under subsection (a) shall be developed on the basis of the work conducted by the panel established under subsection (a) and shall include-- (1) an identification of-- (A) the media used by alcohol advertising to reach children, (B) the total expenditures for alcoholic beverage advertising in each media and in promotions, (C) the extent to which media program audiences are under the age of 21, (D) an identification of the types and themes of alcohol advertising in all media (especially in broadcast) and other electronic means, (E) any graphics, slogans, children's characters, and techniques that are used and that appeal to youth, and (F) the extent to which other promotional efforts used to market alcoholic beverages which appear in clothing, sporting events, contests, and concerts appeal to individuals under the age of 21; (2) a determination of the extent to which young people are exposed to alcohol advertising and promotions of alcoholic beverages; (3) an evaluation of the relationship between alcohol advertising practices and underage drinking, drunk driving, and related public health problems; and (4) an evaluation of alcohol industry sponsored campaigns addressing public service and prevention messages for underage drinking, drunk driving, and other alcohol-related topics.
Recommendations.--The report of the Secretary of Health and Human Services under subsection (a) shall also include such recommendations for legislation as the Secretary determines are appropriate.