This Act may be cited as the ``Northwest Territory of the Great Lakes National Heritage Area Act of 1999''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The region which includes Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio was once known as the Northwest Territory.
It was the first frontier region of the new United States of America.
Some of the indigenous peoples of the area were the Delaware, Kikapoo, Miami, Ottawa, Piankeshaw, Potowatami, Shawnee, Wea, and Wyandotte Indians.
The distinctive landscape of this area was largely defined by-- (A) the Ordinance of 1785, which established a system of transferring land ownership from the Indians to the United States Government and then to private owners, and created the system of land surveyance and township and county plats which remains today; (B) the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, which established a process through which self-government in this first frontier of the newly organized United States could be established; and (C) the Treaty of Greeneville of 1795, which signaled the end of Indian resistance in the region.
The local environmental and topographical landscape of the area was largely defined in commercial and strategic terms by-- (A) the area river systems, including but not limited to-- (i) the Fox River, the Illinois River, and the Kankakee River, in the State of Illinois; (ii) the Eel River, the Elkhart River, the Kankakee River, the Maumee River, the St. Joseph River, the St. Mary's River, and the Wabash River in the State of Indiana; (iii) the Detroit River, the St. Mary's River, and the St. Joseph River in the State of Michigan; and (iv) the Great Miami River, the Maumee River, and the St. Mary's River in the State of Ohio; (B) the Great Lakes; (C) the River Portage Trails, including but not limited to-- (i) the 3 mile portage from the St. Joseph River to the Little Wabash River in Fort Wayne, which was the only separation in the waterway from the upper Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico; and (ii) from the Great Miami River to the St. Mary's and Wabash Rivers in Ohio; (D) the 13 forts which developed in the region, including but not limited to-- (i) Fort Dearborn, in Chicago, Illinois; (ii) Fort Wayne, in Fort Wayne, Indiana; (iii) Fort Mackinac on Mackinac Island, Michigan; and (iv) Fort Defiance, in Defiance, Ohio; and (E) the settlements, including Native American villages, early trading posts, and territorial capitals that developed in the region.
The military history of the region includes, but is not limited to-- (A) LaBalme's Defeat in 1780; (B) the defeat of General Harmar in 1790; (C) the defeat of General St. Clair in 1791; (D) the United States victory by General ``Mad'' Anthony Wayne at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794; and (E) the Battle of Lake Erie in 1832.
The confederacy of Indian Nations was organized by Tecumseh and ``The Prophet'' to stop American advancement.
General William Henry Harrison defeated The Prophet at the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811.
This was the last major battle east of the Mississippi River with Indian Nations and led to the famous slogan ``Tippecanoe and Tyler too'', which propelled Harrison to the Presidency of the United States.
The War of 1812, during which the region might have been lost to Canada without Commodore Perry's victory at Put- in-Bay on Lake Erie.
The rush of settlers to the region after the War of 1812 led to additional treaties and conflict with the Native Americans.
Most Indians were removed in a series of events culminating with the so-called ``Black Hawk Wars'', which ended in 1833.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act include the conservation, interpretation, and development of the historical, cultural, natural, and recreational resources related to the region historically referred to as the Northwest Territory of the Great Lakes during the period from 1785 to 1835.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Authority'' means the Northwest Territory of the Great Lakes National Heritage Area Authority; (2) the term ``Heritage Area'' means the Northwest Territory of the Great Lakes National Heritage Area established in section 4; and (3) the term ``Plan'' means the management plan required to be developed for the Heritage Area pursuant to section 5(e)(1)(G).
THE NORTHWEST TERRITORY OF THE GREAT LAKES NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is hereby established the Northwest Territory of the Great Lakes National Heritage Area.
Boundaries.--The Heritage Area shall be comprised of historically significant areas, as defined by the Authority, within Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio (as defined by the Northwest Ordinance of 1787), such as the following historically significant locations: (1) Fort Dearborn and Fort Clark in the State of Illinois.
In Indiana-- (A) Anthony Wayne, Chief Little Turtle, and Chief Richardville sites (Fort Wayne); (B) The Historic Forks of the Wabash Park and Chief LaFontaine Home (Huntington); (C) Kokomo Village (Kokomo); (D) Deaf Man's Village (Peru); (E) Munsee Town (Muncie); (F) Chief Menominee Monument (Plymouth); (G) Historic Vincennes (Vincennes); (H) Prophetstown (Lafayette); and (I) Historic Corydon (Corydon).
In Michigan-- (A) Fort Michilimackinac (Mackinaw City); and (B) Fort Mackinac (Mackinac Island).
In Ohio-- (A) Fallen Timbers State Memorial (Maumee); (B) Fort Defiance State Memorial (Defiance); (C) Fort Adams/Ft.
Amanda State Memorial (Wapakoneta); (D) Fort Recovery State Memorial (Fort Recovery); (E) Fort Greeneville/Treaty of Greeneville Memorial (Greeneville); (F) Fort Jefferson State Memorial (Ft. Jefferson); (G) Fort St. Clair State Memorial (Eaton); (H) Fort Hamilton Monument (Hamilton); (I) Fort Washington (Cincinnati); and (J) Perry's Victory and International Peace Memorial (Put-in-Bay).
MANAGEMENT ENTITY AND DUTIES.
In General.--The management entity for the Heritage Area shall be the Northwest Territory of the Great Lakes National Heritage Area Authority.
Composition.--The Authority shall be composed of 18 members appointed as follows: (1) 3 members appointed by each of the following: (A) The Governor of Illinois or the Governor's designee.
The Governor of Indiana or the Governor's designee.
The Governor of Michigan or the Governor's designee.
The Governor of Ohio or the Governor's designee.
1 member appointed by each of the following: (A) The Historical Society of the State of Illinois.
The Historical Society of the State of Indiana.
The Historical Society of the State of Michigan.
The Historical Society of the State of Ohio.
2 members appointed by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States or the Secretary's designee.
Of the 3 members appointed by each Governor of a State under paragraph (1)-- (A) at least 1 member shall be a member of the governing body of an Indian tribe located within the State, or a designee of such a member; and (B) at least 1 member shall be an elected official of a unit of local government located within the State which has 1 or more historic sites significant to the Heritage Area.
Terms.--The term of office shall be 2 years.
No member of the Authority shall serve more than 4 terms.
Compensation.--Compensation for members of the Authority shall be determined by the Authority as part of the Plan.
Duties and Powers.-- (1) Duties.--The Authority shall-- (A) receive funds from various sources for the implementation of this Act; (B) disburse funds in accordance with this Act; (C) make grants to and enter into cooperative agreements with States and their political subdivisions, private organizations, or other individuals or entities as appropriate for the execution of this Act; (D) hire and compensate staff; (E) enter into contracts for goods and services; (F) develop a management plan for the Heritage Area; (G) help ensure the conservation, interpretation, and development of the historical, cultural, natural, and recreational resources related to the region historically referred to as the Northwest Territory of the Great Lakes during the period from 1785 through 1835; (H) foster a close working relationship with all levels of government, the private sector, philanthropic and educational organizations, local communities, and regional metroparks systems through a coalition organization to both conserve the heritage of this region and utilize its resources for tourism and economic development; (I) develop an Internet web site and other marketing programs to further the purposes of this Act; and (J) in accordance with Federal, State, and local laws, erect signs to promote the Heritage Area.
Powers.--The Authority may develop visitor centers and interpretive facilities for the Heritage Area.
Plan.--The Plan shall-- (1) present recommendations for the Heritage Area's conservation, funding, management, and development, taking into consideration existing State and local plans and the comments of residents, public agencies, and private organizations working in the Heritage Area; (2) not be final until it has been approved by the Governors of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio; (3) include-- (A) an inventory of the resources contained in the Heritage Area, including a list of any property in the Heritage Area that is related to the themes of the Heritage Area and that should be preserved, restored, managed, developed, or maintained because of its natural, cultural, historical, or recreational significance; and (B) a program for the implementation of the management plan by the Authority.
Specific Prohibitions.--The Authority-- (1) shall not take any action which jeopardizes the sovereignty of the United States; and (2) shall not infringe upon the private property rights of individuals or other property owners.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act not more than $1,000,000 for any fiscal year.
Not more than a total of $10,000,000 may be appropriated for the Heritage Area.
50 Percent Match.--Federal funding provided under this Act may not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of any assistance or grant provided or authorized under this Act.