This Act may be cited as the ``Aircraft Clean Air Act of 2001''.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Air carrier, aircraft, and air transportation.--The terms ``air carrier'', ``aircraft'', and ``air transportation'' have the meaning such terms have under section 40102 of title 49, United States Code.
Aircraft air quality incident.--The term ``aircraft air quality incident'' means an incident in an aircraft used in air transportation which results in crew members or passengers reporting a symptom that is consistent with exposure to neurotoxins or asphyxiants.
Such symptoms include dizziness, fainting, disorientation, memory loss, peripheral neuropathy, muscle tremors, muscle twitching, or tunnel vision.
Mechanical and maintenance records.--The term ``mechanical and maintenance records'' with respect to an aircraft involved in an aircraft air quality incident includes records regarding the use of, and any loss or leakage of, hydraulic fluids, lubrication oils, or fuel, and records regarding any repairs that are, or could be, reported under the Air Transport Association Specifications, including chapter 2100 (Air Conditioning), chapter 2900 (Hydraulic Power), chapter 3600 (Pneumatics), chapter 4900 (Airborne Auxiliary Power), and chapter 7200 (Engine).
DISCLOSURE OF MAINTENANCE RECORDS.
Request Made to Administrator.-- (1) In general.--Any crew member, passenger, or their representative that experiences an aircraft air quality incident may file, not later than 30 days after the incident, a request with the Administrator for the mechanical and maintenance records of the aircraft involved in the aircraft air quality incident.
The request may cover records with respect to the aircraft for the 90-day period preceding the incident and the 30-day period following the incident.
Special rule for previous 5-year period.--Any crew member, passenger, or their representative that experienced an aircraft air quality incident in the 5-year period preceding the date of enactment of this Act may file a request with the Administrator for the mechanical and maintenance records of the aircraft involved in the aircraft air quality incident if the request is made not later than 90 calendar days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Verification by health care professional.--A request described in paragraph (1) must include a statement by a health care professional verifying that the individual making the request reported at least 1 symptom described in section 2(3).
Request Forwarded to Air Carrier.--Within 30 calendar days of receiving a request described in subsection (a), the Administrator shall record receipt of that request and forward it to the air carrier.
Information To Be Disclosed.--An air carrier that receives a request described in subsection (a) shall provide the requested records to the individual making that request-- (1) not later than 15 calendar days after receiving the request described in subsection (a)(1); or (2) not later than 30 calendar days after receiving a request described in subsection (a)(2).
Civil Penalty for Noncompliance.-- (1) In general.--Any air carrier that does not produce any records requested pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each day that the air carrier fails to produce the records.
Fines increased for inflation.--In the case of any calendar year beginning after 2001, the dollar amount described in paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- (A) such dollar amount, multiplied by (B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 1(f)(3)) for the calendar year in which the fine is assessed, determined by substituting ``calendar year 2000'' for ``calendar year 1992'' in subparagraph (B) of such section 1(f)(3).
Retention of Mechanical and Maintenance Records.--The Administrator shall require that air carriers retain mechanical and maintenance records for a period of not less than 5 years, or for such longer period if required under any other provision of law.
Retention of Related Materials and Documents.--The Administrator shall require that air carriers retain all reports, investigative documents, studies, data, memos, and letters relating to or arising from any complaint, report, or request regarding air quality on aircraft for a period of not less than 10 years.
RELEASE OF FILTRATION MEDIA.
Request Made to Administrator.-- (1) In general.--Any crew member, passenger, or their representative that experiences an aircraft air quality incident may file a request with the Administrator not later than 30 days after the incident for the filtration media used in the air supply system of the aircraft involved in that aircraft air quality incident.
Verification by health care professional.--A request described in paragraph (1) must include a statement by a health care professional verifying that the individual making the request reported at least 1 symptom described in section 2(3).
Request Forwarded to Air Carrier.--Within 30 calendar days of receiving a request described in subsection (a), the Administrator shall record receipt of that request and forward it to the air carrier.
Media To Be Provided.--An air carrier that receives a request described in subsection (a) shall provide the filtration media to the Administrator not later than 30 calendar days after replacing the requested filtration media.
Action by Administrator.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after receipt of filtration media under subsection (c), the Administrator shall-- (A) analyze the media to determine the content and chemical properties of any materials contained in the filtration media; and (B) provide the results of the analysis performed under subparagraph (A) to the individual making the request in subsection (a).
Retention of information.--The Administrator shall retain the results of any analysis performed under paragraph (1) for a period of not less than 5 years.
Civil Penalty for Noncompliance.-- (1) In general.--Any air carrier that does not produce a filtration media requested pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each day that the air carrier fails to produce the media.
Fines increased for inflation.--In the case of any calendar year beginning after 2001, the dollar amount described in paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- (A) such dollar amount, multiplied by (B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 1(f)(3)) for the calendar year in which the fine is assessed, determined by substituting ``calendar year 2000'' for ``calendar year 1992'' in subparagraph (B) of such section 1(f)(3).
Retention of Filtration Media.--The Administrator shall require that an air carrier retain and properly store all filtration media for a period of not less than 45 days after any filtration media is replaced.
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION ON PRODUCTS USED IN THE MAINTENANCE, OPERATION, OR TREATMENT OF AIRCRAFT.
Request Made to the Administrator.-- (1) In general.--Any crew member, passenger, or their representative may file a request with the Administrator for information on the chemical constituents of products (either alone or in combination, including the byproducts generated by thermal degradation or decomposition of those products) used in the maintenance, operation, or treatment of aircraft to which a crew member or passenger may be or may have been directly exposed.
Special rule for the previous 5-year period.--Any crew member, passenger, or their representative may file a request with the Administrator for the information described in paragraph (1) regarding a product that was used during the 5- year period preceding the date of enactment of this Act if the request is made not later than 90 calendar days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Request Forwarded to Air Carrier.--Within 30 calendar days of receiving a request described in subsection (a), the Administrator shall record receipt of that request and forward it to the air carrier.
Information To Be Disclosed.-- (1) In general.--An air carrier that receives a request described in subsection (a) shall provide the information to the individual making that request-- (A) not later than 15 calendar days after receiving a request described in subsection (a)(1); and (B) not later than 30 days after receiving a request described in subsection (a)(2).
Information to be included.--An air carrier shall provide to a person making a request described in subsection (a) the following: (A) Information on the toxicity and toxicology of the products described in subsection (a).
Any report of an aircraft air quality incident, including any first aid and medical treatment or tests required by any person in connection with the aircraft air quality incident.
Any monitoring data, including measurements of exposures of personnel in the work environment, measurements of ambient air and surface contamination in the work environment, and in-duct measurements.
All reports, investigative documents, studies, memos, and letters related to or arising from any complaint, report, or request regarding air quality on aircraft.
Any health or symptom survey distributed to crew members.
Civil Penalty for Noncompliance.-- (1) In general.--Any air carrier that does not produce any information requested pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each day that the carrier fails to produce the information.
Fines increased for inflation.--In the case of any calendar year beginning after 2001, the dollar amount described in paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- (A) such dollar amount, multiplied by (B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 1(f)(3)) for the calendar year in which the fine is assessed, determined by substituting ``calendar year 2000'' for ``calendar year 1992'' in subparagraph (B) of such section 1(f)(3).
Retention of Information on Products and Byproducts.--The Administrator shall require that an air carrier retain the records described in this section for a period of not less than 5 years, or for such longer period as is under any other provision of law.
Relationship to Other Disclosures.--The information required to be provided under this section shall be provided to the crew member, passenger, or their representative in addition to any information provided in the material safety data sheet.
Study of Cabin Oxygen Levels.--The Administrator, in consultation with the National Academy of Sciences Committee on Air Quality in Passenger Cabins of Commercial Aircraft, shall award a grant to an eligible applicant described in subsection (b) to conduct an aeromedical research study to determine what cabin altitude must be maintained to provide sufficient oxygen to ensure that the short- and long-term health of 95 percent of a representative sample of cabin crew and passengers is not adversely affected.
Eligible Applicant.--An eligible applicant described in this subsection is an expert in an appropriate academic field who is affiliated with a school of public or occupational health that does not receive funding from the airline industry.
Elements of the Study.--The study shall include-- (1) measurements of blood oxygen saturation collected at cabin altitudes that range from 5,000 to 8,000 feet from a sample of crew members and passengers selected to represent the range of weight and health considerations that could affect blood oxygen transport (including cardiovascular and respiratory conditions); and (2) a review of existing data and published literature.
Report.--The eligible applicant selected to receive the grant under this section shall complete the study and submit a report regarding the results of the study to the Administrator not later than 18 months after the receipt of the grant funds.