In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Route 66 corridor.--The term ``Route 66 corridor'' means structures and other cultural resources described in paragraph (3), including-- (A) lands owned by the Federal Government and lands owned by a State or local government within the immediate vicinity of those portions of the highway formerly designated as United States Route 66; and (B) private land within that immediate vicinity that is owned by persons or entities that are willing to participate in the programs authorized by this Act.
Cultural resource programs.--The term ``Cultural Resource Programs'' means the programs established and administered by the National Park Service for the benefit of and in support of preservation of the Route 66 corridor, either directly or indirectly.
Preservation of the route 66 corridor.--The term ``preservation of the Route 66 corridor'' means the preservation or restoration of structures or other cultural resources of businesses, sites of interest, and other contributing resources that-- (A) are located within the land described in para- graph (1); (B) existed during the route's period of outstanding historic significance (principally between 1926 and 1970), as defined by the study prepared by the National Park Service and entitled ``Special Resource Study of Route 66'', dated July 1995; and (C) remain in existence as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Cultural Resource Programs at the National Park Service.
State.--The term ``State'' means a State in which a portion of the Route 66 corridor is located.
In General.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the entities described in subsection (c), shall facilitate the development of guidelines and a program of technical assistance and grants that will set priorities for the preservation of the Route 66 corridor.
Designation of Officials.--The Secretary shall designate officials of the National Park Service stationed at locations convenient to the States to perform the functions of the Cultural Resource Programs under this Act.
General Functions.--The Secretary shall-- (1) support efforts of State and local public and private persons, nonprofit Route 66 preservation entities, Indian tribes, State Historic Preservation Offices, and entities in the States for the preservation of the Route 66 corridor by providing technical assistance, participating in cost-sharing programs, and making grants; (2) act as a clearinghouse for communication among Federal, State, and local agencies, nonprofit Route 66 preservation entities, Indian tribes, State historic preservation offices, and private persons and entities interested in the preservation of the Route 66 corridor; and (3) assist the States in determining the appropriate form of and establishing and supporting a non-Federal entity or entities to perform the functions of the Cultural Resource Programs after those programs are terminated.
Authorities.--In carrying out this Act, the Secretary may-- (1) enter into cooperative agreements, including (but not limited to) cooperative agreements for study, planning, preservation, rehabilitation, and restoration related to the Route 66 corridor; (2) accept donations of funds, equipment, supplies, and services as appropriate; (3) provide cost-share grants for projects for the preservation of the Route 66 corridor (but not to exceed 50 percent of total project costs) and information about existing cost-share opportunities; (4) provide technical assistance in historic preservation and interpretation of the Route 66 corridor; and (5) coordinate, promote, and stimulate research by other persons and entities regarding the Route 66 corridor.
Preservation Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall provide assistance in the preservation of the Route 66 corridor in a manner that is compatible with the idiosyncratic nature of the Route 66 corridor.
Planning.--The Secretary shall not prepare or require preparation of an overall management plan for the Route 66 corridor, but shall cooperate with the States and local public and private persons and entities, State historic preservation offices, nonprofit Route 66 preservation entities, and Indian tribes in developing local preservation plans to guide efforts to protect the most important or representative resources of the Route 66 corridor.
Technical Assistance Program.-- (1) Program required.--The Secretary shall develop a program of technical assistance in the preservation of the Route 66 corridor and interpretation of the Route 66 corridor.
Program guidelines.--As part of the technical assistance program under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall establish guidelines for setting priorities for preservation needs for the Route 66 corridor.
The Secretary shall base the guidelines on the Secretary's standards for historic preservation.
Program for Coordination of Activities.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall coordinate a program of historic research, curation, preservation strategies, and the collection of oral and video histories of events that occurred along the Route 66 corridor.
Design.--The program under paragraph (1) shall be designed for continuing use and implementation by other organizations after the Cultural Resource Programs are terminated.
There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2000 through 2009 to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.