This Act may be cited as the ``Walker River Basin Act of 1997''.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) Facilitate efforts to negotiate the permanent settlement of all litigation and other claims to the waters of the Walker River Basin, Nevada, including those of the Walker River Paiute Tribe and Walker Lake.
Encourage an equitable apportionment of the waters of the Walker River between California and Nevada.
Direct the management of water rights acquired by the United States on the Walker River.
Protect the fish and wildlife associated habitats in the Walker River Basin of California and Nevada.
Stabilize the water quality and quantity of Walker Lake at acceptable levels.
Protect recreation resources associated with the Walker River and its reservoirs, and Walker Lake.
Protect and preserve agriculture in the Walker River Basin.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Locally Affected Interests'' means, collectively, Mineral County of Nevada, the Walker River Basin Water Users Association, the Walker River Irrigation District, the Walker River Paiute Tribe of Indians, and Mono County of California.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation.
The term ``Walker River Basin'' means the hydrologic area which naturally drains into the Walker River or Walker Lake (or both), located in Mineral County, Nevada.
The term ``Walker River Basin Water Users Association'' means a nonprofit corporation whose membership includes, but is not limited to, irrigators in California and Nevada who possess water rights pursuant to the Walker River Decree, but not including the Walker River Paiute Tribe.
The term ``Walker River Decree'' means the final decree in the case of United States v. Walker River Irrigation District, et alii, United States district court for the District of Nevada, Equity No.
125, filed April 15, 1936, as amended by the Order of the Honorable A.Federal Reporter St. Sure, dated April 24, 1940.
In General.--The Secretary, the Locally Affected Interests, the State of Nevada, and the State of California shall initiate negotiations to explore the potential for comprehensive and permanent settlement of all claims to the waters of the Walker River, in California and Nevada.
Report.--If the terms of any settlement negotiated under subsection (a) require legislation by Congress, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report describing the necessary legislation.
Studies and Projects.--In order to assist the Locally Affected Interests and the States of Nevada and California in negotiating a settlement under section 4, the Secretary shall assist in the development and implementation of studies, pilot projects or long-term projects (or both) including, but not limited to, the following: (1) In accordance with Nevada law, California law, and other applicable law, a locally managed Walker River Water Bank to facilitate voluntary water transfers, including the transfer of any water delivered pursuant to the water conservation provision of this Act, within the Walker River Basin in the States of Nevada and California: Provided, That the Walker River Water Bank may include water held by the Walker River Paiute Tribe pursuant to reserved water rights confirmed in the Walker River Decree or water rights held by the Walker River Paiute Tribe (or both).
The Locally Affected Interests shall have the ability to both purchase from and transfer water to the Walker River Water Bank.
Water conservation, compatible with local land use, designed to encourage the Locally Affected Interests to voluntarily conserve water in the Walker River Basin.
Enhancement of stream flows through phreatophyte control and debris control and removal on the Walker River and in Walker Lake, in order to protect and improve water quality in Walker Lake and to improve water efficiency for agricultural use.
Improvement of agricultural water management practices in the Walker River Basin.
Improvement of water quality in Walker Lake through the construction and operation of facilities designed to address problems in Walker Lake associated with decreased oxygen and increased salinity.
A program to allow any or all of the Locally Affected Interests to extract and utilize available groundwater in lieu of surface water entitlements.
A groundwater recharge program.
A facility to assist in acclimating Lahanton cutthroat trout to Walker Lake.
A program to facilitate the purchase and transfer of water rights for use in Walker Lake or to otherwise benefit the environmental needs of the Walker River system.
Form of Assistance; Cost Share; Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) The Secretary shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, provide assistance under subsection (a) through grants to, cooperative agreements with, and technical assistance to the Locally Affected Interests.
The United States share of costs associated with the studies, pilot projects, and long-term projects described in subsection (a) shall be 75 percent of the total thereof, with the remaining 25 percent equitably apportioned among the Locally Affected Interests, the State of California, and the State of Nevada.
The Locally Affected Interests may pay all or a portion of their 25 percent share of costs in the form of in-kind services.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out the studies, pilot projects, and long- term projects described in subsection (a), $10,000,000, which will constitute the maximum of the United States 75 percent share of costs associated with the studies, pilot projects, and long-term projects authorized by this Act.
Funds appropriated under this section shall be made available to the Locally Affected Interests to carry out the studies, pilot projects, and long-term projects specified in subsection (a).
Funds appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.
ADMINISTRATION OF WATER RIGHTS HELD BY THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--To the extent that the Secretary or any other department or agency of the United States has acquired or in the future acquires water and water rights from the Walker River and its tributaries such water and water rights-- (1) may not be changed except in compliance with Administrative Rules and Regulations Regarding Change of Point of Diversion, Manner of Use or Place of Use of Water of the Walker River and its Tributaries adopted pursuant to the Walker River Decree; (2) shall be managed by the Secretary or another department or agency of the United States for purposes consistent with the purposes of this Act, including, but not limited to, the utilization of water to augment instream flows for use within the Walker River Water Bank or to otherwise benefit Walker Lake, after consultation with the State of Nevada and the State of California to ensure compliance with applicable State laws; (3) may not be changed without the approval of the Walker River Irrigation District, if they include stored water from Bridgeport or Topaz Reservoirs; and (4) if they are appurtenant to lands within the boundaries of the Walker River Irrigation District may not be exercised for any purpose unless the United States has paid all assessments associated with such lands and water rights to the Walker River Irrigation District.
Limitation on Application.--The provisions of subsection (a) do not apply to water rights held or acquired by the United States in trust for the Walker River Paiute Tribe.
In General.--Until the date that is 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act and during the period in which a study or pilot project under section 5(a) is undertaken, no court or administrative tribunal shall have jurisdiction to hear or determine a claim or matter related to a claim for additional water for the Walker River Indian Reservation or for Walker Lake or a claim to amend the Walker River Decree in any manner.
Tolling.--Any applicable period of limitation shall be tolled during the moratorium period under subsection (a).
No Limitation on Jurisdiction.--Nothing in this Act affects the jurisdiction of the United States district court for the District of Nevada to ensure that owners of water rights recognized in the Walker River Decree receive the quantity of water to which the owners are entitled under the Decree.
No person may use information furnished in connection with or derived from a study or pilot project under section 5(a) for any purpose (including introduction as evidence in any court or administrative proceeding) except for the purpose of facilitating settlement under section 4.
COMPLIANCE WITH WALKER RIVER DECREE.
The Secretary shall not take any action that would undermine, contradict, or diminish the water rights confirmed in the Walker River Decree other than action that the Secretary determines is necessary and within the authority of the Secretary as trustee for the Walker River Paiute Indian Tribe and members of the Tribe.
Except as provided in section 7, nothing in this Act affects the authority of the Secretary, the Walker River Paiute Indian Tribe, the State of Nevada, or the State of California in existence on the date of enactment of this Act.