This Act may be cited as the ``Eradication of Slavery in Sudan Act of 2007''.
In General.--There is established the United States Commission to Monitor Slavery and its Eradication in Sudan (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of five members, who are not employees of the Federal Government and who shall be appointed as follows: (A) One member of the Commission shall be appointed by the President.
One member of the Commission shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One member of the Commission shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
One member shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
One member shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Selection.-- (A) In general.--Members of the Commission shall be selected from among distinguished individuals noted for their knowledge about Sudan and who have experience in fields relevant to the issues of abduction and enslavement of persons, human rights, and international law.
Security clearances.--Each member of the Commission shall be required to obtain an appropriate security clearance necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Time of appointment.--The appointments required under paragraph (1) shall be made not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Term of Office.--The term of office of each member of the Commission shall be three years.
Members of the Commission shall be eligible for reappointment to a second term.
Time for Meetings and Elections of Chair.-- (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than 60 days after all the appointments have been made under subsection (b), the Commission shall hold its initial meeting.
Election of chair.--A majority of the members of the Commission present and voting at the initial meeting shall elect the Chair of the Commission.
Subsequent meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair or, if no Chair has been elected for that calendar year, at the call of three voting members of the Commission.
Subsequent elections of chair.--At the first meeting of the Commission in each calendar year, a majority of the members of the Commission present and voting shall elect the Chair of the Commission.
Executive Director.--Not later than 60 days after the initial meeting under subsection (d)(1), the Chair, in consultation with the members of the Commission, shall hire an Executive Director.
Duties of Executive Director.--The Executive Director hired under subsection (e) shall-- (1) prepare a workplan for the Commission's duties under section 3; (2) devise a budget for the annual operations of the Commission; (3) hire staff and consultants for the Commission; (4) develop working relationships with like-minded civil society organizations; and (5) work with the General Services Administration to identify offices for the Commission and take all necessary actions for the Commission to occupy its space, acquire equipment, and secure all necessary services.
Quorum.--Three voting members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for purposes of conducting the affairs of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy of the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Administrative Support.--The President shall provide working space for the Commission at no cost through the General Services Administration.
Funding.--Members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall have as its primary responsibilities-- (1) reporting on progress made by the Government of Sudan and nongovernmental organizations in identifying the location of slaves in Sudan and ensuring their freedom; (2) working with the Government of Sudan to ensure safe passage of freed slaves and family reunification; (3) documenting existing cases of slavery and working to prevent new cases from occurring; (4) assessing and reporting on the needs of former slaves for access to basic education and skills training, as well as medical, social, and psychological support for their effective rehabilitation and reintegration into society; (5) identifying those individuals and groups responsible for slavery and reporting on whether such individuals and groups are brought to justice; (6) reviewing programs of relevant United States Government agencies with respect to slavery in Sudan, including the United States Agency for International Development, the Department of State, the President's Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons, and the Human Smuggling and Trafficking Center; and (7) recommending actions to be taken by the United States Government with respect to the Government of Sudan in response to the Sudanese Government's inaction to eradicate slavery, in accordance with subsection (c).
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out its duties under this Act, hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission determines necessary.
Policy Review and Recommendations.-- (1) In general.--The Commission, in evaluating United States Government policies, shall consider policy options and recommend actions to be taken by the United States Government in accordance with paragraph (2) with respect to the Government of Sudan.
Failure to act to eradicate slavery.--To the extent that the Government of Sudan fails to act to eradicate slavery, such options and actions referred to in paragraph (1) may include diplomatic inquiries, diplomatic protests, official public protest, demarche of protest, condemnation within multilateral fora, delay or cancellation of cultural or scientific exchanges, delay or cancellation of working, official, or state visits, reduction or termination of certain assistance funds, imposition of targeted or broad trade sanctions, and withdrawal of the chief of mission.
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--Not later than October 1st of each year, the Commission shall submit to the Secretary of State a report on the efforts of the Commission with respect to its responsibilities under subsection (a) of section 3.
Classified Form of Report.--The report may be submitted in classified form, together with a public summary of policy recommendations made pursuant to section 3(c), if the classification of information would further the purposes of this Act.
Individual or Dissenting Views.--Each member of the Commission may include the individual or dissenting views of the member.
APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Commission.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission $1,500,000 for fiscal year 2008 and $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2009 to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability of Funds.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated under subparagraph (a) are authorized to remain available until expended, but not later than the date of the termination of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate six years after the initial appointment of all of the members of the Commission.