This Act may be cited as the ``Rapid Deployment Strike Force Act''.
In General.--The Attorney General shall establish in the Federal Bureau of Investigation a unit, to be known as the Rapid Deployment Force, which shall be made available to assist units of local government in combating crime in accordance with this Act.
Assistant Director.--The Rapid Deployment Force shall be headed by a Deputy Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (referred to as ``Deputy Assistant Director'').
Personnel.-- (1) In general.--The Rapid Deployment Force shall be comprised of approximately 2,500 Federal law enforcement officers with training and experience in-- (A) investigation of violent crime, drug-related crime, criminal gangs, and juvenile delinquency; and (B) community action to prevent crime.
Replacement.--To the extent that the Rapid Deployment Force is staffed through the transfer of personnel from other entities in the Department of Justice or any other Federal agency, such personnel of that entity or agency shall be replaced through the hiring of additional law enforcement officers.
In General.--On application of the Governor of a State and the chief executive officer of the affected local government or governments (or, in the case of the District of Columbia, the mayor) and upon finding that the occurrence of criminal activity in a particular jurisdiction is being exacerbated by the interstate flow of drugs, guns, and criminals, the Deputy Assistant Director may deploy on a temporary basis a unit of the Rapid Deployment Force of an appropriate number of law enforcement officers to the jurisdiction to assist State and local law enforcement agencies in the investigation of criminal activity.
For the purposes of this Act, the term ``State'' shall be deemed to include the District of Columbia and any United States territory or possession.
Application.--An application for assistance under this section shall-- (1) describe the nature of the crime problem that a local jurisdiction is experiencing; (2) describe, in quantitative and qualitative terms, the State and local law enforcement forces that are available and will be made available to combat the crime problem; (3) demonstrate that such State and local law enforcement forces have been organized and coordinated so as to make the most effective use of the resources that are available to them, and of the assistance of the Rapid Deployment Force, to combat crime; (4) demonstrate a willingness to assist in providing temporary housing facilities for members of the Rapid Deployment Force; (5) delineate opportunities for training and education of local law enforcement and community representatives in anticrime strategies by the Rapid Deployment Force; (6) include a plan by which the local jurisdiction will prevent a rebound in the crime level following departure of the Rapid Deployment Force from the jurisdiction; and (7) such other information as the Deputy Assistant Director may reasonably require.
Conditions of Deployment.--The Deputy Assistant Director, upon consultation with the Attorney General, may agree to deploy a unit of the Rapid Deployment Force to a State or local jurisdiction on such conditions as the Deputy Assistant Director considers to be appropriate, including a condition that more State or local law enforcement officers or other resources be committed to dealing with the crime problem.
The unit shall serve under the overall control of the senior State or local law enforcement authority in the deployment area, pursuant to a clearly delineated command and operational deployment agreement reached prior to the deployment by the Deputy Assistant Director and such senior State or local authority.
Deputization.--Members of the Rapid Deployment Force who are deployed to a jurisdiction shall be deputized in accordance with State law so as to empower such officers to make arrests and participate in the prosecution of criminal offenses under State law.
Notwithstanding subchapter I of chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code, the Attorney General of the United States shall, after consultation with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, establish, and administer an annual leave system applicable to the Federal law enforcement officers serving in the Rapid Deployment Force.
LOCATION OF UNITS AND FUNCTIONS WHEN NOT DEPLOYED.
Location.--Units of the Rapid Deployment Force shall be based in the Nation's major regions at locations and in facilities determined by the Attorney General.
Members of the Rapid Deployment Force shall receive training and education in the regional crime problems of the region where they are based.
The Deputy Assistant Director whenever possible shall deploy units in the region where they are based.
Nondeployment Functions.--When not deployed pursuant to a deployment agreement to a locality, the Deputy Assistant Director shall use members of a unit to provide special training and education to local law enforcement agencies.
To the extent Rapid Deployment Force units are not needed for deployment or training, members of such units shall be available to support ongoing regional Federal Bureau of Investigation efforts and programs and, as appropriate, other Federal law enforcement efforts, until required for deployment and training.