This Act may be cited as the ``Air Force Science and Technology for the 21st Century Act''.
OFFICE OF AIR FORCE RESEARCH.
In General.--(1) Chapter 803 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new sections: ``Sec.
Office of Air Force Research ``(a)(1) There is in the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force an Office of Air Force Research, at the head of which is a Director of Air Force Research.
Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of the Air Force, the Director of Air Force Research serves as-- ``(A) the principal advisor to the Secretary of the Air Force on all research matters; ``(B) the principal advisor to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force on all research matters; and ``(C) the principal Air Force representative on research matters to other Government, academic, scientific, and corporate agencies.
Unless appointed to higher grade under another provision of law, an officer, while serving as Director of Air Force Research, has the grade of major general.
(1) There is a Deputy Director of Air Force Research, who shall be an employee in the Senior Executive Service and shall be located at and assigned to a major laboratory or field installation.
Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Director of Air Force Research, the Deputy Director of Air Force Research is-- ``(A) responsible for the execution of the Air Force Research Laboratory technical program; and ``(B) responsible for operational aspects of the Air Force Research Laboratory.
The Office of Air Force Research shall perform such duties as the Secretary of the Air Force prescribes relating to-- ``(1) the encouragement, promotion, planning, initiation, and coordination of Air Force research; ``(2) the conduct of Air Force research in augmentation of and in conjunction with the research and development conducted by the bureaus and other agencies and offices of the Department of the Air Force; and ``(3) the supervision, administration, and control of activities within or for the Department relating to patents, inventions, trademarks, copyrights, and royalty payments, and matters connected therewith.
Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of the Air Force, the Director of Air Force Research shall ensure that the management and conduct of the science and technology programs of the Air Force are carried out in a manner that will foster the transition of science and technology to higher levels of research, development, test, and evaluation.
Sufficient information relative to estimates of appropriations for research by the several bureaus and offices shall be furnished to the Office of Air Force Research to assist it in coordinating Air Force research and carrying out its other duties.
The Office of Air Force Research shall perform its duties under the authority of the Secretary, and its orders are considered as coming from the Secretary.
Air Force Science and Technology Policy Council ``(a) There is in the Department of the Air Force a Science and Technology Policy Council consisting of-- ``(1) the Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force, as chairman, with the power of decision; ``(2) the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force with responsibilities for acquisition; ``(3) the Director of Air Force Research; ``(4) the commander of the Air Force Materiel Command; and ``(5) The Deputy Chief of Staff of the Air Force with responsibilities for installations.
The responsibilities of the Council include the following: ``(1) To advise the Secretary of the Air Force and the Chief of Staff of the Air Force on matters of broad policy and budget relating to the Air Force science and technology program.
To identify, set priorities among, and endorse future Air Force technological capabilities.
To oversee and review major science and technology programs as they relate to meeting capabilities identified pursuant to paragraph (2).
To determine the appropriate balance between programs for the purpose of meeting requirements and programs for the purpose of pursuing long-term technologies.
To identify, set priorities among, and endorse planning and budgeting for the transition of science and technology to higher levels of research, development, test, and evaluation.
Subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Air Force, the Council shall appoint, from among personnel of the Department of the Air Force, a staff to assist the Council in carrying out its responsibilities.
Air Force Scientific Advisory Board ``(a) The Secretary of the Air Force may appoint an Air Force Scientific Advisory Board consisting of not more than 15 civilians preeminent in the fields of science, research, and development work.
Each member serves for such term as the Secretary specifies.
The Board shall meet at such times as the Secretary specifies to consult with and advise the Chief of Staff of the Air Force and the Director of Air Force Research.
No law imposing restrictions, requirements, or penalties in relation to the employment of persons, the performance of services, or the payment or receipt of compensation in connection with any claim, proceeding, or matter involving the United States applies to members of the Board solely by reason of their membership on the Board.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``8023.
Office of Air Force Research.
Air Force Science and Technology Policy Council.
Air Force Scientific Advisory Board.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 8014(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (7); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph: ``(6) The Director of Air Force Research.