This Act may be cited as the ``Guam War Restitution Act''.
AMENDMENT TO THE ORGANIC ACT OF GUAM.
The Organic Act of Guam (48 United States Code 1421 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
RECOGNITION OF DEMONSTRATED LOYALTY OF THE PEOPLE OF GUAM TO THE UNITED STATES, AND THE SUFFERING AND DEPRIVATION ARISING THEREFROM, DURING WORLD WAR II.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply to Guamanians who did not meet the one-year time limitation for filing of death or personal injury claims specified in the first section of the Act of November 15, 1945 (Chapter 483; 59 United States Statutes at Large 582), or who suffered other compensable injuries if such Guamanians, their heirs or next of kin, meet the eligibility, time limitation for filing, and other criteria set forth in this section.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: ``(1) Award.--The term `award' means the amount of compensation payable under subsection (c).
Benefit.--The term `benefit' means the amount of compensation payable under subsection (d).
Board.--The term `Board' means the Guam Restitution Trust Fund Board of Directors established by subsection (h).
Claims fund.--The term `Claims Fund' means the Guam Restitution Claims Fund established by subsection (f)(1).
Compensable injury.--The term `compensable injury' means one of the following three categories of injury incurred during, or as a result of, World War II: ``(A) Death.
Forced labor, forced march, or internment.
Guamanian.--The term `Guamanian' means any person who resided in the territory of Guam during the period beginning December 8, 1941, and ending September 2, 1945, and who was a United States citizen or national during the period.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Trust fund.--The term `Trust Fund' means the Guam Restitution Trust Fund established by subsection (g)(1).
General Authority of Secretary and Board; Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may receive, examine, and render final decisions concerning claims for awards under subsection (d) and benefits under subsection (e) filed in accordance with this section.
The Secretary may certify and disburse payments from the Claims Fund, and the Board may certify and disburse payments from the Trust Fund, in accordance with this section.
Required information for inclusion in claims for awards and benefits.--A claim for an award or benefit under this section shall be made under oath and shall include-- ``(A) the claimant's name and age; ``(B) the village in which the claimant resided at the time the compensable injury occurred; ``(C) the approximate date or dates when the compensable injury incurred; ``(D) a brief description of the compensable injury being claimed; ``(E) the circumstances leading up to that compensable injury; and ``(F) in the case of an award based on death as the compensable injury and in the case of a claim for a benefit, proof of the relationship of the claimant to the deceased.
Time limitation applicable to secretary.--The Secretary shall act expeditiously in the examination, determination, and certification of submitted claims, but in no event later than one year after the expiration of the time to be issued by the Secretary.
Eligibility.-- ``(1) Eligibility for awards.--To be eligible for an award under this section, the following criteria must be met: ``(A) The claimant is a living Guamanian who personally received the compensable injury, except that in a claim for death, a claimant may be the heir or next of kin of the decedent Guamanian.
The claimant files a claim with the Secretary for a compensable injury containing all the information required by subsection (c)(2).
The claimant is able to furnish either proof of the compensable injury or is able to produce affidavits by two witnesses to the compensable injury.
The claimant files a claim within one year after the date of enactment of this section.
Eligibility for benefits.--To be eligible for benefits under this section, the following criteria must be met: ``(A) The claimant is a living Guamanian who is an heir or next of kin of the decedent Guamanian who personally received the compensable injury and who died after September 2, 1945.
The claimant files a claim with the Secretary or the Board for a compensable injury containing all the information required by subsection (c)(2).
The claimant is able to furnish either proof of the compensable injury or is able to produce affidavits by two witnesses to the compensable injury.
The claimant files a claim within one year after the date of enactment of this section; except that persons who can prove consanguinity with claimants who have met the criteria specified in subparagraphs (A) through (C) may become eligible for pro rata share of benefits accruing to such claim by filing a claim with the Board at any time, by such procedures as the Board may prescribe.
Limitation on eligibility for awards and benefits.-- (A) A claimant may only be eligible for an award arising out of one category of compensable injury.
A claimant may only be eligible for benefits arising out of one category of compensable injury.
Payments.-- ``(1) Certification.--The Secretary shall certify all awards for payment, and the Board shall certify all benefits for payment, under this section.
Awards.--The Secretary shall pay the following amounts as an award to each eligible claimant under subsection (d)(1) from the Claims Fund: ``(A) $20,000 for the category of death.
$7,000 for the category of personal injury.
$5,000 for the category of forced labor, forced march, or internment.
Benefits.--The Secretary shall pay the following amounts as a benefit to each eligible claimant under subsection (d)(2) from the Trust Fund: ``(A) $7,000 for the category of personal injury.
$5,000 for the category of forced labor, forced march, or internment.
Refusal to accept payment.--If a claimant refuses to accept a payment under paragraph (2) or (3), an amount equal to such payment shall remain in the Claims Fund or Trust Fund, as appropriate, and no payment may be made under this section to such claimant at any future date.
Prorated payments related to claims for the same death.--Payment of the award or benefit relating to death shall be prorated among the heirs or next of kin claiming for the same death, as provided in the Guam probate laws.
Order of payments.--The Secretary shall endeavor to make payments under this section to eligible individuals in the order of date of birth (with the oldest individual on the date of the enactment of this Act or, if applicable, that individual's survivors under paragraph (6), receiving full payment first), until all eligible individuals have received payment in full.
Guam Restitution Claims Fund.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States the Guam Restitution Claims Fund, to be administered by the Secretary of the Treasury, as directed by the Secretary of the Interior.
Amounts in the Claims Fund shall only be available for disbursement by the Secretary of the Interior in the amounts specified in subsection (e).
In the event that all eligible claims have been paid and a balance exists in the Claims Fund, any unobligated funds shall be transferred to the Trust Fund 60 days after the final report required in subsection (j)(3) is submitted to Congress.
Limitation on use of amounts from claims fund.--No cost incurred by the Secretary in carrying out this section shall be paid from the Claims Fund or set off against, or otherwise deducted from, any payment under this section to any eligible claimant.
Guam Restitution Trust Fund.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States the Guam Restitution Trust Fund, which shall be administered by the Secretary of the Treasury.
Investments.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be invested in accordance with section 9702 of title 31, United States Code.
Uses.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be available only for disbursement by the Board in accordance with subsection (h).
Guam Restitution Trust Fund Board of Directors.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established the Guam Restitution Trust Fund Board of Directors, which shall be responsible for making disbursements from the Trust Fund in the manner provided in this subsection.
Uses.--The Board may make disbursements from the Trust Fund only-- ``(A) to sponsor research and public educational activities so that the events surrounding the wartime experiences and losses of the Guamanian people will be remembered, and so that the causes and circumstances of this and similar events may be illuminated and understood; ``(B) to disburse available funds as benefits to eligible claimants through a revolving fund for such purposes as post-secondary scholarships, first-time home ownership loans, and other suitable purposes as may be determined by the Board; and ``(C) for reasonable administrative expenses of the Board, including expenses incurred under paragraphs (3)(C), (4), and (5).
Membership.--(A) The Board shall be composed of nine members appointed by the Secretary from recommendations made by the Governor of Guam, from individuals who are not officers or employees of the United States Government.
(i) Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), members shall be appointed for terms of three years.
Of the members first appointed-- ``(I) five shall be appointed for terms of three years, and ``(II) four shall be appointed for terms of two years, as designed by the Secretary at the time of appointment.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which such member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of such term.
A member may serve after the expiration of such member's term until such member's successor has taken office.
No individual may be appointed as a member for more than two consecutive terms.
Members of the Board shall serve without pay as such, except that members of the Board shall be entitled to reimbursement for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in carrying out the functions of the Board, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the United States Government are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
The Chair of the Board shall be elected by the members of the Board.
(A) The Board shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Board.
The Board may appoint and fix the pay of such additional staff as it may require.
The Director and the additional staff of the Board may be appointed without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, and without regard to the provisions of such title governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that the compensation of any employee of the Board may not exceed a rate equivalent to the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332(a) of such title.
Administrative support services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Board on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services as the Board may request.
Gifts and donations.--The Board may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property for purposes authorized under paragraph (2).
Annual report.--Not later than 12 months after the first meeting of the Board and every 12 months thereafter, the Board shall transmit to the President and to each House of the Congress a report describing the activities of the Board.
Notice.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall give public notice in the territory of Guam and such other places as the Secretary deems appropriate of the time when, and the time limitation within which, claims may be filed under this section.
The Secretary shall assure that the provisions of this section are widely published in the territory of Guam and such other places as the Secretary deems appropriate, and the Secretary shall make every effort to advise promptly all persons who may be entitled to file claims under the provisions of this section and to assist them in the preparation and filing of their claims.
Reports.-- ``(1) Compensation needed.--No later than 18 months after enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress and the Governor of Guam with a recommendation of a specific amount of compensation necessary to fully carry out this section.
The report shall include-- ``(A) a list of all claims, categorized by compensable injury, which were approved under this section; and ``(B) a list of all claims, categorized by compensable injury, which were denied under this section, and a brief explanation for the reason therefore.
Annual.--Beginning with the first full fiscal year ending after submittal of the report provided in paragraph (1), and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit an annual report to Congress concerning the operations under this section, the status of the Claims Fund and Trust Fund, and any request for an appropriation in order to make disbursement from the Claims Fund and Trust Fund.
Such report shall be submitted no later than January 15th of each year.
Final award report.--Once all awards have been paid to eligible claimants, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress and to the Governor of Guam certifying-- ``(A) the total amount of compensation paid as awards under this section, broken down by category of compensable injury; and ``(B) the final status of the Claims Fund and the amount of any existing balance thereof.
Limitation.--Any remuneration on account of services rendered on behalf of any claimant, or any association of claimants, in connection with any claim or claims under this section may not exceed 5 percent of the amount paid on such claim or claims under this section.
Any agreement to the contrary shall be unlawful and void.
Whoever, in the United States or elsewhere, demands or receives, on account of services so rendered, any remuneration in excess of the maximum permitted by this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, imprisoned not more than 12 months, or both.
Disclaimer.--Nothing contained in this section shall constitute a United States obligation to pay any claim arising out of war.
The compensation provided in this section is ex gratia in nature intended solely as a means of recognizing the demonstrated loyalty of the people of Guam to the United States, and the suffering and deprivation arising therefrom, during World War II.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Amounts appropriated pursuant to this section are authorized to remain available until expended.''.