Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Hospitals Education and Research Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Freestanding children's teaching hospitals receive almost no Federal graduate medical education funding.
Increasingly, Federal graduate medical education funding, through the medicare program, has become the major source of support for the academic missions of all teaching hospitals as the medical marketplace has led to a growing inability to gain such support from other payers.
With few medicare patients, these children's teaching hospitals receive less than $400 in Federal funds for each medical resident they train, while other teaching hospitals receive on average more than $79,000 for each resident they train, creating a very serious inequity in the competitive market for these children's hospitals.
Children's teaching hospitals make an essential contribution to training our children's doctors.
Although less than one percent of all hospitals, they train 5 percent of all physicians, 25 percent of all pediatricians, and the majority of most pediatric specialists.
They serve as regional and national pediatric referral centers and provide research discoveries and technological advancements which benefit all children, conducting along with their affiliated departments of pediatrics almost 20 percent of all pediatric research sponsored by the National Institutes of Health.
Their ability to sustain their academic and patient care missions is increasingly threatened by the lack of graduate medical education funding, which represents the major source of shortfall between patient costs and patient revenues for many children's hospitals with significant teaching programs, even as these hospital strive to reduce their costs.
PROGRAM OF PAYMENTS TO CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS THAT OPERATE GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
Payments.--The Secretary shall make payment under this section to each children's hospital for each hospital cost reporting period beginning during fiscal year 1999 or fiscal year 2000 for the direct and indirect expenses associated with operating approved medical residency training programs.
Amount of Payment.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), the amount payable under this section to a children's hospital for direct and indirect expenses relating to approved medical residency training programs for a cost reporting period is equal to the product of-- (A) the per resident rate, as determined under paragraph (2); and (B) the weighted average number of full-time equivalent residents in the hospital's approved medical residency training programs (as determined under section 1886(h)(4) of the Social Security Act) for the cost reporting period.
Per resident rate.-- (A) In general.--The per resident rate under this paragraph for a cost reporting period is equal to the sum of the direct medical education component (computed under subparagraph (B)), and the indirect medical education component (computed under subparagraph (C)(iii).
Direct medical education component.--The Secretary shall compute the direct medical education component described in this subparagraph for a hospital as follows: (i) Computation of base national dme average per resident rate.--The Secretary shall compute a base national DME average per resident rate equal to the simple average of the per resident rates computed under section 1886(h)(2) of the Social Security Act for cost reporting periods ending during fiscal year 1997.
Updating rate.--The Secretary shall update such rate by the estimated percentage increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers during the period beginning October 1997 and ending with the midpoint of the hospital's cost reporting period that begins during fiscal year 1999.
Adjustment for variations in labor- related costs.--For each hospital the Secretary shall adjust the portion of such updated rate that is related to labor and labor-related costs to account for variations in wage costs in the geographic area in which the hospital is located using the factor determined under section 1886(d)(4)(E) of the Social Security Act for discharges occurring during fiscal year 1998.
Direct medical education component.-- The direct medical education component described in this subparagraph for a hospital is the updated rate, computed under clause (ii), as adjusted under clause (iii) for the hospital.
Indirect medical education component.--The Secretary shall compute the indirect medical education component described in this subparagraph for a hospital as follows: (i) Computation of hospital average ime per resident payments.--The Secretary shall determine, for each hospital with a graduate medical education program which is paid under section 1886(d) of the Social Security Act, the amount paid to that hospital pursuant to section 1886(d)(5)(B) of such Act for its cost reporting period ending during fiscal year 1997, and shall divide such amount by the number of FTE residents participating in its approved residency programs and used to calculate the amount of payment under such section in that cost reporting period.
Computing national average.--The Secretary shall take the sum of the amounts determined under clause (i) for all the hospitals described in such clause and divide that sum by the number of hospitals so described.
Updating.--The Secretary shall update the amount computed under clause (ii) for a hospital by applicable percentage increase (as defined in section 1886(b)(3)(B)(i) of the Social Security Act) during the period between October 1997 and ending with the midpoint of the hospital's cost reporting period that begins during fiscal year 1999.
Indirect medical education component.--The indirect medical education component described in this subparagraph for a hospital is the average computed under clause (ii), updated under clause (iii).
Pro rata reductions.--If the Secretary determines that the amount of funds provided under subsection (d) for cost reporting periods ending in a fiscal year is insufficient to provide the total amount of payments otherwise due for such periods, the Secretary shall reduce the amount payable under this section for such period on a pro rata basis to the extent to assure that the aggregate of such payments does not exceed the amount of funds provided under subsection (d) for such cost reporting periods.
Making of Payments.-- (1) Interim payments.--The Secretary shall estimate, before the beginning of each cost reporting period for a hospital for which a payment may be made under this section, the amount of payment to be made under this section to the hospital for such period and shall make payment, in 26 equal interim installments during such period, of the amounts obligated to be paid.
Final payment.--At the end of each such period, the hospital shall submit to the Secretary such information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to determine the final payment amount due under this section for the hospital for the period.
Based on such determination, the Secretary shall recoup any overpayments made, or payment balances due.
The final amount so determined shall be considered a final intermediary determination for purposes of applying section 1878 of the Social Security Act and shall be subject to review under that section in the same manner as the amount of payment under section 1886(d) of such Act is subject to review under such section.
Limitation on Expenditures.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), there are hereby appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for payments under this section for cost reporting periods ending in each of fiscal years 1999 and 2000 $285,000,000.
Carryover of excess.--If the amount of payments under this section for cost reporting periods ending in fiscal year 1999 is less than the amount provided under this subsection for such payments for such periods, then the amount available under this subsection for cost reporting periods ending in fiscal year 2000 shall be increased by the amount of such difference.
Relation to Medicare and Medicaid Payments.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, payments under this section to a hospital for a cost reporting period-- (1) are in lieu of any amounts otherwise payable to the hospital under section 1886(h) or 1886(d)(5)(F) of the Social Security Act to the hospital for such cost reporting period, but (2) shall not affect the amounts otherwise payable to such hospitals under a State medicaid plan under title XIX of such Act.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Approved medical residency training program.--The term ``approved medical residency training program'' has the meaning given such term in section 1886(h)(5)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(h)(5)(A)).
Children's hospital.--The term ``children's hospital'' means a hospital described in section 1886(d)(1)(B)(iii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(d)(1)(B)(iii)).
Direct graduate medical education costs.--The term ``direct graduate medical education costs'' has the meaning given such term in section 1886(h)(5)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(h)(5)(C)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.