This Act may be cited as the ``Water Pollution Program Enhancements Act of 2000''.
In this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
NAPA study--The term ``NAPA Study'' means the study required to be carried out under section 4(b).
NAS study.--The term ``NAS Study'' means the study required to be carried out under section 4(a).
FUNDING FOR WATER POLLUTION CONTROL MEASURES.
State Grants.--Section 106 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1256) is amending by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(a) Funding.-- ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated $250,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2007, to remain available until expended, for grants to States and interstate agencies to be used in carrying out this section, including-- ``(A) the administration of programs for the prevention, reduction, and elimination of pollutants; and ``(B) enforcement carried out directly or through appropriate State law enforcement officers and agencies.
State activities.--Of the amount authorized under paragraph (1) for any fiscal year, $50,000,000 shall be made available to States for-- ``(A) the collection of reliable monitoring data; ``(B) the improvement of lists prepared under section 303(d)(1); ``(C) the preparation of total maximum daily load allocations under section 303(d); and ``(D) the development of watershed management strategies.
Nonpoint Source Management Programs.--Section 319 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1329) is amended by striking subsection (j) and inserting the following: ``(j) Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), there is authorized to be appropriated to carry out subsections (h) and (i) $500,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2007, to remain available until expended.
Groundwater quality.--Of the amount authorized under paragraph (1) for any fiscal year, not more than $7,500,000 may be made available to carry out subsection (i).
Project grants.-- ``(A) In general.--Of the amount authorized under paragraph (1) for any fiscal year, $200,000,000 shall be made available to States to provide grants to landowners to develop and implement nonpoint source pollution control projects or activities to restore or improve the water quality of impaired water that has been identified by a State as a priority for restoration.
Cost sharing.-- ``(i) Federal share.--The Federal share of the costs of any project or activity funded under this paragraph shall not exceed 90 percent.
Non-federal share.--The recipient of a grant under this paragraph may use funds from other Federal programs and eligible in-kind contributions to satisfy the non-Federal share.
Limitation.--Grants under this paragraph shall not be made available for projects or activities that are required to be carried out under Federal or State law.''.
National Academy of Sciences Study.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator shall contract with the National Academy of Sciences to conduct a study of-- (A) the scientific basis underlying the development and implementation of total maximum daily loads under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes); and (B) the availability and effectiveness of alternative programs or mechanisms in producing quantifiable reductions of pollution from point sources and non point sources to achieve water quality standards.
Submission of nas study to congress.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure Committee of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate a copy of the NAS Study.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out the LAS Study $2,000,000, to remain available until expended.
National Academy of Public Administrators Study.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator shall contract with the National Academy of Public Administrators to conduct a study of-- (A) the effectiveness of existing voluntary and other programs, activities, and practices being implemented as of the date of enactment of this Act in producing quantifiable reductions in pollution from point sources and nonpoint sources and attaining water quality standards; and (B) the costs and benefits associated with the programs, activities, and practices described in subparagraph (A) that are incurred by State and local governments and the private sector.
Submission of napa study to congress.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate a copy of the NAPA Study.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out the NAPA Study $3,000,000, to remain available until expended.
Passed the Senate October 10 (legislative day, September 22), 2000.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.