This Act may be cited as the ``Fallen Timbers Battlefield, Fort Meigs, and Fort Miamis National Historical Site Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the 185-acre Fallen Timbers Battlefield is the site of the 1794 battle between General Anthony Wayne and a confederation of Native American tribes; (2) Fort Meigs was constructed in January 1813, following the defeat of American troops commanded by James Winchester at the battle of Frenchtown near Monroe, Michigan; (3) British troops, led by General Henry Proctor, landed at Fort Miamis in the spring of 1813 and attacked the fort twice, without success; (4) Fort Meigs State Memorial is located in Wood County, Ohio, in the city of Perrysburg; (5) Fort Miamis and the Fallen Timbers Battlefield are in Lucas County, Ohio, in the city of Maumee; (6) the 9-acre Fallen Timbers Battlefield Monument is listed as a National Historic Landmark; (7) in 1969, Fort Meigs was listed on the National Register of Historic Places and designated as a National Historic Landmark; (8) Fort Miamis is listed in the National Register of Historic Places as a historic site; (9) in 1959, the Battle of Fallen Timbers was included in the National Survey of Historic Sites and Buildings as 1 of 22 sites representing the ``Advance of the Frontier, 1763-1830''; and (10) in 1960, the Battle of Fallen Timbers was designated as a National Historic Landmark.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to recognize and preserve the 185-acre Fallen Timbers Battlefield site; (2) to formalize the linkage of the Fallen Timbers Battlefield and Monument to Fort Miamis and Fort Meigs; (3) to preserve and interpret United States military history and Native American culture during the period from 1794 through 1813; (4) to provide assistance to the State of Ohio, political subdivisions of the State, and nonprofit organizations in the State, in implementing the Stewardship Plan and developing programs that will preserve and interpret the historical, cultural, natural, recreational, and scenic resources of the historical site; and (5) to authorize the Secretary to provide technical assistance to the State of Ohio, political subdivisions of the State, and nonprofit organizations in the State (including the Ohio Historical Society, the city of Maumee, the Maumee Valley Heritage Corridor, the city of Toledo, and the Metropark District of the Toledo Area) in implementing the Stewardship Plan.
In this Act: (1) Historical site.--The term ``historical site'' means the Fallen Timbers Battlefield and Monument, Fort Meigs, and Fort Miamis National Historical Site established by section 4.
Management entity.--The term ``management entity'' means the Ohio Historical Society, the city of Maumee, the Maumee Valley Heritage Corridor, the city of Toledo, the Metropark District of the Toledo Area, and any other entity designated by the Governor of Ohio.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Stewardship plan.--The term ``Stewardship Plan'' means the management plan developed by the management entity.
Technical assistance.--The term ``technical assistance'' means any guidance, advice, or other aid, other than financial assistance, provided by the Secretary.
FALLEN TIMBERS BATTLEFIELD, FORT MEIGS, AND FORT MIAMIS NATIONAL HISTORICAL SITE.
Establishment.--There is established in the State of Ohio the Fallen Timbers Battlefield, Fort Meigs, and Fort Miamis National Historical Site.
Boundaries.-- (1) In general.--The historical site comprises the Fallen Timbers 185-acre battlefield site and 9-acre battlefield monument, the 66.2-acre Fort Meigs State Memorial site, and the Fort Miamis site.
Map.--The Secretary shall prepare a map of the historical site, which shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director of the National Park Service.
Fallen timbers site.--The Fallen Timbers site generally comprises a 185-acre parcel northeast of United States Reports 24, west of United States Reports 23/I-475, south of the Norfolk and Western Railroad line, and east of Jerome Road.
Consent of local property owners.--No privately owned property or property owned by a municipality shall be included within the boundaries of the historical site unless the owner of the property consents to the inclusion.
In General.--The historical site shall remain a National historical site unless-- (1) the Secretary determines that-- (A) the use, condition, or development of the historical site is incompatible with the purposes of this Act; or (B) the management entity of the historical site has not made reasonable and appropriate progress in preparing or implementing the Stewardship Plan for the historical site; and (2) after making a determination under paragraph (1), the Secretary submits to Congress notification that the historical site designation should be withdrawn.
Public Hearing.--Before the Secretary makes a determination under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall hold a public hearing in the historical site.
Time of Withdrawal of Designation.-- (1) Definition of legislative day.--In this subsection, the term ``legislative day'' means any calendar day on which both Houses of Congress are in session.
Time period.--The withdrawal of the historical site designation shall become final 90 legislative days after the Secretary submits to Congress the notification under subsection (a)(2).
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Duties and Authorities of the Secretary.-- (1) Technical assistance.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may provide technical assistance regarding the Stewardship Plan and its implementation to the State of Ohio, a political subdivision of the State, a nonprofit organization in the State, or any other person on a request by the management entity.
Prohibition of certain requirements.--The Secretary may not, as a condition of the award of technical assistance under this section, require any recipient of the technical assistance to enact or modify land use restrictions.
Determinations regarding assistance.-- (i) Decision by secretary.--The Secretary shall decide if the historical site shall be awarded technical assistance and the amount, if any, of the assistance.
Standard.--A decision under clause (i) shall be based on the degree to which the historical site effectively fulfills the objectives contained in the Stewardship Plan and achieves the purposes of this Act.
Development of Stewardship Plan.--The Secretary may assist in development of the Stewardship Plan.
Provision of information.--In cooperation with other Federal agencies, the Secretary shall provide the public with information regarding the location and character of the historical site.
Duties of Other Federal Agencies.--Any Federal agency conducting an activity directly affecting the historical site shall consider the potential effect of the activity on the Stewardship Plan and shall consult with the management entity of the historical site with respect to the activity to minimize the adverse effects of the activity on the historical site.
NO EFFECT ON LAND USE REGULATION AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No Effect on Authority of Governments.--Nothing in this Act modifies, enlarges, or diminishes the authority of any Federal, State, or local government to regulate the use of land by law (including regulations).
No Zoning or Land Use Powers.--Nothing in this Act grants any power of zoning or land use control to the management entity of the historical site.
No Effect On Local Authority or Private Property.--Nothing in this Act affects or authorizes the management entity to interfere with-- (1) the rights of any person with respect to private property; or (2) any local zoning ordinance or land use plan of the State of Ohio or a political subdivision of the State.
FISHING, TRAPPING, AND HUNTING.
No Diminishment of State Authority.--Establishment of the historical site does not diminish the authority of the State to manage fish and wildlife, including the regulation of fishing, hunting, and trapping in the historical site.
No Conditioning of Approval and Assistance.--Neither the Secretary nor any other Federal agency may make a limitation on fishing, hunting, or trapping-- (1) a condition of the determination of eligibility for assistance under this Act; or (2) a condition for the receipt, in connection with the historical site, of any other form of assistance from the Secretary or the agency, respectively.