Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Motherhood Monitoring and Prevention Research Act of 1999''.
Findings.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) The total maternal mortality has not declined in the United States since 1982.
The four-fold increase in risk of maternal death among black women compared to white women is one of the largest racial disparities among the public health indicators.
United States vital statistics data indicate that between 1987 and 1996 at least 3,086 women died as a consequence of pregnancy or its complications in the United States.
Misclassification on death certificates causes these data to underestimate maternal mortality, and the true number of maternal deaths is estimated to be 1.3 to 3 times higher than that reported in vital statistics records, indicating a need for improved surveillance and public monitoring of this outcome.
Early diagnosis and effective treatment of pregnancy complications are critical to reduce maternal mortality.
Underserved populations many times live in socioeconomic conditions that lack the support systems and financial resources necessary to ensure quality health care for expectant mothers and infant newborns.
By investing in public health surveillance and prevention research to monitor and identify causes of maternal mortality and in maternal health programs to promote maternal health, the risk of maternal mortality and morbidity can be reduced in the United States.
AMENDMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART Q--SAFE MOTHERHOOD PROMOTION ``SEC.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to develop monitoring systems at the local, State, and national level to better understand the burden of maternal complications and mortality and to decrease the disparities among population at risk of death and complications from pregnancy.
Activities.--For the purpose described in subsection (a), the Secretary may carry out the following activities: ``(1) The Secretary, acting through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may establish and implement a national monitoring and surveillance program to identify and promote the investigation of deaths and severe complications that occur during pregnancy.
The Secretary, acting through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may expand the Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System to provide surveillance and collect data in each of the 50 States.
The Secretary, acting through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may expand the Maternal and Child Health Epidemiology Program to provide technical support, financial assistance, or the time-limited assignment of senior epidemiologists to maternal and child health programs in each of the 50 States.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2000).''.
PREVENTION RESEARCH TO ENSURE SAFE MOTHERHOOD.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to provide the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention with the authority to further expand research concerning risk factors, prevention strategies, and the roles of the family, health care providers and the community in safe motherhood.
Research.--The Secretary, acting through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may carry out activities to expand research relating to-- ``(1) encouraging preconception counseling, especially for at risk populations such as diabetics; ``(2) the identification of critical components of prenatal delivery and postpartum care; ``(3) the identification of outreach and support services, such as folic acid education, that are available for pregnant women; ``(4) the identification of women who are at high risk for complications; ``(5) preventing preterm delivery; ``(6) preventing urinary tract infections; ``(7) preventing unnecessary caesarean sections; ``(8) an examination of the higher rates of maternal mortality among African American women; ``(9) an examination of the relationship between domestic violence and maternal complications and mortality; ``(10) preventing smoking, alcohol and illegal drug usage before, during and after pregnancy; ``(11) preventing infections that cause maternal and infant complications; and ``(12) other areas determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be appropriate for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2000).
PREVENTION PROGRAMS TO ENSURE SAFE MOTHERHOOD.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention may carry out activities to promote safe motherhood, including-- ``(1) public education campaigns on healthy pregnancies and the building of partnerships with outside organizations concerned about safe motherhood; ``(2) education programs for physicians, nurses and other health care providers; and ``(3) activities to promote community support services for pregnant women.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be appropriate for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2000).