This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness for the Military Reserve Act of 1999''.
Congress finds the following: (1) There are approximately 1,382,000 members of the seven reserve components of the Armed Forces (the Army Reserve, the Army National Guard of the United States, the Naval Reserve, the Marine Corps Reserve, the Air Force Reserve, the Air National Guard of the United States, and the Coast Guard Reserve).
During fiscal year 1998, reserve component members performed 13,000,000 person-days of military duty, roughly double the level performed during 1994 and the equivalent of 35,000 active component members.
Reserve component members are being called upon to serve in a greater number of overseas peacekeeping, humanitarian, and similar missions, and for longer periods of time, than ever before in peacetime, as shown by the following: (A) 8,338 reserve component personnel served in Haiti during the period from September 1994 through September 1999, constituting up to 6 percent of the Armed Forces personnel participating in Operation Support/Uphold Democracy during that period.
32,022 reserve component personnel served in Bosnia during the period from December 1995 through September 1999, constituting up to 33 percent of the Armed Forces personnel participating in Operation Joint Endeavor/Guard/Forge during that period, and in January 2000, an Army National Guard brigadier general will assume command of Task Force Eagle in Tuzla, Bosnia- Herzegovina.
9,752 reserve component personnel served in Iraq during the period from October 1997 through September 1999, constituting up to 5 percent of the Armed Forces personnel participating in Operation Northern and Southern Watch during that period.
9,576 reserve component personnel served in Kosovo during the period from April 1999 through September 1999, constituting up to 22 percent of the Armed Forces personnel participating in Operation Allied Force during that period.
Recent reports and studies have noted the importance of the reserve components, as shown by the following: (A) The report of the Department of Defense Quadrennial Defense Review conducted in 1997 stated that ``Reserve components have become an ever larger percentage of the Total Force and are essential participants in the full spectrum of operations, from the smallest of smaller-scale contingency operations to major theater war .
Reserve forces are part of all war plans.
No major operation can be successful without them.''.
The National Defense Panel, in its report issued in 1997, called for the ``full integration'' of the reserve components with active duty forces and specifically called on the Army to rely more upon its reserve components to ``reduce pressure on the active Army''.
The Reserve Component Employment 20005 Study, issued on August 8, 1999, concludes that ``while much progress has been made in recent years to ensure equity in the benefit packages that are provided to AC [active component] and RC [reserve component] personnel, the study determined that disparities continue to exist for RC personnel.''.
Secretary of Defense William Cohen has made ``quality of life'' issues for all servicemembers a major priority for the Department of Defense.
The significant recent increase in overseas active-duty assignments for reserve component members warrants enhancement of military benefits for the Nation's citizen soldiers.
Those enhancements should include-- (A) extending eligibility of reserve component members for space available (``Space-A'') travel on military aircraft to travel outside the continental United States (``OCONUS''); (B) providing for reserve component members traveling away from their homes for inactive-duty training to be eligible for billiting in military quarters on the same basis as members on active duty; (C) raising the annual reserve retirement point maximum from 75 to 90; and (D) extending the legal services provided by the Department of Defense to reserve component members.
TRAVEL BY RESERVES ON MILITARY AIRCRAFT OUTSIDE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES.
Space-Required Travel for Travel to Duty Stations OCONUS.--(1) Subsection (a) of section 18505 of title 10, United States Code, as added by section 517(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000 (Public Law 106-65), is amended-- (A) by inserting ``annual training duty or'' before ``inactive-duty training'' both places it appears; and (B) by inserting ``duty or'' before ``training if''.
The heading of such section is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Reserves traveling to annual training duty or inactive- duty training OCONUS: authority for space-required travel''.
Space-Available Travel for Members of Selected Reserve and Gray Area Retirees.--Chapter 1805 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Space-available travel: Selected Reserve and reserve retirees under age 60; dependents ``(a) Eligibility for Space-Available Travel.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations to allow persons described in subsection (b) to receive transportation on aircraft of the Department of Defense on a space-available basis under the same terms and conditions (including terms and conditions applicable to travel outside the United States) as apply to members of the armed forces entitled to retired pay.
Persons Eligible.--Subsection (a) applies to the following persons: ``(1) A person who is a member of the Selected Reserve in good standing (as determined by the Secretary concerned).
A person who is a member or former member of a reserve component under age 60 who, but for age, would be eligible for retired pay under chapter 1223 of this title.
Dependents.--A dependent of a person described in subsection (b) may be provided transportation under this section on the same basis as dependents of members of the armed forces entitled to retired pay.''.
Limitation on Required Identification.--Neither the ``Authentication of Reserve Status for Travel Eligibility'' form (DD Form 1853), nor or any other form, other than the presentation of military identification and duty orders upon request, or other methods of identification required of active duty personnel, shall be required of reserve component personnel using space-available transportation within or outside the continental United States.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by striking the item relating to section 18505 and inserting the following new items: ``18505.
Reserves traveling to annual training duty or inactive-duty training OCONUS: authority for space- required travel.
Space-available travel: Selected Reserve and reserve retirees under age 60; dependents.''.
Effective Date.--Regulations under section 18506 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall be prescribed not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
BILLETING SERVICES FOR RESERVE MEMBERS TRAVELING FOR INACTIVE DUTY TRAINING.
In General.--(1) Chapter 1217 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Attendance at inactive-duty training assemblies: billeting in Department of Defense facilities ``(a) Authority for Billeting on Same Basis as Active Duty Members Traveling Under Orders.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations authorizing a Reserve traveling to inactive duty training at a location more than 50 miles from that Reserve's home to be eligible for billeting in Department of Defense facilities on the same basis as a member of the armed forces on active duty who is traveling under orders away from the member's duty station.
Proof of Reason for Travel.--The Secretary shall include in regulations under subsection (a) means for establishing that a Reserve seeking billeting in Department of Defense facilities under that subsection is traveling for attendance at inactive duty training at a location more than 50 miles from that Reserve's home.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``12604.
Attendance at inactive-duty training assemblies: billeting in Department of Defense facilities.''.
Effective Date.--Section 12604 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall apply with respect to periods of inactive duty training beginning more than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASE IN MAXIMUM NUMBER OF RESERVE RETIREMENT POINTS THAT MAY BE CREDITED IN ANY YEAR.
Section 12733(3) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking ``but not more than'' and all that follows and inserting ``but not more than-- ``(A) 60 days in any one year of service before the year of service that includes September 23, 1996; ``(B) 75 days in the year of service that includes September 23, 1996, and in any subsequent year of service before the year of service that includes the date of the enactment of the Reserve Component Equity Act of 1999; and ``(C) 90 days in the year of service that includes the date of the enactment of the Reserve Component Equity Act of 1999 and in any subsequent year of service.''.
AUTHORITY FOR PROVISION OF LEGAL SERVICES TO RESERVE COMPONENT MEMBERS FOLLOWING RELEASE FROM ACTIVE DUTY.
Legal Services.--Section 1044(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph (4): ``(4) Members of a reserve component not covered by paragraph (1) or (2), but only during a period, following a release from active duty under a call or order to active duty for more than 29 days under a mobilization authority (as determined by the Secretary of Defense), that is not in excess of twice the length of time served on active duty.''.
Dependents.--Paragraph (5) of such section, as amended by subsection (a), is amended by striking ``and (3)'' and inserting ``, and (4)''.
Implementing Regulations.--Regulations to implement the amendments made by subsections (a) and (B) shall be prescribed not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.