This Act may be cited as the ``Defense of the Environment Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress finds that provisions that reduce protection of the environment have been included in legislation without adequate consideration and an opportunity for Members to vote on the provisions and have been included in major rules adopted by Federal agencies without adequate analysis.
Purpose.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) require Members of Congress to vote in House of Representatives and the Senate on provisions included in legislation that reduce protection of the environment; and (2) require the Office of Management and Budget to ensure that an adequate analysis is conducted for provisions included in major rules that reduce protection of the environment.
In General.--This Act shall apply to any provision in a bill, joint resolution, amendment, or conference report before Congress, or in any major rule, that reduces protection of the environment.
Provisions Reducing Protection.--A provision shall be considered to reduce protection of the environment if the provision meets the criteria of one or more of the following paragraphs: (1) Defense of clean air and water.--The provision may allow increased pollution of ambient air, indoor air, surface water, ground water, the oceans, or other terrestrial or aquatic resources.
Defense of national parks and public lands.--The provision may-- (A) cause adverse impacts on the environmental quality of national parks or other public lands, including the effect of decreasing the quantity or quality of outdoor educational or recreational opportunities on such lands; or (B) diminish protection of species that may be endangered.
Defense of children's environmental health.--The provision may increase children's exposure to environmental contaminants and other environmental risks.
Other Provisions.--A provision shall also be considered to reduce protection of the environment if the provision may have the effect of shielding any violators of environmental laws from penalties or limiting judicial review of agency action under the authority of any environmental law.
Baseline for Effects.--The baseline for determining the effects of a provision described in subsection (b) or (c) shall be the circumstances that would exist if the provision were not enacted.
DUTIES OF CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES.
In General.--When a committee of the House of Representatives or Senate or a committee of conference reports a bill or joint resolution of public character that includes any provision that reduces protection of the environment, the report of the committee accompanying the bill or joint resolution (or the statement of managers accompanying the conference report) shall contain each of the following: (1) An identification and description of any provision in the bill or joint resolution or conference report that reduces protection of the environment.
A qualitative and, if practicable, a quantitative assessment of the extent of the reduction in protection of the environment.
A description of the actions, if any, taken by the committee to avoid the reduction in protection of the environment.
Any statement received under section 5.
DUTIES OF THE COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
Statement.--For each bill or joint resolution of a public character reported by any committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate, and for each report by a committee of conference, the Comptroller General of the United States, upon a request of the committee or a majority of the members of the minority party or majority party of the committee, shall, prior to the filing of the report, prepare and submit to the committee a statement assessing the extent to which the provisions of the bill, joint resolution, or conference report reduce protection of the environment.
Assistance to Committees and Studies.--At the request of any committee of the Senate or the House of Representatives, the Comptroller General shall, to the extent practicable, consult with and assist such committee in assessing the extent to which the provisions of a bill, joint resolution, or conference report reduce the protection of the environment.
DUTIES OF OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.
In General.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall ensure that, before proposing or promulgating any major rule, the department or agency of the United States responsible for such rule has conducted an analysis that contains each of the following: (1) An identification and description of any provision in the rule that reduces protection of the environment.
A qualitative and, if practicable, a quantitative assessment of the extent of the reduction in protection of the environment.
A description of the actions, if any, taken by the department or agency to avoid the reduction in protection of the environment.
Notice.--In proposing or promulgating any major rule, the department or agency of the United States responsible for such rule shall include in the Federal Register, together with notice of such proposal or promulgation, a detailed summary of the analysis conducted under subsection (a).
Definition of Major Rule.--For purposes of this section the term ``major rule'' shall have the same meaning as when used in Executive Order No.
LEGISLATION SUBJECT TO POINT OF ORDER.
In General.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, or conference report that is reported by a committee unless the committee has complied with section 4.
Procedure in the House of Representatives.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives to consider a rule or order that waives the application of subsection (a).
DEBATE ON PROVISIONS REDUCING PROTECTION.
Amendment of House Rules.--Rule XVI of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(11) Notwithstanding the adoption of any rule or motion to limit or close debate it shall always be in order, as question of high privilege, to move to strike from any bill, joint resolution, or amendment any provision that reduces protection of the environment (within the meaning of section 3 of the Defense of the Environment Act of 1997).
Such motion shall take precedence over a motion for the previous question on such bill, joint resolution, or amendment and it shall be in order to debate any such motion for 40 minutes, one-half of such time shall be given to debate in favor of, and one-half of such times in opposition to, such motion.''.
Vote in Senate.--Notwithstanding the adoption of any rule or motion to limit or close debate it shall always be in order, as question of high privilege in the Senate, to move to strike from any bill, joint resolution, amendment, or conference report any provision that reduces protection of the environment (within the meaning of section 3 of the Defense of the Environment Act of 1997).
Such motion shall take precedence over a motion for the previous question on such bill, joint resolution, amendment, or conference report, and it shall be in order to debate any such motion for 40 minutes, one-half of such time shall be given to debate in favor of, and one-half of such times in opposition to, such motion.
Conference Reports and Senate Amendments.-- (1) Conference reports.--Clause (4) of Rule XXVIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended as follows: (A) In subsection (a) after ``if such matter has been offered as an amendment in the House'' by inserting ``or containing any provision that reduces protection of the environment (within the meaning of section 3 of the Defense of the Environment Act of 1997)''.
In subsections (a), (b), and (c), by striking out ``nongermane matter'' in each place it appears and inserting ``matter or provision''.
Senate amendments.--Clause (5) of Rule XXVII of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended as follows: (A) In subsection (a) after ``if such matter had been offered as an amendment in the House'' by inserting ``or that reduces protection of the environment (within the meaning of section 3 of the Defense of the Environment Act of 1997)''.
In subsections (a), (b), and (c), by striking out ``nongermane matter'' in each place it appears and inserting ``matter or provision''.
Exercise of Rulemaking Powers.--The provisions of this section and sections 4 and 7 are enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such they shall be considered as part of the rules of such House, respectively, and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change such rules (so far as relating to such House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of each House.
This Act shall take effect on the date of enactment.