AND MEDIATION PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.
In General.--The Secretary of Education is authorized to make grants to local elementary schools to provide assistance to schools most directly affected by conflict and violence.
Model Project.--The Secretary shall develop a written model for conflict resolution and mediation written within 90 days and make such model available to any local elementary school that requests such information.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1999 to carry out the projects under this Act.
Grants made by the Secretary under this Act shall be used to develop programs for conflict resolution and mediation for students, teachers, and other personnel in regular contact with students at school.
In General.--In order to be eligible to receive a grant under this Act for any fiscal year, a local elementary school shall submit an application to the Secretary in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Requirements.--Each application under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) a request for funds for the purposes described in section 2(b); (2) information of the school and communities to be served by the grant, including the nature of the conflict and violence problems within and around the school; (3) statistical information in such form and containing such information that the Secretary may require regarding conflict and violence within the elementary school and surrounding communities; and (4) assurances that Federal funds received under this Act shall be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under this Act.
Comprehensive Plan.--Each application shall include a comprehensive plan that shall contain-- (1) a description of the conflict and violence problems within the elementary school and surrounding community targeted for assistance; (2) a description of the resources available in the community to help implement the plan together with a description of the areas in the plan that cannot be filled with existing resources; and (3) a description of the system the applicant will establish to prevent and reduce ongoing conflict and violence problems.
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS; LIMITATIONS ON GRANTS.
Administrative Cost Limitation.--The Secretary shall use not more than 5 percent of the funds available under this Act for the purposes of administration and technical assistance.
Renewal of Grants.--A grant under this Act may be renewed for not more than 2 additional years after the first fiscal year during which the recipient receives an initial grant under this Act, subject to the availability of funds, if-- (1) the Secretary determines that the funds made available to the recipient during the previous year were used in a manner required under the approved application; and (2) the Secretary determines that an additional grant is necessary to implement the violence prevention program described in the comprehensive plan as required by section 5(c).
Selection of Recipients.--The Secretary shall consider the following factors in awarding grants to local elementary schools: (1) Conflict and violence problem.--The nature and scope of the violence problem in the targeted schools.
Need and ability.--Demonstrated need and evidence of the ability to provide the services described in the plan required under section 5(c).
Population.--The number of students to be served by the plan required under section 5(c).
Geographic Distribution.--The Secretary shall attempt, to the extent practicable, to achieve an equitable geographic distribution of grant awards.
Reports.--Local elementary schools that receive funds under this Act shall submit to the Secretary a detailed report not later than March 1 of each year that describes progress achieved in carrying out the plan required under section 5(c).
Report to Congress.--The Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report by October 1 of each year in which grants are made available under this Act which shall contain a detailed statement regarding grant awards, activities of grant recipients, a compilation of statistical information submitted by applicants under section 5(b)(3), and an evaluation of programs established under this Act.
For the purpose of this Act: (1) The term ``local educational agency'' has the same meaning given such term under section 1471(12) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.