This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Health Regional Centers Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Until recently, women have been excluded from most clinical trials for treatments for cancer, heart disease, and stroke, despite the fact that women react differently from men to many treatments for these and other diseases.
Historically, little research money has been devoted to diseases that primarily afflict women, such as osteoporosis, breast cancer, and multiple sclerosis.
The American medical education system has not trained physicians and other health care professionals for women's health needs.
A major barrier to change is the absence of an appropriate curriculum on women's health.
Another barrier to change has been the significant underrepresentation of women in senior ranks of academic medicine.
As long as this void in women leaders is allowed to continue, women's health issues will not gain the appropriate attention within the medical community.
The establishment of the Office of Research on Women's Health at the National Institutes of Health is vital to addressing the necessary research for diseases and health conditions that affect women.
However, there is currently no means by which to translate this new research into improved physician education and patient care.
The Federal Government should develop regional education and treatment centers on women's health to disseminate the information made available by the National Institutes of Health and other Federal research efforts in women's health.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM FOR MULTIPURPOSE REGIONAL CENTERS ON WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Part F of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 287d et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
MULTIPURPOSE REGIONAL CENTERS ON WOMEN'S HEALTH.
In General.--The Director of NIH, in consultation with the Director of the Office, shall make grants to, or enter into contracts with, public or nonprofit private entities for the development and operation of centers to carry out the activities described in subsection (c) regarding women's health conditions.
Number of Centers; Regional Considerations.--The Director of NIH shall, subject to the extent of amounts made available in appropriations Acts, provide for the development of 5 centers under subsection (a) and shall ensure, to the extent practicable, that such a center is developed in each of the principal geographic regions of the United States.
Activities of Centers.-- ``(1) In general.--With respect to women's health conditions, each center developed under subsection (a) shall-- ``(A) conduct basic research, and clinical and other applied research; ``(B) develop curricula for training health professionals and scientists; ``(C) conduct training programs for health professionals and scientists; ``(D) develop model continuing education programs for health professionals and scientists; ``(E) disseminate information to health professionals, scientists, and the public; ``(F) develop model programs for the delivery of health services to women, including, as appropriate, programs specific to particular age groups; and ``(G) in the case of women who are in the medical profession (including women attending schools of medicine), develop model programs for training the women in the skills necessary for achieving positions of leadership in such schools and in academic health centers.
Stipends regarding training; fees regarding clinical research subjects.--A center may use funds provided under subsection (a) to provide stipends for health professionals and scientists enrolled in programs described in subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1), and to provide fees to individuals serving as subjects in clinical trials conducted under such paragraph.
Coordination of Information.--The Director of NIH shall, as appropriate, provide for the coordination of information among the centers assisted under subsection (a) and among the national research institutes.
Structure of Centers.--Each center assisted under subsection (a) shall use the facilities of a single institution, or be formed from a consortium of cooperating institutions, meeting such requirements as may be prescribed by the Director of NIH.
Duration of Support.--Support of a center under subsection (a) may be for a period not exceeding 5 years.
Such period may be extended for one or more additional periods not exceeding 5 years if the operations of such center have been reviewed by an appropriate technical and scientific peer review group established by the Director of NIH and if such group has recommended to the Director that such period should be extended.
Limitation on Support Per Center.--The Director of NIH may not, from amounts appropriated under subsection (h), obligate more than $15,000,000 in the aggregate for the development and operation of a center under subsection (a).
Aggregate Authorizations of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $60,000,000 in the aggregate for fiscal year 1995 and subsequent fiscal years.