This Act may be cited as the ``Kentucky National Forest Land Transfer Act of 2000''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the United States owns over 40,000 acres of land and mineral rights administered by the Tennessee Valley Authority within the Daniel Boone National Forest in the State of Kentucky; (2) the land and mineral rights were acquired by the Tennessee Valley Authority for purposes of power production using funds derived from ratepayers; (3) the management of the land and mineral rights should be carried out in accordance with the laws governing the management of national forests; and (4) the Tennessee Valley Authority, on behalf of the ratepayers of the Authority, should be reasonably compensated for the land and mineral rights of the Authority transferred within the Daniel Boone National Forest.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to transfer administrative jurisdiction over land of the Tennessee Valley Authority within the Daniel Boone National Forest to the Secretary of Agriculture; and (2) to compensate the Tennessee Valley Authority for the reasonable value of the transfer of jurisdiction.
In this Act: (1) Covered land.-- (A) In general.--The term ``covered land'' means all land and interests in land owned or managed by the Tennessee Valley Authority within the boundaries of the Daniel Boone National Forest in the State of Kentucky that are transferred under this Act, including surface and subsurface estates.
Exclusions.--The term ``covered land'' does not include any land or interest in land owned or managed by the Tennessee Valley Authority for the transmission of water, gas, or power, including power line easements and associated facilities.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
TRANSFER OF ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OVER COVERED LAND.
In General.--All covered land is transferred to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary to be managed in accordance with the laws (including regulations) pertaining to the National Forest System.
Authority of Secretary of Interior Over Mineral Resources.--The transfer of the covered land shall be subject to the authority of the Secretary of the Interior with respect to mineral resources underlying National Forest System land, including laws pertaining to mineral leasing and the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 United States Code 1201 et sequentes).
Surface Mining.--No surface mining shall be permitted with respect to any covered land except as provided under section 522(e)(2) of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 United States Code 1272(e)(2)).
In General.--In consideration for the transfer provided under section 4, the Secretary of the Interior shall provide to the Tennessee Valley Authority monetary credits with a value of $4,000,000 that may be used for the payment of-- (1) not more than 50 percent of the bonus or other payments made by successful bidders in any sales of mineral, oil, gas, or geothermal leases in the contiguous 48 States under-- (A) the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 181 et seq.
); (B) the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et sequentes); or (C) the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1001 et sequentes); (2) not more than 10 percent of the bonus or other payments made by successful bidders in any sales of mineral, oil, gas, or geothermal leases in the State of Alaska under the laws referred to in paragraph (1); (3) not more than 50 percent of any royalty, rental, or advance royalty payment made to the United States to maintain any mineral, oil, gas, or geothermal lease in the contiguous 48 States issued under the laws referred to in paragraph (1); or (4) not more than 10 percent of any royalty, rental, or advance royalty payment made to the United States to maintain any mineral, oil, gas, or geothermal lease in the State of Alaska issued under the laws referred to in paragraph (1).
Value of Credits.--The total amount of credits provided under subsection (a) shall be considered equal to the fair market value of the covered land.
Acceptance of Credits.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior shall accept credits provided under subsection (a) in the same manner as cash for the payments described under subsection (a).
Use of credits.--The use of the credits shall be subject to the laws (including regulations) governing such payments, to the extent the laws are consistent with this section.
Treatment of Credits for Distribution to States.--All credits accepted by the Secretary of the Interior under subsection (c) for the payments described in subsection (a) shall be considered to be money received for the purpose of section 35 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 191) and section 20 of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1019).
Exchange Account.-- (1) Establishment.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall establish an exchange account for the Tennessee Valley Authority for the monetary credits provided under subsection (a).
Administration.--The account shall-- (A) be established with the Minerals Management Service of the Department of the Interior; and (B) have an initial balance of credits equal to $4,000,000.
Use of credits.-- (A) In general.--The credits shall be available to the Tennessee Valley Authority for the purposes described in subsection (a).
Adjustment of balance.--The Secretary of the Interior shall adjust the balance of credits in the account to reflect credits accepted by the Secretary of the Interior under subsection (c).
Transfer or Sale of Credits.-- (1) In general.--The Tennessee Valley Authority may transfer or sell any credits in the account of the Authority to another person or entity.
Use of transferred credits.--Credits transferred or sold under paragraph (1) may be used in accordance with this subsection only by a person or entity that is qualified to bid on, or that holds, a mineral, oil, or gas lease under-- (A) the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 181 et seq.
); (B) the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et sequentes); or (C) the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1001 et sequentes).
Notification.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the transfer or sale of any credits, the Tennessee Valley Authority shall notify the Secretary of the Interior of the transfer or sale.
Validity of transfer or sale.--The transfer or sale of any credit shall not be valid until the Secretary of the Interior has received the notification required under subparagraph (A).
Time limit on use of credits.-- (A) In general.--On the date that is 5 years after the date on which an account is established for the Tennessee Valley Authority under subsection (e), the Secretary of the Interior shall terminate the account.
Unused credits.--Any credits that originated in the terminated account and have not been used as of the termination date, including any credits transferred or sold under this subsection, shall expire.
In General.--Nothing in this Act affects any valid existing rights under any lease, permit, or other authorization by the Tennessee Valley Authority on covered land in effect before the date of enactment of this Act.
Renewal.--Renewal of any existing lease, permit, or other authorization on covered land shall be at the discretion of the Secretary on terms and conditions determined by the Secretary.
COMPLIANCE WITH ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Environmental law.-- (A) In general.--The term ``environmental law'' means all applicable Federal, State, and local laws (including regulations) and requirements related to protection of human health, natural or cultural resources, or the environment.
Inclusions.--The term ``environmental law'' includes-- (i) the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes); (ii) the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes); (iii) the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes); (iv) the Clean Air Act (42 United States Code 7401 et seq.
); (v) the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 United States Code 136 et sequentes); (vi) the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 United States Code 2601 et sequentes); (vii) the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 United States Code 300f et sequentes); (viii) the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes); and (ix) the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).
Hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant, release, and response action.--The terms ``hazardous substance'', ``pollutant or contaminant'', ``release'', and ``response action'' have the meanings given the terms in section 101 and other provisions of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et seq.).
Documentation of Existing Conditions.-- (1) In General.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Tennessee Valley Authority shall provide the Secretary all documentation and information that exists on the environmental condition of the land and waters comprising the covered land.
Additional documentation.--The Tennessee Valley Authority shall provide the Secretary with any additional documentation and information regarding the environmental condition of the covered land as such documentation and information becomes available.
Action Required.-- (1) Assessment.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Tennessee Valley Authority shall provide to the Secretary an assessment indicating what action, if any, is required under any environmental law on covered land.
Memorandum of understanding.--If the assessment concludes that action is required under any environmental law with respect to any portion of the covered land, the Secretary and the Tennessee Valley Authority shall enter into a memorandum of understanding that-- (A) provides for the performance by the Tennessee Valley Authority of the required actions identified in the assessment; and (B) includes a schedule providing for the prompt completion of the required actions to the satisfaction of the Secretary.
Documentation Demonstrating Action.--The Tennessee Valley Authority shall provide the Secretary with documentation demonstrating that all actions required under any environmental law have been taken, including all response actions that are necessary to protect human health and the environment with respect to any hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant, hazardous waste, hazardous material, or petroleum product or derivative of a petroleum product on covered land.
Continuation of Responsibilities and Liabilities.-- (1) In general.--The transfer of covered land under this Act, and the requirements of this section, shall not affect the responsibilities and liabilities of the Tennessee Valley Authority under any environmental law.
Access.--The Tennessee Valley Authority shall have access to the property that may be reasonably required to carry out a responsibility or satisfy a liability referred to in paragraph (1).
Additional terms and conditions.--The Secretary may require such additional terms and conditions in connection with the transfer of covered land under this Act as the Secretary considers to be appropriate to protect the interest of the United States concerning the continuation of any responsibilities and liabilities under any environmental law.
No effect on responsibilities or liabilities.--Nothing in this Act affects, directly or indirectly, the responsibilities or liabilities under any environmental law of any person with respect to the Secretary.
Other Federal Agencies.--Subject to the other provisions of this section, a Federal agency that carried or carries out operations on covered land resulting in the release or threatened release of a hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant, hazardous waste, hazardous material, or petroleum product or derivative of a petroleum product for which that agency would be liable under any environmental law shall pay-- (1) the costs of related response actions; and (2) the costs of related actions to remediate petroleum products or their derivatives.