This Act may be cited as the ``Campaign Finance Reform and Disclosure Act of 1996''.
Section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(20) Election cycle.--The term `election cycle' means-- ``(A) in the case of a candidate or the authorized committees of a candidate, the period beginning on the day after the date of the most recent general election for the specific office or seat that the candidate seeks and ending on the date of the next general election for that office or seat; and ``(B) in the case of all other persons, the period beginning on the first day following the date of the last general election and ending on the date of the next general election.
Senate candidate.--The term `Senate candidate' means a candidate who seeks nomination for election, or election, to the Senate.
Campaign expense.--The term `campaign expense' means an expense that is attributable solely to a bona fide campaign purpose.
Inherently personal purpose.--The term `inherently personal purpose' means a purpose that, by its nature, confers a personal benefit on a candidate, including a home mortgage rent or utility payment, clothing purchase, noncampaign automobile expense, country club membership, vacation, or trip of a noncampaign nature, household food item, tuition payment, admission to a sporting event, concert, theater, or other form of entertainment not associated with a campaign, dues, fees, or contribution to a health club or recreational facility, and any other inherently personal living expense as determined under a regulation issued under section 326.''.
LIMITATION ON ACCEPTANCE OF OUT-OF-STATE CONTRIBUTIONS BY SENATE CANDIDATES.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
LIMITATION ON ACCEPTANCE OF OUT-OF-STATE CONTRIBUTIONS BY SENATE CANDIDATES.
``A Senate candidate and the candidate's authorized committees shall not accept, during an election cycle, contributions from persons other than individuals residing in the candidate's State in an amount exceeding 40 percent of the total amount of contributions accepted during the election cycle.''.
LIMITATION ON REIMBURSEMENT FROM CAMPAIGNS FOR CONTRIBUTIONS BY SENATE CANDIDATES AND IMMEDIATE FAMILIES OF SENATE CANDIDATES.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) (as amended by section 3) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
LIMITATION ON REIMBURSEMENT FROM CAMPAIGNS FOR CONTRIBUTIONS BY SENATE CANDIDATES AND IMMEDIATE FAMILIES OF SENATE CANDIDATES.
In General.--The aggregate amount of contributions to an eligible Senate candidate or the candidate's authorized committees from the sources described in subsection (b) that may be reimbursed during an election cycle to the candidate or the candidate's immediate family shall not exceed $250,000.
Sources.--A source is described in this subsection if the source is-- ``(1) personal funds of the candidate and members of the candidate's immediate family; or ``(2) personal loans incurred by the candidate and members of the candidate's immediate family.
Indexing.--The $250,000 amount under subsection (a) shall be increased as of the beginning of each calendar year based on the increase in the price index determined under section 315(c), except that the base period shall be calendar year 1996.''.
RESTRICTION ON USE OF CAMPAIGN FUNDS BY SENATE CANDIDATES FOR PERSONAL PURPOSES.
Restriction.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) (as amended by section 4) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
RESTRICTION ON USE OF CAMPAIGN FUNDS BY SENATE CANDIDATES FOR PERSONAL PURPOSES.
Restriction.--A Senate candidate who accepts a contribution-- ``(1) shall use the contribution only to pay a legitimate and verifiable campaign expense; and ``(2) shall not use the contributions to pay any inherently personal purpose.
Regulation.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Commission shall issue a regulation implementing subsection (a).''.
Application of Amendment.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to all contributions possessed by a candidate on the date of enactment of this Act and thereafter.
LIMIT ON CONGRESSIONAL USE OF THE FRANKING PRIVILEGE.
Section 3210(a)(6)(A) of title 39, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(A) A Member of Congress shall not mail any mass mailing as franked mail during a year in which there will be an election for the seat held by the Member during the period between January 1 of that year and the date of the general election for that Office, unless the Member has made a public announcement that the Member will not be a candidate for election to any Federal office in that year (including the office held by the Member).''.
DECREASE IN PAC CONTRIBUTION LIMIT; INDEXING OF LIMITS.
Section 315(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(A) by striking ``$5,000'' and inserting ``$1,000''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(9) Indexing.--The $1,000 amounts under paragraphs (1)(A) and (2)(A) shall be increased as of the beginning of each calendar year based on the increase in the price index determined under subsection (c), except that the base period shall be calendar year 1996.''.
RESTRICTION ON ACCEPTANCE OF CONTRIBUTIONS BY POLITICAL PARTY COMMITTEES.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) (as amended by section 5) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
RESTRICTION ON ACCEPTANCE OF CONTRIBUTIONS BY POLITICAL PARTY COMMITTEES.
``It shall be unlawful for a committee of a political party to accept a contribution on the condition that the contribution be used to make a contribution to or an expenditure on behalf of a particular candidate.''.
UNLIMITED COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN A POLITICAL PARTY AND MEMBERS OF THE POLITICAL PARTY.
Section 315(d) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4)(A) For purposes of applying the limitations under paragraphs (2) and (3), in determining the amount of expenditures made by a national committee of a political party or a State committee of a political party (including any subordinate committee of a State committee), there shall be excluded any amount spent by the committee for communications to the extent the communications are made to members of the political party.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), an individual shall be considered to be a `member' of a political party if-- ``(i) the individual is registered to vote as a member of the party; ``(ii) there is a public record that the individual voted in the primary election of the political party in the most recent primary election; or ``(iii) the individual has indicated in writing that the individual is a member of the political party.''.
PROMOTION OF STATE AND LOCAL PARTY ACTIVITY.
Contributions.--Section 301(8)(B) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(8)(B)) is amended-- (1) in clause (xiii) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in clause (xiv) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(xv) the payment by a State or local committee of a political party for-- ``(I) the listing of the slate of the political party's candidates, including the communication of the slate to the public; ``(II) the mailing of materials for or on behalf of specific candidates by volunteers (including labeling envelopes or affixing postage or other indicia to particular pieces of mail), other than the mailing of materials to a commercial list; ``(III) conducting a telephone bank for or on behalf of specific candidates staffed by volunteers; or ``(IV) the distribution of collateral materials (such as pins, bumper stickers, handbills, brochures, posters, party tabloids, and yard signs) for or on behalf of specific candidates (whether by volunteers or otherwise).''.
Expenditures.--Section 301(9)(B) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(9)(B)) is amended-- (1) in clause (ix) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in clause (x) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(xi) the payment by a State or local committee of a political party for-- ``(I) the listing of the slate of the political party's candidates, including the communication of the slate to the public; ``(II) the mailing of materials for or on behalf of specific candidates by volunteers (including labeling envelopes or affixing postage or other indicia to particular pieces of mail), other than the mailing of materials to a commercial list; ``(III) conducting a telephone bank for or on behalf of specific candidates staffed by volunteers; or ``(IV) the distribution of collateral materials (such as pins, bumper stickers, handbills, brochures, posters, party tabloids, and yard signs) for or on behalf of specific candidates (whether by volunteers or otherwise).''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 301(8)(B)(x) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(8)(B)(x)) is amended by striking ``in connection with volunteer activities on behalf of nominees of such party'' and inserting ``in connection with State or local activities, other than any payment described in clause (xv)''.
Section 301(9)(B)(viii) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(9)(B)(viii)) is amended by striking ``in connection with volunteer activities on behalf of nominees of such party'' and inserting ``in connection with State or local activities, other than any payment described in clause (xi)''.
RELIEF OF SMALL PACS FROM REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
Section 304(a)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(a)(1)) is amended by inserting after ``political committee'' the following: ``(except a multicandidate political committee or separate segregated fund that has not, during an election cycle, as of any date within the election cycle, accepted contributions or made expenditures in an aggregate amount exceeding $25,000)''.
RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES RELATING TO THE PAYMENT AND USE OF LABOR ORGANIZATION DUES.
Payment of Dues.-- (1) Rights of employees.--Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 157) is amended by striking ``membership'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``the payment to a labor organization of dues or fees related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment necessary to performing the duties of exclusive representation as a condition of employment as authorized in section 8(a)(3).''.
Unfair labor practices.--Section 8(a)(3) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 158(a)(3)) is amended by striking ``membership therein'' and inserting ``the payment to such labor organization of dues or fees related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment necessary to performing the duties of exclusive representation''.
Requirements for Use of Dues for Certain Purposes.-- (1) Written agreement.--Section 8 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 158) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h)(1) An employee subject to an agreement between an employer and a labor organization requiring the payment of dues or fees to such organization as authorized in subsection (a)(3) may not be required to pay to such organization, nor may such organization accept payment of, any dues or fees not related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment necessary to performing the duties of exclusive representation unless the employee has agreed to pay such dues or fees in a signed written agreement that shall be renewed between the first day of September and the first day of October of each year.
Such signed written agreement shall include a ratio, certified by an independent auditor, of the dues or fees related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment necessary to performing the duties of exclusive representation and the dues or fees related to other purposes.''.
Written assignment.--Section 302(c)(4) of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (29 United States Code 186) is amended by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``: Provided further, That no amount may be deducted for dues unrelated to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment necessary to performing the duties of exclusive representation unless a written assignment authorizes such a deduction''.
Notice to Employees Relating to the Payment and Use of Dues.-- Section 8 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 158) (as amended by subsection (b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i)(1) An employer shall post a notice that informs the employees of their rights under section 7 of this Act and clarifies to such employees that an agreement requiring the payment of dues or fees to a labor organization as a condition of employment as authorized in subsection (a)(3) may only require that employees pay to such organization any dues or fees related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment necessary to performing the duties of exclusive representation.
A copy of such notice shall be provided to each employee not later than 10 days after the first day of employment.
The notice described in paragraph (1) shall be of such size and in such form as the Board shall prescribe and shall be posted in conspicuous places in and about the plants and offices of such employer, including all places where notices to employees are customarily posted.''.
Employee Participation in the Affairs of a Labor Organization.--Section 8(b)(1) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 158(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``therein;'' and inserting the following: ``therein, except that, an employee who is subject to an agreement between an employer and a labor organization requiring as a condition of employment the payment of dues or fees to such organization as authorized in subsection (a)(3) and who pays such dues or fees shall have the same right to participate in the affairs of the organization related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment as any member of the organization;''.
Disclosure to Employees.-- (1) Expenses reporting.--Section 201(b) of the Labor- Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (29 United States Code 431(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Every labor organization shall be required to attribute and report expenses by function classification in such detail as necessary to allow the members of such organization or the employees required to pay any dues or fees to such organization to determine whether such expenses were related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment necessary to performing the duties of exclusive representation or were related to other purposes.''.
Report information.--Section 201(c) of the Labor- Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (29 United States Code 431(c)) is amended-- (A) by inserting ``and employees required to pay any dues or fees to such organization'' after ``members''; (B) by striking ``suit of any member of such organization'' and inserting ``suit of any member of such organization or employee required to pay any dues or fees to such organization''; and (C) by striking ``such member'' and inserting ``such member or employee''.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Labor shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out the amendments made by this subsection not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act, except that the requirements contained in the amendments made by subsections (b) and (c) shall take effect 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Civil Action.--The Federal Election Commission, a political committee under title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, or any individual eligible to vote in any election for the office of President of the United States may bring a civil action in United States district court to determine the constitutionality of any provision of this Act or any amendment made by this Act.
Hearing by 3-Judge Court.--Immediately upon commencement of a civil action under subsection (a), a district court of 3 judges shall be convened to decide the action pursuant to section 2284 of title 28, United States Code.
Direct Appeal to Supreme Court.--An appeal of an interlocutory order or final judgment, decree, or order in a civil action under subsection (a) may be taken directly to the Supreme Court not later than 20 days after the entry of the judgment, decree, or order.
Expedited Review by Supreme Court.--The Supreme Court shall accept jurisdiction over, advance on the docket, and expedite to the greatest extent possible an appeal under subsection (c).