This Act may be cited as the ``Slamming Protection Act''.
ADDITIONAL PROTECTIONS AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED CHANGES OF PROVIDERS OF TELEPHONE SERVICE.
Section 258 of the Communications Act of 1984 (47 United States Code 258) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Criminal Penalties.-- ``(1) Persons.--Any person who executes a change in a provider of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service in willful violation of the procedures prescribed under subsection (a)-- ``(A) shall be fined not more than $1,000, imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for the first offense; and ``(B) shall be fined not more than $10,000, imprisoned not more than 9 months, or both, for any subsequent offense.
Telecommunications carriers.--Any telecommunications carrier who executes a change in a provider of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service in willful violation of the procedures prescribed under subsection (a) shall be fined not more than $50,000 for the first offense and shall be fined not more than $100,000 for any subsequent offense.
Private Right of Action.-- ``(1) In general.--A subscriber whose provider of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service is changed in violation of the procedures prescribed under subsection (a) may, within one year after discovery of the change, bring in an appropriate court an action-- ``(A) for an order to revoke the change; ``(B) for an award of damages in an amount equal to the greater of-- ``(i) the actual monetary loss resulting from the change; or ``(ii) an amount not to exceed $2,000; or ``(C) for relief under both subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Increased award.--If the court finds that the defendant executed the change in willful and knowing violation of the procedures prescribed under subsection (a), the court may, in its discretion, increase the amount of the award under paragraph (1) to an amount equal to not more than three times the maximum amount awardable under subparagraph (B) of that paragraph.
Actions by States.-- ``(1) Authority of states.--Whenever the attorney general of a State, or an official or agency designated by a State, has reason to believe that any person has engaged or is engaging in a pattern or practice of unauthorized changes in providers of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service of residents in such State in violation of the procedures prescribed under subsection (a), the State may bring a civil action on behalf of its residents to enjoin such practices, to recover damages equal to the actual monetary loss suffered by such residents, or both.
If the court finds the defendant executed such changes in willful and knowing violation of such procedures, the court may, in its discretion, increase the amount of the award to an amount equal to not more than three times the amount awardable under the preceding sentence.
Exclusive jurisdiction of federal courts.--The district courts of the United States shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all civil actions brought under this subsection.
Upon proper application, such courts shall also have jurisdiction to award declaratory relief, or orders affording like relief, commanding the defendant to comply with the procedures prescribed under subsection (a).
Upon a proper showing, a permanent or temporary injunction or restraining order shall be granted without bond.
Notice to commission.--A State shall serve prior written notice of any civil action under this subsection upon the Commission with a copy of its complaint, except in any case where prior notice is not feasible, in which case the State shall serve such notice immediately after instituting such action.
Rights of commission.--Upon receiving notice of an action under this subsection, the Commission shall have the right-- ``(A) to intervene in the action; ``(B) upon so intervening, to be heard on all such matters arising therein; and ``(C) to file petitions for appeal.
Venue; service of process.--Any civil action under this subsection may be brought in the district wherein the defendant is found or is an inhabitant or transacts business or wherein the violation occurred or is occurring, and process in such cases may be served in any district in which the defendant is an inhabitant or where the defendant may be found.
Effect on state court proceedings.--Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit an authorized State official from proceeding in State court on the basis of an alleged violation of any general civil or criminal statute of such State.
Class Actions.--For any class action brought with respect to the violation of the procedures prescribed under subsection (a), the total damages awarded may not exceed an amount equal to three times the total actual damages suffered by the members of the class, irrespective of the minimum damages provided for in subsection (d).
No Preemption of State Law.--Nothing in this section shall preempt the availability of relief under State law for unauthorized changes of providers of intrastate telephone exchange service or telephone toll service.