SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Geospatial Preparedness Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Homeland security and national geospatial preparedness.
Security policy and guidelines for geospatial data.
Office of Geospatial Management and Geospatial Information Officer.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Geospatial technologies and geospatial data can provide all levels of government and the private sector with proven capabilities to carry out detection, planning, preparedness, mitigation, response, and recovery activities for homeland security purposes that save lives and protect property.
The completion and maintenance of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure with integrated applications and systems will provide the level of geospatial preparedness required to protect critical infrastructure, strategic assets, the economic base, and persons.
Geospatial technology and information have proven to be essential to enabling more informed decisionmaking, greater efficiency, increased accountability, and better management in all levels of government and the private sector.
Building spatial data once and then sharing it many times between all levels of government and the private sector increases the ability of information technology applications and systems to provide better services to the public in a cost- effective manner.
The use of international, national, and industry consensus standards to develop and deploy interoperable geospatial data and geospatial technologies assists the commercial geospatial industry to provide products that make it easier, faster, and less expensive for all levels of government and the private sector to share, integrate, and use geospatial data for decisionmaking.
Establishing a new Federal Government program to provide financial incentives to State, regional, local, and tribal governments will greatly accelerate adoption of international, national, and industry consensus standards.
Geospatial technologies and geospatial data can be essential tools for virtually all functions of government and business.
Geospatial preparedness in the United States is not adequate due to a variety of factors including inadequate geospatial data compatibility, insufficient geospatial data sharing, technology interoperability barriers, institutional and organizational resistance to new ways of doing business, lack of financial incentives to improved use of geospatial technologies, and inefficient geospatial data collection and sharing.
Interoperable geospatial technology and geospatial data capabilities are emerging and incentives are needed for full adoption and for collaborative use to meet community and national needs.
Geospatial technologies and geospatial data are maintained by all levels of government and the private sector.
A comprehensive nationwide program is necessary to build and maintain a standards-based geospatial spatial data infrastructure and geographic information systems required to respond to increasing demands.
State, regional, local, and tribal governments, the private sector, and other non-government organizations are investing in geospatial technologies and geospatial data.
Incentives are necessary to leverage these investments for more effective use to meet community and national needs.
Establishing the Office of Geospatial Management, administered by a Geospatial Information Officer, within the Department of Homeland Security will ensure the most effective and efficient management of programs and activities involving geospatial technologies and geospatial data.
In this Act: (1) Geographic information systems software and hardware.-- The term ``geographic information systems software and hardware'' means computer software and hardware required to identify, depict, visualize, analyze, maintain, or otherwise utilize geospatial data.
Geospatial applications.--The term ``geospatial applications'' means computer software and systems that extend the capabilities of geographic information systems software and hardware to identify, depict, visualize, analyze, maintain, or otherwise utilize geospatial data.
Geospatial data.--The term ``geospatial data'' means information that identifies, depicts, or describes the geographic locations, boundaries, or characteristics of inhabitants and natural or constructed features on the Earth, including such information derived from, among other sources, socio-demographic analysis, economic analysis, land information records and land use information processing, statistical analysis, survey and observational methodologies, environmental analysis, critical infrastructure protection, satellites, remote sensing, airborne imagery collection, mapping, engineering, construction, global positioning systems, and surveying technologies and activities.
Geospatial preparedness.--The term ``geospatial preparedness'' means the level of overall capability and capacity necessary to enable all levels of government and the private sector to utilize geospatial data, geographic information systems software and hardware, and geospatial applications to perform essential emergency management functions, including detection, planning, mitigation, response, and recovery, in order to minimize loss of life and property from weapons of mass destruction, terrorist threats, major man- made accidents, and natural disasters.
National spatial data infrastructure.--The term ``National Spatial Data Infrastructure'' means the combination of the geographic information systems software and hardware, geospatial applications, geospatial data, standards, policies, programs, and human resources necessary to acquire, process, analyze, store, maintain, distribute, and otherwise utilize geospatial data as a strategic asset for the Nation.
Office of geospatial management.--The term ``Office of Geospatial Management'' means the administrative organization responsible for designing, managing, coordinating, and implementing comprehensive geospatial initiatives.
Standards.--The term ``standards'' means documented international, national, or industry consensus agreements containing technical specifications or other precise criteria to be used consistently as rules, guidelines, or definitions to ensure that materials, products, processes, or services are proper for their purposes.
HOMELAND SECURITY AND NATIONAL GEOSPATIAL PREPAREDNESS.
The Secretary shall direct the Chief Information Officer to work, consistent with Office of Management and Budget Circular A-16, Executive Order 12906, and section 216 of the Electronic Government Act, with the Department of the Interior, the Department of Justice, the Federal Geographic Data Committee, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, other appropriate Federal agencies, and members of the Steering Committee and Coordination Group of the Federal Geographic Data Committee, to use and enhance the National Spatial Data Infrastructure for homeland security purposes, by-- (1) developing a comprehensive national enterprise strategy, incorporating industry and government standards, for the coordinated acquisition, building, storage, maintenance, and use of Federal Government, non-Federal Government, and private sector geospatial data with, when feasible and appropriate, integrated and interoperable commercially-provided geographic information systems software and hardware, geospatial applications, geospatial data, and services in order to achieve an adequate level of national geospatial preparedness; (2) providing grants, technical assistance, and cooperative agreements to State, regional, local, and tribal government as well as non-profit organizations in order to increase geospatial preparedness by actions such as analyzing requirements, performing strategic planning, sharing geospatial data, developing agreements for sharing geospatial data, integrating geospatial data, developing standards, integrating systems, and acquiring, when feasible and appropriate, interoperable commercially-provided geographic information systems software and hardware, geospatial applications, geospatial data, and Global Positioning System equipment and procuring services in order to achieve an adequate level of national geospatial preparedness; (3) coordinating with, and assisting, the Federal Geographic Data Committee, the Office of Management and Budget, and the commercial geospatial industry to establish national standards for the development, acquisition, storage, maintenance, distribution, utilization, and application of geospatial data; (4) coordinating with, and assisting, the commercial geospatial industry to establish national standards for the development, distribution, and utilization of geographic information systems software and hardware and geospatial applications; and (5) utilizing, when feasible and appropriate, commercially- provided interoperable geographic information systems software and hardware, geospatial applications, geospatial data, and services to carry out the responsibilities, activities, and programs authorized by this section.
SECURITY POLICY AND GUIDELINES FOR GEOSPATIAL DATA.
The Chief Information Officer of the Department of Homeland Security shall establish, within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and consistent with overall homeland security goals of the Department of Homeland Security, security policy and guidelines for the acquisition, processing, and dissemination of geospatial data depicting critical infrastructure and strategic assets located in the United States.
OFFICE OF GEOSPATIAL MANAGEMENT AND GEOSPATIAL INFORMATION OFFICER.
In General.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall establish the Office of Geospatial Management within the Office of the Chief Information Officer.
The Office of Geospatial Management shall be administered by the Geospatial Information Officer under the direction of the Chief Information Officer.
Geospatial Information Officer.--The Geospatial Information Officer-- (1) shall be appointed by the Secretary from among individuals who are skilled in geographic information technology and systems management; and (2) shall be responsible for-- (A) designing, managing, coordinating, and implementing comprehensive geospatial initiatives; and (B) working with the Chief Information Officer to carry out section 4 and section 5.
For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
Such authorization is in addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for such purpose.