This Act may be cited as the ``National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act Amendments of 2000''.
Section 2(b) of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3701(b)) is amended by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following: ``(1) to encourage, accept, and administer private gifts of property for the benefit of, or in connection with, the activities and services of the Department of the Interior and the Department of Commerce to further the conservation and management of fish, wildlife, plants, and other natural resources;''.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE FOUNDATION.
Establishment and Membership.--Section 3 of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3702) is amended by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(a) Establishment and Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--The Foundation shall have a governing Board of Directors (referred to in this Act as the `Board'), which shall consist of 25 Directors appointed in accordance with subsection (b), each of whom shall be a United States citizen.
Representation of diverse points of view.--To the maximum extent practicable, the membership of the Board shall represent diverse points of view relating to conservation and management of fish, wildlife, plants, and other natural resources.
Not federal employees.--Appointment as a Director of the Foundation shall not constitute employment by, or the holding of an office of, the United States for the purpose of any Federal law.''.
Appointment and Terms.--Section 3 of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3702) is amended by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: ``(b) Appointment and Terms.-- ``(1) Agency heads.--The Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere shall be Directors of the Foundation.
Appointments by the secretary of the interior.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), after consulting with the Secretary of Commerce and considering the recommendations submitted by the Board, the Secretary of the Interior shall appoint 23 Directors who meet the criteria established by subsection (a), of whom-- ``(i) at least 6 shall be educated or experienced in fish, wildlife, or other natural resource conservation; ``(ii) at least 4 shall be educated or experienced in the principles of fish, wildlife, or other natural resource management; and ``(iii) at least 4 shall be educated or experienced in ocean and coastal resource conservation.
Transition provision.-- ``(i) Continuation of terms.--The 15 Directors serving on the Board as of the date of enactment of this paragraph shall continue to serve until the expiration of their terms.
New directors.--The Secretary of the Interior shall appoint 8 new Directors.
To the maximum extent practicable, those appointments shall be made not later than 45 calendar days after the date of enactment of this paragraph.
Terms.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), each Director (other than a Director described in paragraph (1)) shall be appointed for a term of 6 years.
Initial appointments to new member positions.--Of the Directors appointed by the Secretary of the Interior under paragraph (2)(B)(ii), the Secretary shall appoint-- ``(i) 2 Directors for a term of 2 years; ``(ii) 3 Directors for a term of 4 years; and ``(iii) 3 Directors for a term of 6 years.
Vacancies.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior shall fill a vacancy on the Board.
To the maximum extent practicable, a vacancy shall be filled not later than 45 calendar days after the occurrence of the vacancy.
Term of appointments to fill unexpired terms.--An individual appointed to fill a vacancy that occurs before the expiration of the term of a Director shall be appointed for the remainder of the term.
Reappointment.--An individual (other than an individual described in paragraph (1)) shall not serve more than 2 consecutive terms as a Director, excluding any term of less than 6 years.
Request for removal.--The Executive Committee of the Board may submit to the Secretary a letter describing the nonperformance of a Director and requesting the removal of the Director from the Board.
Consultation before removal.--Before removing any Director from the Board, the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of Commerce.''.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Section 4(c)(5) of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3703(c)(5)) is amended by striking ``Directors of the Board'' and inserting ``Directors of the Foundation''.
Section 6 of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3705) is amended-- (A) by striking ``Secretary'' and inserting ``Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce''; and (B) by inserting ``or the Department of Commerce'' after ``Department of the Interior''.
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE FOUNDATION.
Principal Office of the Foundation.--Section 4(a)(3) of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3703(a)(3)) is amended by inserting after ``the District of Columbia'' the following: ``or in a county in the State of Maryland or Virginia that borders on the District of Columbia''.
Investment and Deposit of Federal Funds.--Section 4(c) of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3703(c)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (7) as paragraphs (7) through (11), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) to invest any funds provided to the Foundation by the Federal Government in obligations of the United States or in obligations or securities that are guaranteed or insured by the United States; ``(4) to deposit any funds provided to the Foundation by the Federal Government into accounts that are insured by an agency or instrumentality of the United States; ``(5) to make use of any interest or investment income that accrues as a consequence of actions taken under paragraph (3) or (4) to carry out the purposes of the Foundation; ``(6) to use Federal funds to make payments under cooperative agreements entered into with willing private landowners to provide substantial long-term benefits for the restoration or enhancement of fish, wildlife, plants, and other natural resources on private land;''.
Agency Approval of Acquisitions of Property.--Section 4(e)(1) of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3703(e)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the following: ``(B) the Foundation notifies the Federal agency that administers the program under which the funds were provided of the proposed acquisition, and the agency does not object in writing to the proposed acquisition within 60 calendar days after the date of the notification.''.
Repeal.--Section 304 of Public Law 102-440 (16 United States Code 3703 note) is repealed.
Agency Approval of Conveyances and Grants.--Section 4(e)(3)(B) of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3703(e)(3)(B)) is amended by striking clause (ii) and inserting the following: ``(ii) the Foundation notifies the Federal agency that administers the Federal program under which the funds were provided of the proposed conveyance or provision of Federal funds, and the agency does not object in writing to the proposed conveyance or provision of Federal funds within 60 calendar days after the date of the notification.''.
Reconveyance of Real Property.--Section 4(e) of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3703(e)) is amended by striking paragraph (5) and inserting the following: ``(5) Reconveyance of real property.--The Foundation shall convey at not less than fair market value any real property acquired by the Foundation in whole or in part with Federal funds if the Foundation notifies the Federal agency that administers the Federal program under which the funds were provided, and the agency does not disagree within 60 calendar days after the date of the notification, that-- ``(A) the property is no longer valuable for the purpose of conservation or management of fish, wildlife, plants, and other natural resources; and ``(B) the purposes of the Foundation would be better served by use of the proceeds of the conveyance for other authorized activities of the Foundation.''.
Expenditures for Printing Services or Capital Equipment.-- Section 4 of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3703) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Expenditures for Printing Services or Capital Equipment.--The Foundation shall not make any expenditure of Federal funds in connection with any 1 transaction for printing services or capital equipment that is greater than $10,000 unless the expenditure is approved by the Federal agency that administers the Federal program under which the funds were provided.''.
Section 10 of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3709) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004-- ``(A) $30,000,000 to the Department of the Interior; and ``(B) $10,000,000 to the Department of Commerce.
Requirement of advance payment.--The amount made available for a fiscal year under paragraph (1) shall be provided to the Foundation in an advance payment of the entire amount on October 1, or as soon as practicable thereafter, of the fiscal year.
Use of appropriated funds.--Subject to paragraph (4), amounts made available under paragraph (1) shall be provided to the Foundation for use for matching, on a 1-to-1 basis, contributions (whether in currency, services, or property) made to the Foundation by private persons and State and local government agencies.
Prohibition on use for administrative expenses.--No Federal funds made available under paragraph (1) shall be used by the Foundation for administrative expenses of the Foundation, including for salaries, travel and transportation expenses, and other overhead expenses.
Additional Authorization.-- ``(1) In general.--In addition to the amounts authorized to be appropriated under subsection (a), the Foundation may accept Federal funds from a Federal agency under any other Federal law for use by the Foundation to further the conservation and management of fish, wildlife, plants, and other natural resources in accordance with the requirements of this Act.
Use of funds accepted from federal agencies.--Federal funds provided to the Foundation under paragraph (1) shall be used by the Foundation for matching, in whole or in part, contributions (whether in currency, services, or property) made to the Foundation by private persons and State and local government agencies.
Prohibition on Use of Grant Amounts for Litigation and Lobbying Expenses.--Amounts provided as a grant by the Foundation shall not be used for-- ``(1) any expense related to litigation; or ``(2) any activity the purpose of which is to influence legislation pending before Congress.''.
The National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3701 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
``Nothing in this Act authorizes the Foundation to perform any function the authority for which is provided to the National Park Foundation by Public Law 90-209 (16 United States Code 19e et sequentes).''.
Passed the Senate March 9, 2000.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.