SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Food Desert Oasis Act of 2009''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--FOOD DESERT OASIS PILOT PROGRAM Sec.
Food Desert Zones; qualified food desert businesses.
Increase in rehabilitation tax credit for qualified food desert businesses.
Food desert employment tax credit.
Food desert tax exempt facility bonds.
TITLE II--HUNGER-FREE COMMUNITIES GRANTS EXTENSION AND ENHANCEMENT Sec.
Expansion of hunger-free communities program.
TITLE III--REPORTS TO CONGRESS ON PILOT PROGRAM Sec.
Reports to Congress on pilot program.
TITLE I--FOOD DESERT OASIS PILOT PROGRAM SEC.
FOOD DESERT ZONES; QUALIFIED FOOD DESERT BUSINESSES.
Food Desert Zones.--Each of the following shall be treated as a separate Food Desert Zone: (1) Chicago, Illinois.
Baltimore, Maryland (12) Atlanta, Georgia.
Qualified Food Desert Business.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``qualified food desert business'' means any taxpayer for any taxable year if such taxpayer-- (1) is in the trade or business of selling products at wholesale or retail, and (2) at least 25 percent of such taxpayer's gross receipts from such trade or business are derived from the sale of fresh fruits and vegetables.
For purposes of this subsection, all persons treated as a single employer under subsection (b), (c), (m), or (o) of section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as 1 taxpayer.
INCREASE IN REHABILITATION TAX CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED FOOD DESERT BUSINESSES.
In General.--In the case of qualified rehabilitation expenditures (as defined in section 47(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) paid or incurred by a qualified food desert business during the period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and ending on December 31, 2012, with respect to any qualified building, subsection (a) of section 47 of such Code (relating to rehabilitation credit) shall be applied-- (1) by substituting ``13 percent'' for ``10 percent'' in paragraph (1) thereof, and (2) by substituting ``26 percent'' for ``20 percent'' in paragraph (2) thereof.
Qualified Building.--For purposes of this section, the term ``qualified building'' means any qualified rehabilitated building or certified historic structure (as defined in section 47(c) of such Code) which-- (1) is located in a Food Desert Zone, and (2) is used by the qualified food desert business in carrying on the trade or business referred to in section 101(b).
FOOD DESERT EMPLOYMENT TAX CREDIT.
In General.--Subject to the modifications in subsection (b), a Food Desert Zone shall be treated as an empowerment zone for purposes of section 1396 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to wages paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act and before December 31, 2015.
Modifications.--In applying section 1396 of such Code to Food Desert Zones, only qualified food desert businesses shall be treated as employers.
FOOD DESERT TAX EXEMPT FACILITY BONDS.
In General.--For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, any qualified food desert bond shall be treated as an exempt facility bond.
Qualified Food Desert Bond.--For purposes of this section, the term ``qualified food desert bond'' means any bond issued as part of an issue if-- (1) 95 percent or more of the net proceeds (as defined in section 150(a)(3) of such Code) of such issue are to be used for qualified project costs, (2) such bond is issued by the State (or any political subdivision thereof) in which the property referred to in subsection (d) is located, (3) such bond is designated for purposes of this section by-- (A) in the case of a bond which is required under State law to be approved by the bond commission of such State, such bond commission, and (B) in the case of any other bond, the Governor of such State, (4) such bond is issued after the date of the enactment of this section and before January 1, 2016, and (5) no portion of the proceeds of such issue is to be used to provide any property described in section 144(c)(6)(B) of such Code.
Limitations on Bonds.-- (1) Aggregate amount designated.--The maximum aggregate face amount of bonds which may be designated under this section with respect to any Food Desert Zone shall not exceed $20,000,000.
Movable property.--No bonds shall be issued which are to be used for movable fixtures and equipment.
Qualified Project Costs.--For purposes of this section, the term ``qualified project costs'' means the cost of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, or renovation of nonresidential real property (including fixed improvements associated with such property) which-- (1) is located in a Food Desert Zone, and (2) is used by a qualified food desert business in carrying on the trade or business referred to in section 101(b).
Application of Certain Rules.--For purposes of this section, rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (5) and (6) of section 1400N(a) of such Code shall apply.
TITLE II--HUNGER-FREE COMMUNITIES GRANTS EXTENSION AND ENHANCEMENT SEC.
EXPANSION OF HUNGER-FREE COMMUNITIES PROGRAM.
Section 4405 of the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (7 United States Code 7017) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)(B) by inserting ``, except that for fiscal years 2010 through 2015 the Federal share shall be 100 percent of the cost of carrying out such activity in a Food Desert Zone (as specified in section 101(a) of the Food Desert Oasis Act of 2009)'' before the period at the end, and (2) in subsection (e) by striking ``2012'' and inserting ``2015''.
TITLE III--REPORTS TO CONGRESS ON PILOT PROGRAM SEC.
REPORTS TO CONGRESS ON PILOT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with such other Federal officials as the Secretary determines appropriate, shall annually submit a written report to Congress regarding the Food Desert Oasis Pilot Program established under title I.
Contents of Report.--Such report shall include-- (1) an analysis of any increases or decreases in the health of the residents of the Food Desert Zones, and (2) the effect of title I on the level of investment in the Food Desert Zones.
Timing of Reports.--The first report under subsection (a) shall be made not later than December 31, 2011 and shall cover the period ending on December 31, 2010.
The last such report under subsection (a) shall be made not later than December 31, 2016 and shall cover the period ending on December 31, 2015.