This Act may be cited as the ``Robert Stodola Homeless Veterans Assistance Act''.
In General.--Subtitle A of title IV of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11361 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
``For purposes of this title, the term `veteran' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of title 38, United States Code.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 101(b) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 401 the following new item: ``Sec.
EMERGENCY SHELTER GRANTS PROGRAM.
Section 413 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11373) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Veterans' Share.-- ``(1) In general.--Each metropolitan city, urban county, State, and Indian tribe for which assistance under this subtitle is provided shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the total amount received by the city, county, State, or tribe in each fiscal year shall be used for eligible activities designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans.
Such activities shall, to the extent possible, be integrated and coordinated with services made available by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Exception.--Upon the request of a metropolitan city, urban county, State, or Indian tribe, the Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage under such paragraph for the city, county, State, or tribe if the city, county, State, or tribe demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary, and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs concurs in the determination, that but for such waiver or reduction amounts of assistance under this subtitle for the city, county, State, or tribe will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.
Reports by grantees.--Each metropolitan city, urban county, State, and Indian tribe for which assistance under this subtitle is provided for a fiscal year shall submit a report to the Secretary and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for such fiscal year describing each project and activity funded with such assistance that is designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, the location of the project or activity, and the amount of such assistance provided for the project or activity.''.
Selection Criteria.--Section 426(b) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11386(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) such factors as the Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, considers necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements under section 429(b)(4); and''.
Veterans' Share.--Section 429(b) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11389(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (3) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) not less than 20 percent shall be allocated for use only for projects and supportive services designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, except that-- ``(A) the Secretary shall make assistance available with such amounts only after consultation with and upon the concurrence of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs; ``(B) projects and services provided with amounts allocated under this paragraph shall, to the extent possible, be integrated and coordinated with services made available by the Department of Veterans Affairs; and ``(C) the Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement to reserve amounts under this paragraph or reduce the percentage so reserved if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this subtitle), and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs concurs in the determination, that but for such waiver or reduction amounts appropriated for such fiscal year to carry out this subtitle will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
Report.--Section 426(c)(4) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11386(c)(4)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, which shall include, in the case of an applicant carrying out a project designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, reporting to the Secretary and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for such fiscal year regarding the activities funded during such fiscal year with such assistance that are designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, the location of the project and of such activities, and the amount of such assistance provided for the project or such activities.''.
SAFE HAVENS FOR HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Selection Criteria.--Section 434(c) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11394(c)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) such factors as the Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, considers necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements under subsection (e); and''.
Veterans' Share.--Section 434 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Veterans' Share.-- ``(1) In general.--In making grants to applicants under this subtitle, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amount made available for each fiscal year to carry out this subtitle is used for eligible activities designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, which activities shall, to the extent possible, be integrated and coordinated with services made available by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
A grant shall be considered to comply with the requirement under preceding sentence only if the Secretary consults with and obtains the concurrence of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs in making the grant.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage under such paragraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this subtitle), and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs concurs in the determination, that but for such waiver or reduction amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this subtitle will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.
Reports by recipients.--Each recipient provided assistance under this subtitle for a fiscal year shall submit a report to the Secretary and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for such fiscal year describing each facility and activity funded with such assistance that is designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, the location of the facility or activity, and the amount of such assistance provided for the facility or activity.''.
SECTION 8 PROGRAM FOR SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY DWELLINGS.
Selection Criteria.--Section 441(c) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11401(c)) is amended by striking the period at the end of the first sentence and inserting the following: ``, while ensuring compliance with the requirements under subsection (k).
The Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall establish any criteria for such competition necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements under subsection (k).''.
Veterans' Share.--Section 441 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Veterans' Share.-- ``(1) In general.--In allocating amounts to applicants under this section, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amounts made available for each fiscal year to carry out this section are used for assistance designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, which assistance shall, to the extent possible, be integrated and coordinated with services made available by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Assistance shall be considered to comply with the requirement under preceding sentence only if the Secretary consults with and obtains the concurrence of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs in allocating the assistance.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage under such paragraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this section), and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs concurs in the determination, that but for such waiver or reduction amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this section will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.
Reports by recipients.--Each applicant that receives assistance under this section for a fiscal year shall submit a report to the Secretary and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for such fiscal year describing each dwelling unit occupied by a homeless person who is a veteran that is assisted with such assistance, the location of the dwelling unit, and the amount of such assistance provided for the dwelling unit.''.
SHELTER PLUS CARE PROGRAM.
Selection Criteria.--Section 455(a) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11403d(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (8) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (9) as paragraph (10); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (8) the following new paragraph: ``(9) such factors as the Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, considers necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements under subsection (d); and''.
Veterans' Share.--Section 455 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Veterans' Share.-- ``(1) In general.--In providing assistance to applicants under this subtitle, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amount made available for each fiscal year to carry out this subtitle is used for rental assistance designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, which assistance shall, to the extent possible, be integrated and coordinated with services made available by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Assistance shall be considered to comply with the requirement under preceding sentence only if the Secretary consults with and obtains the concurrence of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs in providing the assistance.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage under such paragraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this subtitle), and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs concurs in the determination, that but for such waiver or reduction amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this subtitle will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.
Reports by recipients.--Each recipient provided assistance under this subtitle for a fiscal year shall submit a report to the Secretary and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for such fiscal year describing assistance funded with such amounts that is designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, the location of the housing or activity so assisted, and the amount of such assistance provided for the housing or activity.''.
RURAL HOMELESSNESS GRANT PROGRAM.
Section 491(c) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11408(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Veterans' share.-- ``(A) In general.--In awarding grants under subsection (a) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amount made available for the fiscal year for such grants is used for eligible activities under subsection (b) designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, which activities shall, to the extent possible, be integrated and coordinated with services made available by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
A grant shall be considered to comply with the requirement under preceding sentence only if the Secretary consults with and obtains the concurrence of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs in providing the grant.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under subparagraph (A) or reduce the percentage under such subparagraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for grants under this section), and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs concurs in the determination, that but for such waiver or reduction amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this section will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.
Reports by recipients.--Each eligible organization receiving a grant under this section for a fiscal year shall submit a report to the Secretary and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for such fiscal year describing assistance funded with such amounts that is designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, the location of the housing or activities so assisted, and the amount of such amounts provided for the housing or activities.''.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND ANNUAL REPORTS.
In General.--Subtitle A of title IV of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C 11361), as amended by section 2 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND REPORTS REGARDING ACTIVITIES BENEFITING HOMELESS VETERANS.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary, after consultation with and upon the concurrence of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall carry out a program to provide technical advice, training, and outreach activities necessary to facilitate and encourage the funding, with grant amounts under this title, of projects and activities designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans.
The program shall include-- ``(1) providing notice of availability of amounts set-aside under this title for eligible activities designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans to agencies and organizations who are qualified or could qualify as grantees for such amounts and project sponsors for such activities; ``(2) increasing participation, by agencies and organizations interested in carrying out eligible activities designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans, in developing plans required under section 401; ``(3) providing assistance to increase the capability of such agencies and organizations in developing plans and applications for grants under this title and activities funded with such grant amounts (including providing assistance in integrating and coordinating such activities with services made available by the Department of Veterans Affairs).
Annual Reports.--Not later than 6 months after the conclusion of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Congress and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs regarding activities and assistance provided with grant amounts under this title that are designed to serve primarily homeless persons who are veterans.
The report shall analyze the extent of compliance with the requirements under this title to reserve amounts for such activities and assistance and shall summarize the reports regarding such assistance and activities submitted under sections 413(f)(3), 426(c)(4), 434(e)(3), 441(k)(3), 455(d)(3), and 491(c)(4)(C) by grant recipients.
After submitting each report under this subsection, the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs regarding any recommendations of such Secretary in response to the report.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 101(b) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 402 (as added by section 2(b) of this Act) the following new item: ``Sec.
Technical assistance and reports regarding activities benefiting homeless veterans.