This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Tuberculosis Elimination Act of 2001''.
TITLE I--INTERAGENCY COLLABORATION SEC.
COMMITTEE ON INTERAGENCY COLLABORATION FOR TUBERCULOSIS ELIMINATION.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for the ongoing operation of a committee to be known as the Committee on Interagency Collaboration for Tuberculosis Elimination.
Duties.-- (1) In general.--For the purpose of making progress toward the goal of eliminating tuberculosis, the Committee shall provide to the Secretary and other appropriate Federal officials advice on coordinating the activities of the Public Health Service and other Federal agencies that relate to such disease and on efficiently utilizing the Federal resources involved.
In carrying out this subsection, the Committee shall consider the recommendations of the Institute of Medicine regarding the elimination of tuberculosis.
National plan.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Committee, in consultation with appropriate public and private entities, shall make recommendations on the development and implementation of a national plan that, with respect to tuberculosis, provides for training and education for health care workers, persons with or at-risk of such disease, and the general public.
Global activities.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Committee, in consultation with appropriate public and private entities, shall make recommendations for the development and implementation of a plan to guide the involvement of the United States in global tuberculosis-control activities, including recommendations regarding policies, strategies, objectives, and priorities.
Such recommendations for the plan shall have a focus on high-burden countries and on access to directly observed treatment, short course (commonly known as DOTS).
Composition.--The Committee shall be composed of-- (1) representatives from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and all other Federal departments and agencies that carry out activities relating to tuberculosis; and (2) members appointed from among individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``Committee'' means the Committee on Interagency Collaboration for Tuberculosis Elimination.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
TITLE II--CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION SEC.
NATIONAL PROGRAM FOR TUBERCULOSIS ELIMINATION.
Section 317E of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247b-6) is amended-- (1) by striking the heading for the section and inserting the following: ``national program for tuberculosis elimination''; (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows: ``(b) Research, Demonstration Projects, Education, and Training.-- With respect to the prevention, control, and elimination of tuberculosis, the Secretary may, directly or through grants to public or nonprofit private entities, carry out the following: ``(1) Research, with priority given to research concerning-- ``(A) diagnosis and treatment of latent infection of tuberculosis; ``(B) strains of tuberculosis resistant to drugs; ``(C) cases of tuberculosis that affect certain populations; and ``(D) clinical trials, including a tuberculosis trials consortium.
Demonstration projects for-- ``(A) the development of regional capabilities for the prevention, control, and elimination of tuberculosis; and ``(B) collaboration with the Immigration and Naturalization Service to identify and treat immigrants with active or latent tuberculosis infection.
Public information and education programs.
Education, training and clinical skills improvement activities for health professionals, including allied health personnel.
Support of model centers to carry out activities under paragraphs (1) through (4).
Collaboration with international organizations and foreign countries in carrying out such activities, including coordinating activities through the Committee on Interagency Collaboration for Tuberculosis Elimination.
''; (3) in subsection (f), by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Annual reports.--The Council shall annually submit to the Congress and the Secretary a report on the activities carried out under this subsection.
The report shall include the opinion of the Council on the extent to which the recommendations of the Institute of Medicine regarding tuberculosis have been implemented.
''; and (4) by amending subsection (g) to read as follows: ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $528,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.''.
TITLE III--NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH SEC.
ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INSTITUTE.
Subpart 2 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285b et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 424B the following section: ``tuberculosis ``Sec.
In General.--The Director of the Institute shall expand, intensify, and coordinate research and related activities of the Institute with respect to tuberculosis, including activities toward the goal of eliminating such disease.
Certain Activities.--Activities under subsection (a) shall include-- ``(1) enhancing basic and clinical research on tuberculosis; and ``(2) expanding research on the relationship between such disease and the human immunodeficiency virus.
Research Education.-- ``(1) Tuberculosis academic awards.--The Director of the Institute may provide awards to faculty of schools of medicine or osteopathic medicine to assist such faculty in developing high quality curricula in such schools designed to significantly increase the opportunities for interested individuals, including students of the school and practicing physicians and nurses, to learn the principles and practices of preventing, managing, and controlling tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis/pulmonary infection awards.--The Director of the Institute may provide awards to support the career development of clinically trained professionals who are committed to research regarding pulmonary infections and tuberculosis by providing for supervised study and research.
Authorization of appropriations.-- ``(A) Tuberculosis academic awards.--For the purpose of carrying out paragraph (1), there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.
Tuberculosis/pulmonary infection awards.--For the purpose of carrying out paragraph (2), there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.''.
ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
Section 447A of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285f-2) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c); (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following subsection: ``(b) Activities under subsection (a) shall include activities to develop a tuberculosis vaccine.
Such activities shall be carried out in accordance with the blueprint for tuberculosis vaccine development described in the report prepared pursuant to the workshop convened in March 1998 by the Advisory Council for Elimination of Tuberculosis, the Director of the National Vaccine Program, and the Director of the Institute.
''; and (3) in subsection (c) (as so redesignated), in the first sentence-- (A) by striking ``and'' after ``1994,''; and (B) by inserting before the period the following: ``, $240,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006''.
JOHN E. FOGARTY INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR ADVANCED STUDY IN THE HEALTH SCIENCES.
Section 482 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 287b) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before ``The general purpose''; (2) in subsection (a) (as so designated), by inserting after ``Health Sciences'' the following: ``(in this subpart referred to as the `Center')''; and (3) by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(b) Tuberculosis.-- ``(1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (a) with respect to tuberculosis, the Center shall expand, intensify, and coordinate international activities of the Center for research and training.
International training program.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Center shall carry out an international training program regarding tuberculosis.
Such program shall be modeled after the international training program carried out by the Center with respect to the human immunodeficiency virus.''.
LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS REGARDING RESEARCH ON TUBERCULOSIS.
Part G of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 288 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the second section 487F as section 487G; and (2) by inserting after section 487G (as so redesignated) the following section: ``loan repayments regarding research on tuberculosis ``Sec.
In carrying out sections 487C, 487E, and 487F, the Secretary shall seek to ensure that, for fiscal year 2002 and subsequent fiscal years, a portion of amounts appropriated to carry out such sections is reserved for the purpose of entering into contracts under which (in accordance with the section involved) individuals will conduct research on tuberculosis.