REQUIREMENT FOR PRESENTATION OF DOCUMENTATION PROVING BOTH CITIZENSHIP AND IDENTITY IN ORDER TO RECEIVE BENEFITS UNDER SCHIP, TAA, AND ATAA.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, as a condition of receiving benefits under SCHIP, TAA, and ATAA, an individual who is applying for such benefits (including applying for renewal of such benefits) shall present satisfactory documentation providing both citizenship and identity.
Acceptable Documentation.--The following shall constitute acceptable documentation for purposes of subsection (a): (1) Acceptable primary documentation for identification and citizenship.-- (A) A Certificate of Naturalization (DHS Forms N- 550 or N-570).
A Certificate of United States Reports Citizenship (DHS Forms N- 560 or N-561).
A combination of an acceptable secondary documentation to verify proof of citizenship and an acceptable documentation to verify identity.-- (A) In general.--A document described in subparagraph (B) and a document described in subparagraph (C).
Acceptable documentation to verify proof of citizenship.-- (i) A United States Reports birth certificate.
A Certification of birth issued by the Department of State (Form DS-1350).
A Report of Birth Abroad of a United States Reports Citizen (Form FS-240).
A Certification of Birth Abroad (FS- 545).
A United States Reports Citizen I.D.
card (DHS Form I- 197).
An American Indian Card issued by the Department of Homeland Security with the classification code ``KIC'' (Issued by the Department of Homeland Security to identify United States Reports citizen members of the Texas Band of Kickapoos living near the United States Reports/Mexican border).
Evidence of civil service employment by the United States government before June 1976.
An official military record of service showing a place of birth in the United States.
A Northern Mariana Identification Card (Issued by the Immigration and Naturalization Service to a collectively naturalized citizen of the United States who was born in the Northern Mariana Islands before November 4, 1986).
Acceptable documentation to verify proof of identity.-- (i) A current State driver's license bearing the individual's picture or State identity document also with the individual's picture.
Certificate of Indian Blood, or other United States Reports American Indian/Alaska Native tribal document.
A school identification card with a photograph of the individual.
United States Reports military card or draft record.
Identification card issued by the Federal, State, or local government with the same information included on driver's licenses.
Military dependent's identification card.
Native American Tribal document.
United States Reports Coast Guard Merchant Mariner card.
Data matches with other agencies can be used to verify identity such as those with Federal or State governmental, public assistance, law enforcement, or corrections agencies, at the State's option.
Such agencies may include food stamps, child support, corrections, including juvenile detention, motor vehicle, or child protective services (D) Special identity rules for children under 16.-- In the case of a child under 16 years of age, the following documents may be used for purposes of establishing identity under subparagraph (C): (i) A clinic, doctor, hospital, or school record.
School records may include nursery or daycare records and report cards.
If the State accepts such records, it must verify them with the issuing school.
If no previous document is available, an affidavit may be used.
An affidavit is only acceptable if it is signed under penalty of perjury by a parent, guardian, or caretaker relative stating the date and place of the birth of the child.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The term ``SCHIP'' means the program under title XXI of the Social Security Act.
The term ``TAA'' means the program of trade adjustment assistance under chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974.
The term ``ATAA'' means the program of alternative trade adjustment assistance under 246 of the Trade Act of 1974.