The Railway Labor Act (45 United States Code 151 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 10 the following new section: ``final arbitration procedures ``Sec.
If any dispute with respect to which a board created under section 10 has made recommendations remains unresolved 30 days after the report of such board to the President, the final paragraph of section 10 shall apply and be extended for an additional period with respect to each such unresolved dispute, so that no change shall be made by any carrier or employee affected by such unresolved dispute, before a decision is rendered under subsection (c)(4) or the parties have reached agreement, in the conditions out of which such dispute arose.
(1)(A) Within three days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and Federal holidays) after the date which is 30 days after a report is made to the President under section 10, the carrier parties to the unresolved disputes that were the subject of such report, acting jointly, and the labor organization parties to such unresolved disputes, acting jointly, shall select an individual from the entire roster of arbitrators maintained by the National Mediation Board.
Within six days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and Federal holidays) after the date which is 30 days after such report under section 10, the individual selected by the labor organizations under the preceding sentence shall, jointly with the individual selected by the carrier parties under the preceding sentence, select an individual from such roster to serve as arbitrator for the unresolved disputes involving such labor organizations and carriers.
For purposes of this paragraph and subsection (a), a dispute as to which tentative agreement has been reached but not ratified shall be considered an unresolved dispute.
No individual shall be selected under paragraph (1) who is pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of employees or any railroad, or who has served as a member of the board created under section 10 with respect to the disputes involved.
The compensation of individuals selected under paragraph (1) shall be fixed by the National Mediation Board.
The second paragraph of section 10 of the Railway Labor Act shall apply to the expenses of such individuals as if such individuals were members of a board created under such section 10.
(1) During the 20-day period beginning on the date which is 30 days after the relevant report under section 10, the parties to the unresolved disputes described in subsection (b)(1) shall conduct negotiations for the purpose of reaching agreement with respect to such disputes.
Arbitrators selected under subsection (b) shall be available for consultation with the parties to the unresolved disputes for which they have been selected.
If, within the period described in paragraph (1), the parties to any dispute described in subsection (b) do not reach agreement, both the labor organizations and the carriers shall, within five days after the end of such period, submit to the arbitrator and to the other parties a proposed written contract embodying their last best offer for agreement concerning rates of pay, rules, and working conditions.
Such proposed written contract shall address only-- ``(A) issues that the relevant Presidential Emergency Board dealt with by a recommendation in its report; and ``(B) other issues that the parties agree may be addressed by the written contract.
Upon submission to the arbitrator of the proposed written contracts described in paragraph (2), and for a period of seven days thereafter, the parties shall, with the assistance of the arbitrator, attempt to reach agreement.
If the parties fail to reach agreement within the period described in paragraph (3), the arbitrator, within three days thereafter, shall render a decision selecting one of the proposed written contracts submitted under paragraph (2), without modification, and shall immediately submit such decision and selected contract to the President.
The selected contract shall be binding on the parties and have the same effect as though arrived at by agreement of the parties under this Act unless, within three days following receipt of the decision and selected contract, the President disapproves such decision and contract.
If the President disapproves such decision and contract, the parties shall have those rights under this Act they had on the date which was 30 days after the relevant report under section 10.
(A) With respect to any tentative agreement reached but not ratified prior to the date which is 30 days after the relevant report under section 10, if the ratification of such tentative agreement fails, the parties to such tentative agreement shall be considered parties to an unresolved dispute for purposes of this subsection, and the time periods described in this subsection shall apply to such dispute beginning on the date of such failure.
With respect to any tentative agreement reached after the date which is 30 days after the relevant report under section 10, if the ratification of such tentative agreement fails, both the labor organizations and the carriers party to such tentative agreement shall, within five days after the date of such failure, submit to the arbitrator and to the other parties a proposed written contract under paragraph (2), and shall be subject to paragraphs (3) and (4).
Upon the agreement of the parties to an unresolved dispute, final offers may be submitted under paragraph (2) at any time after the date which is 30 days after the relevant report under section 10.
The responsibilities of an arbitrator appointed under subsection (b) shall terminate upon a decision under paragraph (4) of this subsection.
There shall be no judicial review of any decision of an arbitrator under this section.
Nothing in this section shall prevent a mutual written agreement to any terms and conditions different from those established by this section.''.
Section 201 of the Railway Labor Act (45 United States Code 181) is amended by striking ``section 3'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``sections 3 and 10A''.