This Act may be cited as the ``First Lunar Landing Anniversary Commemorative Coin Act''.
FIRST LUNAR LANDING COMMEMORATIVE COIN.
The Secretary of the Treasury (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue coins in accordance with this Act to commemorate the 25th Anniversary of the first lunar landing.
Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 1-dollar coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.-- (1) Requirements.--The design of the coins issued under subsection (A) shall be emblematic of the first lunar landing and shall include-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``1994''; and (C) inscriptions of the words-- (i) ``Liberty''; (ii) ``In God We Trust''; (iii) ``United States of America''; and (iv) ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection of design.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (A) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; and (B) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee in accordance with section 5134 of title 31, United States Code.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act (50 United States Code 98 et sequentes).
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue the coins minted under this Act beginning on January 1, 1994.
Termination of Authority.--Coins may not be minted under this Act after December 31, 1994.
Quality of Coins.--The coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of coins minted under this Act.
Sale Price.--The Secretary shall sell the coins minted under this Act at as price equal to the face value plus the cost of designing, minting, and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping) and the surcharge provided in subsection (d).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins minted under this Act at a reasonable discount to reflect the lower cost of the sales.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act.
To fill the orders, the Secretary shall sell the coins at a reasonable discount to reflect the benefit of prepayment.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $5 per coin.
Notwithstanding section 5134 of title 32, United States Code, and subject to section 9 of this Act, surcharges received from the sale of coins minted under this Act shall be paid by the Secretary as follows: (1) Neil armstrong air and space museum.--Twenty-five percent of the surcharges shall be paid to the Ohio Historic Preservation Association to be used for the Neil Armstrong Air and Space Museum, located in Wapakoneta, Ohio.
National air and space museum.--Twenty-five percent of the surcharges shall be paid to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution to be used for the National Air and Space Museum.
Reduction of national debt.--Fifty percent of the surcharges shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury for the purpose of reducing the national debt.
As a condition of receiving the surcharges paid under section 7, the Ohio Historic Preservation Association shall allow the Comptroller General of the United States to examine the books, records, documents, and other data of the Ohio Historic Preservation Association that may be related to the expenditure by the Association of surcharges paid under section 7.
The Secretary shall take actions necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of the coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the Federal Government.
Waiver.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law applicable to procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services relating to the minting and issuing of the coins issued under this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
NUMISMATIC PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND.
Subject to section 7 of this Act, the coins minted under this Act are numismatic items for purposes of subchapter III, chapter 51, subtitle IV of title 31, United States Code.