This Act may be cited as the ``Economic Conversion Clearinghouse Act''.
Establishment.--There is established, within the Department of Commerce, the Office of Economic Conversion Information (hereinafter referred to as ``Office'').
Purpose.--It is the purpose of the Office-- (1) to serve as a central information clearinghouse on matters relating to economic adjustment and defense conversion programs and activities of the Federal and State governments, including political subdivisions of the States; and (2) to help potential and actual applicants for economic adjustment and defense conversion assistance under Federal, State and local laws in locating and applying for such assistance, including financial and technical assistance.
Director.--The Office shall be headed by a Director.
The Secretary of Commerce shall appoint and fix the compensation of the Director.
Staff.--The Director may appoint such personnel as may be necessary to enable the Office to perform its duties.
Information Databases.-- (1) Uses.--The Office shall develop information databases for use by Federal departments and agencies, State and local governmental agencies, public and private entities, and individuals to assist such agencies, entities, and individuals in the process of identifying and applying for assistance and resources under economic adjustment and defense conversion programs and activities of the Federal, State, and local governments.
Federal agencies and programs.--The databases established pursuant to paragraph (1) shall include a comprehensive compilation of all relevant information concerning available economic adjustment and defense conversion-related programs of the Federal Government.
The compilation shall identify the administering department, office, or agency, which administers such programs, and key contact people; and descriptions of the application process, eligibility requirements and criteria, selection, and followup procedures.
Such compilation shall also include data as to the expenditure of funds under such programs, projects supported by such programs, and the types and amounts of funding available for assistance under such programs.
Range of programs.--The range of programs covered by the database shall include: worker adjustment assistance for private sector employees and Federal civilian and military personnel; community adjustment assistance (planning and implementation), including the so-called ``bricks and mortar'' programs, such as infrastructure rebuilding, and airport improvement; technology development and deployment programs administered through the Advanced Research Projects Agency, Department of Defense, coordinated Technology Reinvestment Project; other relevant technology research and development programs administered by the Department of Commerce, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Department of Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency, Department of Transportation, and the National Institutes of Health and other technology agencies; small business assistance (financial, technical, marketing); defense facility environmental restoration; available tax credits and incentives, relevant regulatory information (environmental, occupational health and safety, and intellectual property rights) affecting application procedures and the implementation of federally supported projects involving economic adjustment and defense conversion.
Available assistance.--In developing such database, the Office shall survey all Federal departments and agencies in order to identify all relevant assistance and resources that may be available to assist defense-dependent communities, businesses, and workers in their adjustment and conversion efforts, especially the Department of Defense, the Department of Commerce, the Department of Labor, the Small Business Administration, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Education, the Department of Transportation, the National Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Database of major state and local programs.--The Office shall establish a database containing State and local governmental economic adjustment and defense conversion assistance programs.
Such database shall include a current listing of appropriate offices, officers, and contact personnel connected with, or involved in, such programs.
Defense cutback early warning database.--The Office, working with the Secretary of Defense, shall establish and keep current a database containing a listing of available defense contracts, and information listing military bases and installations expected to be closed, cut back, or realigned, or which are in the process of being closed, cut back, or realigned, including a current listing of States, communities, industries, firms, and employment likely to be most adversely affected as a result thereof.
Database of conversion efforts and successes.--The Office shall establish a database of listings and descriptions of defense conversion efforts, their successes and failures, as well as a current listing of ongoing conversion and assistance efforts by communities, contractors, and small- and mid-sized businesses, and labor organizations.
Reference lists and bibliographies.--The Office shall establish a database which shall include a listing of published works (books, reports, articles, videos, and tapes) related to all facets of defense economic adjustment and defense conversion.
Such listing shall further include manuals relating to economic adjustment and defense conversion developed by the National Governors Association, the National League of Cities, public interest groups, labor unions, business associations, and similar organizations, and a listing of contact organizations and people for obtaining such references.
The Office shall also maintain in electronic form the full texts of selected references and make such references available to the public through online services.
Alternative product bank for industries and firms.--The Office shall establish a databank of potentially commercializable technologies and products matched to the capabilities of defense-dependent industries and firms.
Such databank shall include a short overview of market potential and shall identify potential programs in Federal, State and local governments that may be available to support technology development, deployment, and commercialization in these specific areas.
Multiple Points of Public Access to Databases.-- (1) Easy access.--The Office shall establish several mechanisms to assure easy access by the public and others to such databases, and to assure that the databases be as accessible, user-friendly, culturally neutral, and affordable as possible.
In addition, the Office shall conduct an extensive outreach to States and communities, especially in the most defense-dependent regions of the Nation, and to a wide range of constituencies, including State and local government officials, chambers of commerce, industrial organizations, labor unions, and community organizations, to publicize the existence of databanks and other assistance and services provided by this Act, and how to acquire such assistance and services, and access such databanks.
1-800-toll free number.--The Office shall establish a toll free 1-800 number to provide a first point of entry into the Office information database system.
An individual calling such number shall receive information on how to use the Office databases, how to receive printed materials, and how to contact appropriate people in other governmental agencies for information about specific programs, and answer other requests regarding services of the Office.
Online electronic access through network.--Databases established by the Office shall be easily accessible through existing computer networks and publicly available computer database access facilities, such as at repository libraries and by direct call-in via modem, and shall be menu-driven and highly user-friendly.
Printed manuals and orientation materials.--The Office shall develop and make available to the public and others a printed manual, and other printed material, reviewing the major Federal agencies and programs engaged in economic adjustment, defense conversion, and technology investments.
It shall also serve as a guide to using the databases and services of the Office, list State and local contacts and resources, and include a bibliography of major reference materials.
Orientation workshops.--The Office shall offer periodic workshops (1-2 weeks long) available to selected representatives from defense-dependent communities, businesses, and occupational groups, to orient and train them in using the Office and the services of the Office.
Information specialists.--The Office shall maintain on- call economic adjustment and conversion information specialists to address special problems requiring person-to-person assistance, as needed.
Program Evaluation.-- (1) Review.--The Office shall conduct a regular review of the various agencies and programs in the Federal system involving economic adjustment and defense conversion.
Such review shall evaluate the procedures of these agencies and programs, and the success of their activities.
Such reviews shall be based on periodic surveys of both Federal officials and recipients of assistance pursuant to this Act.
The Office shall identify problems with the programs and barriers to entry, for inclusion in the databases established pursuant to this Act.
Such review shall include recommendations for improving such programs.
Community roundtables.--The Office shall conduct, on an annual basis, consultative meetings and briefings with defense- impacted constituencies drawn from local and State governments, business, labor, community and public interest organizations and academic institutions.
Such meetings and briefings shall be held in all major defense-dependent regions of the United States, both to introduce its programs and receive comments and recommendations concerning its services and how to expand and improve them.
Establishment.--There is established the Interagency Economic Conversion Information Coordinating Committee (referred to in this section as the ``Committee'').
Members.--The members of the Committee are as follows: (1) Director of the Office, who shall serve as Chairperson of the Committee.
Director of the Economic Development Administration.
Director of the Office of Economic Adjustment, Department of Defense.
One member appointed by the Secretary of Labor.
Director of the Advanced Research Projects Agency, Department of Defense.
Director of the National Institute for Standards and Technology.
Director of the Small Business Administration.
One member appointed by the Director of the National Economic Council.
Functions.--It shall be the function of the Committee-- (1) to advise and make recommendations to the Office in carrying out the purposes of this Act; (2) to coordinate and facilitate the information gathering and monitoring activities of the Office among Federal departments and agencies; (3) to help the Office prepare and present information in a manner that is publicly accessible, affordable, and user- friendly; and (4) to assist the Office in making technical assistance personnel available as needed.
Compensation of Members.--All members of the Committee shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Committee.
Staff.--The Chairman of the Committee may request any Federal department or agency to detail such employees to the Committee as may be necessary to enable the Committee to perform its duties.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Committee without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Committee may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Startup and Operating Expenses.--For fiscal year 1994, there are authorized to be appropriated such amounts as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Operating Expenses.--For fiscal year 1995, and each fiscal year thereafter, there are authorized to be appropriated such amounts as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.