This Act may be cited as the ``Consumer Travel Tax Credit Holiday Act of 2001''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Consumer confidence and spending is critical to a healthy United States economy.
In order to prevent a further decline in consumer spending, which fell 1.8 percent in September 2001, and consumer confidence, which is at its lowest level since February 1994, the Federal Government needs to provide an immediate and targeted tax incentive to encourage consumer spending.
The most immediate and targeted incentive for consumption would be to reduce the price of goods to consumers, which can be done most effectively by providing a tax incentive to individuals to make retail purchases.
A 10-day consumer travel tax credit holiday, prior to the 2001 holiday season, would encourage Americans to make immediate purchases and help to counteract the decline in consumer confidence Americans have experienced since September 11, 2001.
The direct boost to consumption resulting from such tax incentive would enhance the benefits of individual tax cuts provided by any Federal tax stimulus legislation.
Alaska, Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire, and Oregon currently do not impose a State sales tax.
These States have worked hard to establish a State tax structure that does not include a sales tax.
Any economic stimulus proposals relating to sales tax must include proportional relief to these five States, which have chosen not to impose a sales tax.
These five sales-tax-free States should not be penalized for choosing the tax structure best for their State by being excluded from sales tax holiday relief.
A tax credit for travel for the purpose of making retail purchases in those States would provide a benefit to consumers similar to a sales tax holiday in other States.
CREDIT FOR TRAVEL FOR PURPOSES OF RETAIL PURCHASES IN STATES NOT IMPOSING SALES TAX.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25B the following new section: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the qualified travel expenses which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the consumer travel tax credit period.
Qualified Travel Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified travel expenses' means reasonable expenses in connection with a qualifying personal trip for-- ``(A) travel by aircraft, rail, watercraft, or motor vehicle, and ``(B) lodging while away from home at any commercial lodging facility.
Such term does not include expenses for meals, entertainment, amusement, or recreation.
Qualifying personal trip.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualifying personal trip' means travel within the United States-- ``(i) the destination of which is Alaska, Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire, or Oregon, and ``(ii) the purpose of which is to purchase at retail tangible property of a type that would be subject to sales tax in any State not listed in clause (i).
Only personal travel included.--Such term shall not include travel if, without regard to this section, any expenses in connection with such travel are deductible in connection with a trade or business or activity for the production of income.
Commercial lodging facility.--The term `commercial lodging facility' includes any hotel, motel, resort, rooming house, or campground.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Consumer travel tax credit period.--For purposes of this section, the term `consumer travel tax credit period' means the period beginning on December 7, 2001, and ending before December 17, 2001.
Sales tax.--The term `sales tax' means-- ``(A) a tax imposed on or measured by general retail sales of taxable tangible property, or services performed incidental to the sale of taxable tangible property, that is-- ``(i) calculated as a percentage of the price, gross receipts, or gross proceeds, and ``(ii) can or is required to be directly collected by retail sellers from purchasers of such property, ``(B) a use tax, or ``(C) the Illinois Retailers' Occupation Tax, as defined under the law of the State of Illinois, but excludes any tax payable with respect to food and beverages sold for immediate consumption on the premises, beverages containing alcohol, and tobacco products.
Use tax.--The term `use tax' means a tax imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible property that is not subject to sales tax.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Denial of credit to dependents.--No credit shall be allowed under this section to any individual with respect to whom a deduction under section 151 is allowable to another taxpayer for a taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year begins.
Expenses must be substantiated.--No credit shall be allowed by subsection (a) unless the taxpayer substantiates by adequate records or by sufficient evidence corroborating the taxpayer's own statement the amount of the expenses described in subsection (b)(1).
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any expense for which credit is allowed under this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting before the item relating to section 26 the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.