This Act may be cited as the ``Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Park Wilderness Act of 2007''.
In this Act: (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of California.
DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS.
In accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), the following areas in the State are designated as wilderness areas and as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System: (1) John krebs wilderness.-- (A) Designation.--Certain land in Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Park, comprising approximately 69,500 acres of land, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``John Krebs Wilderness Proposal-Hockett Plateau/Mineral King'' and dated July 2007 and the map entitled ``John Krebs Wilderness Proposal-Enlargement of Mineral King Area'' and dated May 2007, to be known as the ``John Krebs Wilderness''.
Limitations.--The designation of the wilderness under subparagraph (A) does not-- (i) preclude operation and maintenance of the existing Hockett Meadow Cabin and Quinn Patrol Cabin in the same manner and degree in which the cabins were operated and maintained on the day before the date of enactment of this Act; or (ii) prohibit the operation, maintenance, and repair of the small check dams and water impoundments on Lower Franklin Lake, Crystal Lake, Upper Monarch Lake, and Eagle Lake.
Effect.--Nothing in this paragraph affects-- (i) the cabins in, and adjacent to, Mineral King Valley; or (ii) the private inholdings known as ``Silver City'' and ``Kaweah Han''.
Sequoia-kings canyon national park wilderness addition.--Certain land in the North Fork/Redwood Canyon, California, comprising approximately 43,450 acres, and certain land in Chimney Rock, California, comprising approximately 1,736 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Redwood Canyon/North Fork/Chimney Rock Wilderness Proposal'' and dated June 2007, is incorporated in, and shall be considered to be a part of, the Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Park Wilderness.
ADMINISTRATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS.
In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, each area designated as wilderness by this Act shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et seq.
), except that any reference in the Wilderness Act to the effective date of the Wilderness Act shall be considered to be a reference to the date of enactment of this Act.
Map and Legal Description.-- (1) Submission of map and legal description.--As soon as practicable, but not later than 3 years, after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map and legal description of each area designated as wilderness by this Act with-- (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate; and (B) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives.
Force and effect.--The map and legal description filed under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct any clerical or typographical error in the map or legal description.
Public availability.--The map and legal description filed under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Secretary.
Hydrologic, Meteorologic, and Climatological Devices, Facilities, and Associated Equipment.--Nothing in this Act-- (1) prevents the installation and maintenance of, or if nonmotorized access is not reasonably available or time is of the essence, limited motorized access to, hydrologic, meteorologic, or climatological devices or facilities and communication equipment associated with the devices, if the devices, facilities, or equipment are essential to flood warning, flood control, water supply forecasting, or reservoir operation purposes; or (2) precludes or restricts the use of utility helicopters for inspection or surveillance of utility facilities in the vicinity of an area designated as wilderness by this Act.
No Buffer Zones.-- (1) In general.--Nothing in this Act creates a protective perimeter or buffer zone around an area designated as wilderness by this Act.
Activities outside wilderness.--The fact that a nonwilderness activity or use can be seen or heard from within an area designated as wilderness by this Act shall not preclude the conduct of the activity or use outside the boundary of the wilderness.
Horseback Riding.--Nothing in this Act precludes horseback riding in, or the entry of recreational or commercial saddle or pack stock into, an area designated as wilderness by this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.