This Act may be cited as the ``Yankton Sioux Tribe and Santee Sioux Tribe of Nebraska Development Trust Fund Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) by enacting the Act of December 22, 1944, commonly known as the ``Flood Control Act of 1944'' (58 United States Statutes at Large 887, chapter 665; 33 United States Code 701-1 et sequentes) Congress approved the Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin program (referred to in this section as the ``Pick-Sloan program'')-- (A) to promote the general economic development of the United States; (B) to provide for irrigation above Sioux City, Iowa; (C) to protect urban and rural areas from devastating floods of the Missouri River; and (D) for other purposes; (2) the waters impounded for the Fort Randall and Gavins Point projects of the Pick-Sloan program have inundated the fertile, wooded bottom lands along the Missouri River that constituted the most productive agricultural and pastoral lands of, and the homeland of, the members of the Yankton Sioux Tribe and the Santee Sioux Tribe; (3) the Fort Randall project (including the Fort Randall Dam and Reservoir)-- (A) overlies the western boundary of the Yankton Sioux Tribe Indian Reservation; and (B) has caused the erosion of more than 400 acres of prime land on the Yankton Sioux Reservation adjoining the east bank of the Missouri River; (4) the Gavins Point project (including the Gavins Point Dam and Reservoir) overlies the eastern boundary of the Santee Sioux Tribe; (5) although the Fort Randall and Gavins Point projects are major components of the Pick-Sloan program, and contribute to the economy of the United States by generating a substantial amount of hydropower and impounding a substantial quantity of water, the reservations of the Yankton Sioux Tribe and the Santee Sioux Tribe remain undeveloped; (6) the United States Army Corps of Engineers took the Indian lands used for the Fort Randall and Gavins Point projects by condemnation proceedings; (7) the Federal Government did not give Yankton Sioux Tribe and the Santee Sioux Tribe an opportunity to receive compensation for direct damages from the Pick-Sloan program, even though the Federal Government gave 5 Indian reservations upstream from the reservations of those Indian tribes such an opportunity; (8) the Yankton Sioux Tribe and the Santee Sioux Tribe did not receive just compensation for the taking of productive agricultural Indian lands through the condemnation referred to in paragraph (6); (9) the settlement agreement that the United States entered into with the Yankton Sioux Tribe and the Santee Sioux Tribe to provide compensation for the taking by condemnation referred to in paragraph (6) did not take into account the increase in property values over the years between the date of taking and the date of settlement; and (10) in addition to the financial compensation provided under the settlement agreements referred to in paragraph (9)-- (A) the Yankton Sioux Tribe should receive an aggregate amount equal to $34,323,743 for-- (i) the loss value of 2,851.40 acres of Indian land taken for the Fort Randall Dam and Reservoir of the Pick-Sloan program; and (ii) the use value of 408.40 acres of Indian land on the reservation of that Indian tribe that was lost as a result of stream bank erosion that has occurred since 1953; and (B) the Santee Sioux Tribe should receive an aggregate amount equal to $8,132,838 for the loss value of-- (i) 593.10 acres of Indian land located near the Santee village; and (ii) 414.12 acres on Niobrara Island of the Santee Sioux Tribe Indian Reservation used for the Gavins Point Dam and Reservoir.
In this Act: (1) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(e) of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
Program.--The term ``Program'' means the power program of the Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin program, administered by the Western Area Power Administration.
Santee sioux tribe.--The term ``Santee Sioux Tribe'' means the Santee Sioux Tribe of Nebraska.
Tribal plan.--The term ``Tribal Plan'' means a plan developed pursuant to section 6.
YANKTON SIOUX TRIBE DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be known as the ``Yankton Sioux Tribe Development Trust Fund'' (referred to in this section as the ``Fund'').
The Fund shall consist of any amounts deposited in the Fund under this Act.
Funding.--Out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit $34,323,743 into the Fund not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Investments.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest the amounts deposited under subsection (b) in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit interest resulting from such investments into the Fund.
Payment of Interest to Yankton Sioux Tribe.-- (1) Withdrawal of interest.--Beginning at the end of the first fiscal year in which interest is deposited into the Fund, the Secretary of the Treasury shall withdraw the aggregate amount of interest deposited into the Fund for that fiscal year and transfer that amount to the Secretary of the Interior for use in accordance with paragraph (2).
Each amount so transferred shall be available without fiscal year limitation.
Payments to yankton sioux tribe.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior shall use the amounts transferred under paragraph (1) only for the purpose of making payments to the Yankton Sioux Tribe, as such payments are requested by that Indian tribe pursuant to tribal resolution.
Limitation.--Payments may be made by the Secretary of the Interior under subparagraph (A) only after the Yankton Sioux Tribe has adopted a Tribal Plan.
Use of payments by yankton sioux tribe.--The Yankton Sioux Tribe shall use the payments made under subparagraph (A) only for carrying out projects and programs under the Tribal Plan.
Pledge of future payments.-- (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), the Yankton Sioux Tribe may enter into an agreement under which that Indian tribe pledges future payments under this paragraph as security for a loan or other financial transaction.
Limitations.--The Yankton Sioux Tribe-- (I) may enter into an agreement under clause (i) only in connection with the purchase of land or other capital assets; and (II) may not pledge, for any year under an agreement referred to in clause (i), an amount greater than 40 percent of any payment under this paragraph for that year.
Transfers and Withdrawals.--Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d)(1), the Secretary of the Treasury may not transfer or withdraw any amount deposited under subsection (b).
SANTEE SIOUX TRIBE OF NEBRASKA DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be known as the ``Santee Sioux Tribe of Nebraska Development Trust Fund'' (referred to in this section as the ``Fund'').
The Fund shall consist of any amounts deposited in the Fund under this Act.
Funding.--Out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit $8,132,838 into the Fund not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Investments.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest the amounts deposited under subsection (b) in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit interest resulting from such investments into the Fund.
Payment of Interest to Santee Sioux Tribe.-- (1) Withdrawal of interest.--Beginning at the end of the first fiscal year in which interest is deposited into the Fund, the Secretary of the Treasury shall withdraw the aggregate amount of interest deposited into the Fund for that fiscal year and transfer that amount to the Secretary of the Interior for use in accordance with paragraph (2).
Each amount so transferred shall be available without fiscal year limitation.
Payments to santee sioux tribe.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior shall use the amounts transferred under paragraph (1) only for the purpose of making payments to the Santee Sioux Tribe, as such payments are requested by that Indian tribe pursuant to tribal resolution.
Limitation.--Payments may be made by the Secretary of the Interior under subparagraph (A) only after the Santee Sioux Tribe has adopted a Tribal Plan.
Use of payments by santee sioux tribe.--The Santee Sioux Tribe shall use the payments made under subparagraph (A) only for carrying out projects and programs under the Tribal Plan.
Pledge of future payments.-- (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), the Santee Sioux Tribe may enter into an agreement under which that Indian tribe pledges future payments under this paragraph as security for a loan or other financial transaction.
Limitations.--The Santee Sioux Tribe-- (I) may enter into an agreement under clause (i) only in connection with the purchase of land or other capital assets; and (II) may not pledge, for any year under an agreement referred to in clause (i), an amount greater than 40 percent of any payment under this paragraph for that year.
Transfers and Withdrawals.--Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d)(1), the Secretary of the Treasury may not transfer or withdraw any amount deposited under subsection (b).
In General.--Not later than 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the tribal council of each of the Yankton Sioux and Santee Sioux Tribes shall prepare a plan for the use of the payments to the Indian tribe under section 4(d) or 5(d).
Contents of Tribal Plan.--Each Tribal Plan shall provide for the manner in which the Indian tribe covered under the Tribal Plan shall expend payments to the Indian tribe under this Act to promote-- (1) economic development; (2) infrastructure development; (3) the educational, health, recreational, and social welfare objectives of the Indian tribe and its members; or (4) any combination of the activities described in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3).
Tribal Plan Review and Revision.-- (1) In general.--Each tribal council referred to in subsection (a) shall make available for review and comment by the members of the Indian tribe a copy of the Tribal Plan for the Indian tribe before the Tribal Plan becomes final, in accordance with procedures established by the tribal council.
Updating of tribal plan.--Each tribal council referred to in subsection (a) may, on an annual basis, revise the Tribal Plan prepared by that tribal council to update the Tribal Plan.
In revising the Tribal Plan under this paragraph, the tribal council shall provide the members of the Indian tribe opportunity to review and comment on any proposed revision to the Tribal Plan.
ELIGIBILITY OF TRIBE FOR CERTAIN PROGRAMS AND SERVICES.
In General.--No payment made to the Yankton Sioux Tribe or Santee Sioux Tribe pursuant to this Act shall result in the reduction or denial of any service or program to which, pursuant to Federal law-- (1) the Yankton Sioux Tribe or Santee Sioux Tribe is otherwise entitled because of the status of the Indian tribe as a federally recognized Indian tribe; or (2) any individual who is a member of a Indian tribe under paragraph (1) is entitled because of the status of the individual as a member of the Indian tribe.
Exemptions From Taxation.--No payment made pursuant to this Act shall be subject to any Federal or State income tax.
Power Rates.--No payment made pursuant to this Act shall affect Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin power rates.
Nothing in this Act may be construed as diminishing or affecting any water right of an Indian tribe, except as specifically provided in another provision of this Act, any treaty right that is in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, any authority of the Secretary of the Interior or the head of any other Federal agency under a law in effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act, including such sums as may be necessary for the administration of the Yankton Sioux Tribe Development Trust Fund under section 4 and the Santee Sioux Tribe of Nebraska Development Trust Fund under section 5.