This Act may be cited as the ``Renewable Energy Loan Guarantee Act of 2001''.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE LOAN GUARANTEES.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Loan Guarantee Board established by subsection (b)(2).
Incremental hydropower.--The term ``incremental hydropower'' means additional generating capacity achieved from increased efficiency at a non-Federal hydroelectric facility in existence on January 1, 2001, and licensed by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
Program.--The term ``Program'' means the Renewable Energy Source Facility Guaranteed Loan Program established by subsection (b)(1).
Qualified renewable energy source facility.--The term ``qualified renewable energy source facility'' means a facility that generates electric energy for sale in, or affecting, interstate commerce using solar, wind, biomass, landfill gas, incremental hydropower, or geothermal energy.
Renewable Energy Source Facility Guaranteed Loan Program.-- (1) In general.--There is established the Renewable Energy Source Facility Guaranteed Loan Program, the purpose of which shall be to provide loan guarantees for qualified renewable energy source facilities in accordance with this section.
Loan guarantee board.--There is established to administer the Program a Loan Guarantee Board, to be composed of-- (A) the Secretary of Energy, or the Secretary's designee, who shall serve as Chairman of the Board; (B) the Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary's designee; (C) the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the Chairman's designee; and (D) the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary's designee.
Authority.-- (1) In general.--The Program may guarantee loans provided for qualified renewable energy source facilities by private banking and investment institutions in accordance with procedures, rules, and regulations established by the Board.
The Board shall ensure that small businesses receive an appropriate amount and number of loan guarantees under the Program, consistent with applicable laws and goals for small business participation in Federal programs.
Total guarantee limit.--The aggregate amount of loans guaranteed and outstanding at any one time under this section shall not exceed $750,000,000.
Expeditious action on applications.--The Board shall approve or deny an application for a guarantee under this section as soon as practicable after receipt of an application.
Requirements for Loan Guarantees.--The Board may issue a loan guarantee on application by the owner or operator of a qualified renewable energy source facility under an agreement by a private bank or investment company to provide a loan for the qualified renewable energy source facility, if the Board determines that-- (1) credit is not otherwise available to the owner or operator under reasonable terms or conditions sufficient to meet its financing needs, as reflected in the financial and business plans of the owner or operator; (2) the prospective earning power of the owner or operator of the facility, together with the character and value of the security pledged, provide a reasonable assurance of repayment of the loan to be guaranteed in accordance with its terms; and (3) the loan to be guaranteed bears interest at a rate determined by the Board to be reasonable, taking into account the current average yield on outstanding obligations of the United States with remaining periods of maturity comparable to the maturity of the loan.
Terms and Conditions of Loan Guarantees.-- (1) Loan duration.--All loans guaranteed under this section shall be repayable in full not later than December 31, 2025, and the terms and conditions of each such loan shall provide that the loan agreement may not be amended, or any provision of the loan agreement waived, without the consent of the Board.
Loan security.--A commitment to issue a loan guarantee under this section shall contain such affirmative and negative covenants and other protective provisions as the Board determines are appropriate.
The Board shall require security for the loans to be guaranteed under this section at the time at which the commitment is made.
Fees.--The owner or operator of a qualified renewable energy source facility receiving a loan guarantee under this section shall pay a fee to the Department of the Treasury to cover costs of the Program, but in no event shall such fee exceed an amount equal to 0.5 percent of the outstanding principal balance of the guaranteed loan.
Audits.--The General Accounting Office shall audit, before issuance of a loan guarantee under this section, and once every 2 years while the guaranteed loan is outstanding, the owner or operator of the facility with respect to which the loan guarantee is issued.
Reports.--During each fiscal year until each guaranteed loan has been repaid in full, the Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress a report on the activities of the Board.