SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Citizen Debt Reduction Contribution Act''.
Table of Contents.-- Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Sense of the Congress.
Donation of social security benefits for purposes of reducing the Federal deficit.
Donation of military retirement benefits for purposes of reducing the Federal deficit.
Donation of veterans' disability compensation for purposes of reducing the Federal deficit.
Budgetary treatment of savings resulting from this Act.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that any budget savings resulting from this Act should be used solely to reduce net Government spending.
Congress appreciates and respects the contributions made by citizens participating in the programs authorized by this Act, and shares their concerns at excessive Government spending.
General Rule.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to returns and records) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX OVERPAYMENTS TO BE USED TO REDUCE PUBLIC DEBT ``Sec.
Designation of income tax overpayments.
DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX OVERPAYMENTS.
General Rule.--Every taxpayer who makes a return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for any taxable year may designate that a specified portion (not less than $1) of any overpayment of tax for such taxable year shall be used to reduce the public debt of the United States.
Manner and Time of Designation.--Any designation under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall be made-- ``(1) at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, and ``(2) in such manner as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe, except that such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Treatment of Amounts Designated.--For purposes of this title, the amount designated by any taxpayer under subsection (a)-- ``(1) shall be treated as being refunded to such taxpayer as of the last date prescribed for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 (determined without regard to extensions) or, if later, the date the return is filed, and ``(2) shall be treated as a contribution made by such taxpayer on such date to the United States.''
Transfer of Designated Amounts For Deficit Reduction.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, from time to time, transfer to the special account described in section 3113(d) of title 31, United States Code, the amounts designated under section 6097 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to be used to reduce the public debt of the United States.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of income tax overpayments to be used to reduce public debt.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
DONATION OF SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS FOR PURPOSES OF REDUCING THE FEDERAL DEFICIT.
Section 201(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401(i)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(1)''; (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``paragraph (1)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (A)'', and by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; (3) by redesignating paragraph (2) as subparagraph (B); and (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2)(A) The Commissioner of Social Security shall establish a program under which recipients of monthly insurance benefits under this title may elect to have the Commissioner, in lieu of certification of payment of benefits to the recipient pursuant to section 205(i), certify to the Managing Trustee that all or a designated portion of such benefits be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury as a gift which the Managing Trustee is authorized, as Secretary of the Treasury, to accept as a gift under subsection (a)(1)(A) of section 3113 of title 31, United States Code (relating to accepting gifts for reducing the public debt).
Amounts to which an election under subparagraph (A) applies shall not be includible in gross income for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
No deduction shall be allowed under such Code with respect to any amount which is not includible in gross income by reason of the preceding sentence.''
DONATION OF MILITARY RETIREMENT BENEFITS FOR PURPOSES OF REDUCING THE FEDERAL DEFICIT.
In General.--Chapter 71 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Donations for purposes of reducing the public debt ``(a) The Secretary concerned shall establish a program under which a member or former member of the armed forces under the jurisdiction of the Secretary who is entitled to receive retired or retainer pay may elect that all or a designated portion of such pay for any month be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury as a gift to reduce the public debt.
Any such election may be revoked at any time.
For any month for which an election under subsection (a) is in effect, the Secretary concerned shall withhold from the retired or retainer pay of the person making the election the amount designated by that person in such election and shall transfer the amount so withheld to the Secretary of the Treasury.
The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to accept any amount transferred to the Secretary under this section as a gift under subsection (a)(1)(A) of section 3113 of title 31 (relating to accepting gifts for reducing the public debt).
Amounts to which an election under subsection (a) applies shall not be includible in gross income for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
No deduction shall be allowed under such Code with respect to any amount which is not includible in gross income by reason of the preceding sentence.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1413.
Donations for purposes of reducing the public debt.''.
DONATION OF VETERANS' DISABILITY COMPENSATION FOR PURPOSES OF REDUCING THE FEDERAL DEFICIT.
In General.--Chapter 53 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Donations of compensation for purposes of reducing the public debt ``(a) The Secretary shall establish a program under which a veteran who is entitled to compensation may elect that all or a designated portion of such compensation for any month be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury as a gift to reduce the public debt.
Any such election may be revoked at any time.
For any month for which an election under subsection (a) is in effect, the Secretary shall withhold from the compensation payable to the veteran making the election the amount designated by the veteran in such election and shall transfer the amount so withheld to the Secretary of the Treasury.
The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to accept any amount transferred to the Secretary under this section as a gift under subsection (a)(1)(A) of section 3113 of title 31 (relating to accepting gifts for reducing the public debt).
Amounts to which an election under subsection (a) applies shall not be includible in gross income for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
No deduction shall be allowed under such Code with respect to any amount which is not includible in gross income by reason of the preceding sentence.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``5320.
Donations of compensation for purposes of reducing the public debt.''.
BUDGETARY TREATMENT OF SAVINGS RESULTING FROM THIS ACT.
Savings resulting from the enactment of this Act shall not be considered for purposes of estimates made for this Act under section 252(d) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.