The Congress finds the following: (1) Monsignor Ignatius McDermott is a man of unwavering faith, deep compassion, and tireless devotion to helping those who are among the most desperate and needy.
In his own words, today's world is over-saturated with a surplus of starters and a famine of finishers: Monsignor McDermott is a finisher.
Monsignor McDermott, or ``Father Mac'' as he is affectionately referred to by everyone from the Governor of Illinois to the last wanderer from the street, grew up on Chicago's South Side and was ordained in the priesthood in 1936.
From the start of his career, Father Mac found a calling in helping those plagued by dependency on alcohol and drugs.
Inspired by experiences in his early work with children neglected due to alcohol abuse, and at a charity near a police ``drunk tank'', Father Mac sought not only to help those who could not help themselves, but to change the very system that had in many ways given up on them.
Working toward a solution, Father Mac founded the Addiction Counseling Education Services in 1961, which provided counseling to alcoholics and other substance abusers who had no other means to get help.
Later, he would expand his work to the Chicago schools system, where he developed an alcohol education curriculum and fostered Alternatives to Expulsion, a program to help teachers salvage addicted teenagers who were willing to give up drinking and drugs and resume their studies.
This program worked so well that it was incorporated into State of Illinois educational practices.
Father Mac's work has had a lasting impact on the treatment community as a whole; in 1963, he founded the Central States Institute of Addiction, a nonprofit charitable organization providing instruction to social workers and counselors regarding addiction and dependency.
This Institute is only one of numerous programs begun through his inspiration and dedication that continue to function to the benefit of many.
Father Mac's lifelong concern for the homeless inebriate and for families split by alcoholism has also met with matching public attitudes.
His work helped first bring to light the problems of drinking and driving, provide treatment services to pregnant mothers suffering from addiction, and to decriminalize the public inebriate.
This latter breakthrough led to his creating the Chicago Clergy Association for the Homeless Person, and the founding of Haymarket Center at the age of 75, a time when most people are ready to retire.
Father Mac is now 94, and Haymarket Center is the largest drug abuse treatment center in the City of Chicago providing integrated treatment services for an average of 18,000 clients annually, and serving as a model for other treatment programs throughout the Nation.
As the Nation renews its commitment to addiction disorders, Father Mac continues what has become a lifelong pursuit of helping others raise themselves from the depths of their personal struggles with addiction.
Presentation Authorized.--The Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate shall make appropriate arrangements for the presentation, on behalf of the Congress, of a gold medal of appropriate design, to Monsignor Ignatius McDermott, in recognition of his contribution to the drug treatment community, and his accomplishments as a priest and humanitarian.
Design and Striking.--For purposes of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions to be determined by the Secretary.
The Secretary may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck pursuant to section 2 under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, at a price sufficient to cover the cost thereof, including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses, and the cost of the gold medal.
National Medals.--The medals struck pursuant to this Act are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all medals struck under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
AUTHORITY TO USE FUND AMOUNTS; PROCEEDS OF SALE.
Authority To Use Fund Amounts.--There is authorized to be charged against the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund such amounts as may be necessary to pay for the costs of the medals struck pursuant to this Act.
Proceeds of Sale.--Amounts received from the sale of duplicate bronze medals authorized under section 3 shall be deposited into the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund.