RETIREMENT YEARS SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.
In General.--Subpart A of part I of subchapter D of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to pension, profit- sharing, stock bonus plans, etc.)
is amended by inserting after section 408 the following new section: ``SEC.
RETIREMENT YEARS SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.
General Rule.--Except as provided in this section, a Retirement Years Savings Account shall be treated for purposes of this title in the same manner as an individual retirement plan.
Retirement Years Savings Account.--For purposes of this title, the term `Retirement Years Savings Account' or `RYS Account' means an individual retirement plan which is designated at the time of the establishment of the plan as a Retirement Years Savings Account.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe.
Contribution Rules.-- ``(1) Deduction allowed for years before individual attains age 40.--Section 219(g) shall not apply to any contribution to an RYS Account for any taxable year before the taxable year during which the individual attains age 40.
Denial of deduction for years after individual attains age 40.--No deduction shall be allowed under section 219 for a contribution to an RYS account for the taxable year in which the individual attains age 40 or any taxable year thereafter.
Increased spousal contribution.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of an individual to whom this paragraph applies for the taxable year, in lieu of applying section 219(c), the limitation under section 219(b)(1)(B) shall be equal to the sum of-- ``(i) the compensation includible in such individual's gross income for the taxable year, plus ``(ii) the compensation includible in the gross income of such individual's spouse for the taxable year reduced by the amount of the limitation under section 219(b)(1) applicable to such spouse for such taxable year.
Individuals to whom paragraph applies.--This paragraph shall apply to any individual if-- ``(i) such individual files a joint return for the taxable year, and ``(ii) the amount of compensation (if any) includible in such individual's gross income for the taxable year is less than the compensation includible in the gross income of such individual's spouse for the taxable year.
Tax on excess contributions.--Section 4973 shall be applied separately with respect to individual retirement plans which are RYS Accounts and individual retirement plans which are not RYS Accounts; except that, for purposes of applying such section with respect to individual retirement plans which are RYS Accounts, the limitation under paragraph (3) shall be taken into account.
Limitations on rollover contributions.--No rollover contribution may be made to an RYS Account unless-- ``(A) such contribution is from another RYS Account, or ``(B) such contribution is from an individual retirement plan (other than an RYS Account) and is made before January 1, 1998.
Distribution Rules.--For purposes of this title-- ``(1) Exclusion from gross income; no penalty tax.--No portion of a qualified distribution from an RYS Account shall be includible in gross income.
Qualified distribution.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified distribution' means any payment or distribution-- ``(A) made on or after the date on which the individual attains age 59\1/2\, ``(B) made to a beneficiary (or to the estate of the individual) on or after the death of the individual, or ``(C) attributable to the individual's being disabled (within the meaning of section 72(m)(7)).
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Rollover contributions.--The term `rollover contributions' means contributions described in sections 402(c), 403(a)(4), 403(b)(8), or 408(d)(3).
Compensation.--The term `compensation' has the meaning given such term by section 219(f).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part I of subchapter D of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 408 the following new item: ``Sec.
Retirement Years Savings Accounts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.