This Act may be cited as the ``Abandoned Mine Restoration Act of 1999''.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Non-federal entities.--The term ``non-Federal entities'' includes nonprofit and private entities.
Program.--The term ``program'' means the program authorized under section 3(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
RESTORATION OF ABANDONED MINE SITES PROGRAM.
In General.--Subject to the requirements of this section, the Secretary may carry out a program to assist stewards of lands owned by the United States and non-Federal entities to address environmental and water quality problems caused by drainage and related activities from abandoned, inactive, and post-production noncoal mines.
The program shall be managed by the head of the Sacramento District Office of the Corps of Engineers.
Consultation.--The Secretary shall coordinate actions taken under the program with appropriate Federal, State, and local agencies.
Any project conducted under the program on lands owned by the United States shall be undertaken in consultation with the head of the Federal entity with administrative jurisdiction over the lands.
Assistance.-- (1) Types of assistance.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary may provide technical, planning, design, restoration, remediation, and construction assistance to Federal and non- Federal entities for the purpose of carrying out projects to address problems described in subsection (a).
Requirement for assistance.--The Secretary may only provide assistance for a project under the program, if the Secretary determines that the project-- (A) will improve the quality of the environment and is in the public interest; and (B) is cost-effective.
Specific Measures.--Assistance may be provided under the program in support of a Federal or non-Federal project for the following purposes: (1) Response, control, and remediation of hazardous, toxic, and radioactive waste and improvement of the quality of the environment associated with an abandoned, inactive, or post- production noncoal mine, if the Secretary finds that such activities are integral to carrying out the environmental restoration project.
Restoration and protection of streams, rivers, wetlands, and other waterbodies and all ecosystems degraded, or with the potential to become degraded, by drainage from an abandoned, inactive, or post-production noncoal mine.
Demonstration of treatment technologies, including innovative and alternative technologies, to minimize or eliminate adverse environmental effects associated with an abandoned, inactive, or post-production noncoal mine.
Demonstration of management practices to address environmental effects associated with an abandoned, inactive, or post-production noncoal mine.
Remediation and restoration of an abandoned, inactive, or post-production noncoal mine site for public health or safety purposes.
Expedite the closure, remediation, or restoration of an abandoned, inactive, or post-production noncoal mine to minimize adverse impacts to the environment.
Cost-Sharing.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the Federal share of the cost of a project carried out under the program shall be 65 percent of such cost.
Projects on federal lands.--With respect to projects carried out under the program on Federal lands, the Federal share of the cost of the project shall be 100 percent of such cost.
Credits.--For purposes of subsection (e), a non-Federal entity shall receive credit toward the non-Federal share of the cost of a project-- (1) for all lands, easements, rights-of-way, and relocations, but not to exceed 25 percent of total project cost; (2) for design and construction services and other in-kind work; (3) for grants and the value, as determined by the Secretary, of work performed on behalf of the non-Federal entity by State and local agencies; and (4) for such costs as are incurred by the non-Federal entity in carrying out studies and any preconstruction, engineering, or design activities required for any construction to be conducted under the project, if the Secretary determines that such activities are integral to the project.
Grants and Reimbursements.-- (1) Grants.--The Federal share of the cost of a project under the program may be provided in the form of grants to the non-Federal entity or direct reimbursements to the non-Federal entity of project costs.
Reimbursements.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary may reimburse a non-Federal interest an amount equal to the estimate of the Federal share, without interest, of the cost of any work (including work associated with studies, planning, design, and construction) carried out by the non-Federal entity otherwise made eligible for non-Federal assistance under this section.
Reimbursements for construction work.--Reimbursements for construction work by a non-Federal entity as part of a project under the program may be made only-- (A) if, before initiation of construction of the project, the Secretary approves the plans for construction of the project by the non-Federal entity; (B) if the Secretary finds, after a review of studies and design documents prepared pursuant to this section, that construction of the project meets the requirements in subsection (d); and (C) if the Secretary determines that the work for which reimbursement is requested has been performed in accordance with applicable permits and approved plans.
Operation and Maintenance.--The non-Federal share of operation and maintenance costs for a project carried out under the program shall be 100 percent, except that, in the case of a project undertaken on Federal lands, the Federal agency with management responsibility for the lands shall be responsible for all operation and maintenance costs.
Effect on Authority of Secretary of the Interior.--Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of the Secretary of the Interior under the Mining Law of 1872 or title IV of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 United States Code 1231 et sequentes).
Cost Limitation.--Not more than $10,000,000 of the amounts appropriated to carry out this section may be allotted for projects in a single locality, but the Secretary may accept funds voluntarily contributed by the non-Federal or Federal entity for the purpose of expanding the scope of the services requested by the non-Federal or Federal entity.
Limitation on Actions.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary or any State or political subdivision (including any local district) which has implemented or will implement any remedial action which is consistent with a State and Environmental Protection Agency approved remediation plan, and any State approved modification thereof, at an abandoned mine site and adjacent lands to provide water quality protection, shall not be treated, based on actions taken consistent with the plan, to be-- (1) the owner or operator of the site, or arranger or transporter for disposal; (2) responsible for any discharge or release of pollutants, contaminants, or hazardous substances on or from the abandoned mine site or adjacent lands, including discharges or releases which have been affected by the activities of the remedial action; or (3) subject to any enforcement action pursuant to Federal law, except for violations involving gross negligence.
In this subsection, the term ``gross negligence'' means reckless, willful, or wanton misconduct.
Western Universities Mine-Land Reclamation and Restoration Consortium.--The Secretary may provide assistance to the Western Universities Mine-Land Reclamation and Restoration Consortium, which includes the University of Nevada, the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, the University of Idaho, and the University of Alaska, for the purposes of carrying out the purposes of the program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $45,000,000 for fiscal years beginning after September 30, 1999.