This Act may be cited as the ``Sun Grant Initiative for Renewable Energy and Biobased Products Act''.
RESEARCH, EXTENSION, AND EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS ON BIOBASED ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES AND PRODUCTS.
Title IX of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 8101 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
RESEARCH, EXTENSION, AND EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS ON BIOBASED ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES AND PRODUCTS.
Purposes.--The purposes of the programs established under this section are-- ``(1) to enhance national energy security through the development, distribution, and implementation of biobased energy technologies; ``(2) to promote diversification in, and the environmental sustainability of, agricultural production in the United States through biobased energy and product technologies; and ``(3) to promote economic diversification in rural areas of the United States through biobased energy and product technologies.
Definition of Land-Grant Colleges and Universities.--In this section, the term `land-grant colleges and universities' means-- ``(1) 1862 Institutions (as defined in section 2 of the Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998 (7 United States Code 7601)); ``(2) 1890 Institutions (as defined in section 2 of that Act); and ``(3) 1994 Institutions (as defined in section 2 of that Act).
Establishment.--To carry out the purposes described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall establish programs under which-- ``(1) the Secretary shall provide grants to sun grant centers specified in subsection (d)(1); and ``(2) the sun grant centers shall use the grants in accordance with this section.
Grants to Centers.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall use amounts made available for a fiscal year under subsection (i) to provide a grant to each of the following sun grant centers: ``(A) North central center.--A northern sun grant center at South Dakota State University for the region composed of the States of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin, Wyoming.
Southeastern center.--A southeastern sun grant center at the University of Tennessee at Knoxville for the region composed of-- ``(i) the States of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia; ``(ii) the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico; and ``(iii) the United States Virgin Islands.
South central center.--A southern sun grant center at Oklahoma State University for the region composed of the States of Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas, Louisiana, Missouri, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas.
Western center.--A western sun grant center at Oregon State University for the region composed of-- ``(i) the States of Alaska, Arizona, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, and Washington; and ``(ii) territories and possessions of the United States (other than the territories referred to in clauses (ii) and (iii) of subparagraph (B)).
Northeastern center.--A northeastern sun grant center at Cornell University for the region composed of the States of Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, Maryland, Maine, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, and West Virginia.
Equal amounts.--Of the amount of funds that are made available for grants for fiscal year under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide an equal amount of grants to each of the sun grant centers specified in paragraph (1).
Use of Funds.-- ``(1) Centers of excellence.--Of the amount of funds that are made available for a fiscal year to a sun grant center under subsection (d), the center shall use not more than 25 percent of the amount for administration and support centers of excellence in science, engineering, and economics at the university to promote the purposes described in subsection (a) through the State agricultural experiment station, cooperative extension services, and relevant educational programs of the university.
Grants to land-grant colleges and universities.-- ``(A) In general.--The sun grant center established for a region shall use the funds that remain available for a fiscal year after expenditures made under paragraph (1) to provide competitive grants to land- grant colleges and universities in the region of the sun grant center to conduct, consistent with the purposes described in subsection (a), multiinstitutional and multistate-- ``(i) research, extension, and educational programs on technology development; and ``(ii) integrated research, extension, and educational programs on technology implementation.
Programs.--Of the amount of funds that are used to provide grants for a fiscal year under subparagraph (A), the center shall use-- ``(i) not less than 20 percent of the funds to carry out programs described in subparagraph (A)(i); and ``(ii) not less than 20 percent of the funds to carry out programs described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
Indirect costs.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a sun grant center may recover the indirect costs of making a grant under this subsection in an amount that does not exceed 19 percent of the amount of the direct costs of making the grant.
Other land-grant colleges and universities.-- A sun grant center may not recover the indirect costs of making grants under paragraph (2) to other land- grant colleges and universities.
Plan.--Subject to the availability of funds under subsection (i), in cooperation with other land-grant colleges and universities and private industry, the sun grant centers shall jointly develop and submit to the Secretary, for approval, a plan for the making of grants under subsections (e)(1) and (e)(2) for programs that will facilitate the development of-- ``(1) not later than January 1, 2008, critical biobased- based products industries; ``(2) not later than January 1, 2013-- ``(A) a biobased transportation fuels production industry; and ``(B) an independent biobased power production industry; and ``(3) not later than January 1, 2018, hydrogen production systems for biobased products.
Grants to Other Land-Grant Colleges and Universities.-- ``(1) Priority for grants.--In making grants under subsection (e)(2), a sun grant center shall give a higher priority to programs that are consistent with the plan approved by the Secretary under subsection (f).
Term of grants.--The term of a grant provided by a sun grant center under subsection (e)(2) shall not exceed 5 years.
Coordination with bioenergy and biobased product development programs.--The sun grant centers shall jointly develop and submit to the Secretary, for approval, a plan for coordination of activities of the centers with, and input from, the bioenergy and biobased product development programs of the Secretary of Energy, including those conducted at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Grant Information Analysis Center.--The sun grant centers shall maintain a Sun Grant Information Analysis Center to provide sun grant centers analysis and data management support.
Annual Reports.--Not later than March 1 following the end of each fiscal year for which a sun grant center receives a grant under subsection (d), the sun grant center shall submit to the Secretary a report that describes the policies, priorities, and operations of the program carried out by the center during the fiscal year, including a description of progress made in facilitating the priorities described in subsection (f).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2020, of which $4,000,000 for each fiscal year shall be made available to carry out subsection (h).''.
BIOMASS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.
Board.--Section 305(b) of the Biomass Research and Development Act of 2000 (7 United States Code 7624 note; Public Law 106-224) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively; (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) a representative of the Cooperative Research, Extension, and Educational Service; and''; and (3) in paragraph (5) (as redesignated by paragraph (1)), by striking ``(3)'' and inserting ``(4)''.
Technical Advisory Committee.--Section 306(b)(1) of the Biomass Research and Development Act of 2000 (7 United States Code 7624 note; Public Law 106-224) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (J) as subparagraph (K); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (I) the following: ``(J) a representative of sun grant centers specified in section 9011(d)(1) of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002; and''.