This Act may be cited as the ``Post Terrorism Mental Health Improvement Act''.
PLANNING AND TRAINING GRANTS.
Section 520A of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290bb-32) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (2), by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, including the training of mental health professionals with respect to evidence- based practices in the treatment of individuals who are victims of a disaster''; (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' at the end; (C) in paragraph (4), by striking the period and inserting a semicolon; and (D) by inserting after paragraph (4), the following: ``(5) the development of coordinated response plans for responding to the mental health needs (including the response efforts of private organizations) that arise from a disaster, including the development and expansion of the 2-1-1 or other universal hotline as appropriate; and ``(6) the establishment of a mental health disaster response clearinghouse.
''; (2) by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (h); and (3) by inserting after subsection (e) the following: ``(f) State Comments.--With respect to a State or local public entity that submits an application for assistance under this section and that intends to use such assistance as provided for in subsection (a)(5), such entity shall provide notice of such application to the chief executive officer of the State, the State mental health department, and the State office responsible for emergency preparedness who shall consult with providers and organizations serving public safety officials and others involved in responding to the crisis, and provide such officer, department and office with the opportunity to comment on such application.
Definition.--For purposes of subsection (a)(2), the term `mental health professional' includes psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical psychiatric nurse specialists, mental health counselors, marriage and family therapists, clinical social workers, pastoral counselors, school psychologists, licensed professional counselors, school guidance counselors, and any other individual practicing in a mental health profession that is licensed or regulated by a State agency.''.
GRANTS TO DIRECTLY AFFECTED AREAS TO ADDRESS LONG-TERM NEEDS.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall award grants to eligible State and local governments and other public entities to enable such entities to respond to the long-term mental health needs arising from the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a) an entity shall-- (1) be a State or local government or other public entity that is located in an area that is directly affected (as determined by the Secretary) by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001; and (2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.--A grantee shall use amounts received under a grant under subsection (a)-- (1) to carry out activities to locate individuals who may be affected by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 and in need of mental health services; (2) to provide treatment for those individuals identified under paragraph (1) who are suffering from a serious psychiatric illness as a result of such terrorist attack, including paying the costs of necessary medications; and (3) to carry out other activities determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Supplement not Supplant.--Amounts expended for treatments under subsection (c)(2) shall be used to supplement and not supplant amounts otherwise made available for such treatments (including medications) under any other Federal, State, or local program or under any health insurance coverage.
Use of Private Entities and Existing Providers.--To the extent appropriate, a grantee under subsection (a) shall-- (1) enter into contracts with private, nonprofit entities to carry out activities under the grant; and (2) to the extent feasible, utilize providers that are already serving the affected population, including providers used by public safety officials.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary in each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005.
Part A of title II of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 202 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may waive any restriction on the amount of supplemental funding that may be provided to any disaster-related scientific research project that is funded by the Secretary.''.
CHILDREN WHO EXPERIENCE VIOLENCE-RELATED STRESS.
In General.--Section 582(f) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290hh-1(f)) is amended by striking ``2002 and 2003'' and inserting ``2002 through 2005''.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the program established under section 582 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290hh-1) should be fully funded.
Passed the Senate December 12, 2001.
Attest: JERI THOMSON, Secretary.