ELIMINATION OF TAX SUBSIDIES FOR ETHANOL FUEL.
Elimination of Credit for Alcohol Used as Fuel.-- (1) In general.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking section 40 (relating to alcohol used as fuel).
Clerical and conforming amendments.-- (A) Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code (relating to general business credit) is amended by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (12) as paragraphs (3) through (11), respectively.
Paragraph (3) of section 38(d) of such Code (relating to credits no longer listed) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) the credit allowable by section 40, as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this subparagraph (relating to alcohol used as fuel) shall be treated as referred to after the last paragraph of subsection (b) and after any credits treated as referred to by reason of subparagraph (A).''
The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 40.
(i) Part II of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking section 87 (relating to alcohol fuel credit).
The table of sections for part II of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 87.
Subsection (a) of section 56 of such Code (relating to adjustments in computing alternative minimum taxable income) is amended by striking paragraph (7) (relating to section 87 not applicable).
Subsection (c) of section 196 of such Code (relating to qualified business credits) is amended by striking paragraph (3) and redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as paragraphs (3) through (7), respectively.
Section 6501(m) of such Code (relating to deficiencies attributable to election of certain credits) is amended by striking ``40(f),''.
Reductions of Other Incentives for Ethanol Fuel.-- (1) Repeal of reduced rate on ethanol fuel not produced from petroleum or natural gas.--Subsection (b) of section 4041 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Exemption for Off-Highway Business Use.-- ``(1) In general.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) or (d)(1) on liquids sold for use or used in an off-highway business use.
Tax where other use.--If a liquid on which no tax was imposed by reason of paragraph (1) is used otherwise than in an off-highway business use, a tax shall be imposed by paragraph (1)(B), (2)(B), or (3)(A)(ii) of subsection (a) (whichever is appropriate) and by the corresponding provision of subsection (d)(1) (if any).
Off-highway business use defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `off-highway business use' has the meaning given to such term by section 6421(e)(2); except that such term shall not, for purposes of subsection (a)(1), include use in a diesel-powered train.''
Repeal of reduced rate on ethanol fuel produced from natural gas.-- (A) Paragraph (1) of section 4041(m) of such Code is amended by striking ``or ethanol'' in the material preceding subparagraph (A).
Clause (i) of section 4041(m)(1)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``shall be--'' and all that follows and inserting ``shall be 9.15 cents per gallon, and''.
Clause (ii) of section 4041(m)(1)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``shall be--'' and all that follows and inserting ``shall be 2.15 cents per gallon, and''.
Paragraph (2) of section 4041(m) of such Code is amended-- (i) by striking ``or ethanol'' each place it appears in the heading and text, (ii) by striking ``, ethanol,'' and (iii) by inserting ``(other than ethanol)'' after ``alcohol''.
Tax of Fuel Alcohol To Same Extent as Other Motor Fuels.-- (1) Treatment as taxable fuel.--Paragraph (1) of section 4083(a) of such Code (defining taxable fuel) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(D) fuel alcohol.''
Definition of fuel alcohol.--Subsection (a) of section 4083 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Fuel alcohol.--The term `fuel alcohol' means any alcohol (including ethanol and methanol)-- ``(A) which is produced other than from petroleum, natural gas, or coal (including peat), and ``(B) which is withdrawn from the distillery where produced free of tax under chapter 51 by reason of section 5181 or so much of section 5214(a)(1) as relates to fuel use.''
Rate of tax.--Clause (i) of section 4081(a)(2)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``other than aviation gasoline'' and inserting ``(other than aviation gasoline) and fuel alcohol''.
Special rules for imposition of tax.--Paragraph (1) of section 4081(a) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Special rules for fuel alcohol.--In the case of fuel alcohol-- ``(i) the distillery where produced shall be treated as a refinery, and ``(ii) subparagraph (B) shall be applied by including transfers by truck or rail in excess of such minimum quantities as the Secretary shall prescribe.''
Repeal of reduced rates on alcohol fuels.-- (A) Section 4041 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (k).
Section 4081 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (c).
Section 4091 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (c).
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Subparagraph (A) of section 4041(a)(2) of such Code is amended-- (i) by inserting ``other than fuel alcohol'' after ``any product'', and (ii) by adding at the end the following flush sentence: ``No tax shall be imposed by this paragraph on the sale or use of any fuel alcohol if tax was imposed on such alcohol under section 4081 and the tax thereon was not credited or refunded.''
Section 6427 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (f).
Subsection (i) of section 6427 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (3).
Paragraph (2) of section 6427(k) of such Code is amended by striking ``(3),''.
(i) Paragraph (1) of section 6427(l) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C), and by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) any fuel alcohol (as defined in section 4083) on which tax has been imposed by section 4041 or 4081, or''.
Paragraph (2) of section 6427(l) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C), and by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) in the case of fuel alcohol (as so defined), any use which is exempt from the tax imposed by section 4041(a)(2) other than by reason of a prior imposition of tax, and''.
The heading of subsection (l) of section 6427 of such Code is amended by inserting ``, Fuel Alcohol,'' after ``Kerosene''.
Sections 9503(b)(1)(D) and 9508(b)(2) of such Code are each amended by striking ``and kerosene'' and inserting ``kerosene, and fuel alcohol''.
Subsection (e) of section 9502 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (2).
Paragraph (4) of section 9503(b) of such Code is amended by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the comma at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting a period, and by striking subparagraphs (E) and (F).
Subsection (b) of section 9503 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (5) and by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (5).
Effective Dates.-- (1) General rule.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Elimination of section 40 credit.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to alcohol produced after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Floor Stock Taxes.-- (1) Imposition of tax.--In the case of fuel alcohol which is held on the date of the enactment of this Act by any person, there is hereby imposed a floor stocks tax of 18.4 cents per gallon.
Liability for tax and method of payment.-- (A) Liability for tax.--A person holding fuel alcohol on the date of the enactment of this Act to which the tax imposed by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for such tax.
Method of payment.--The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be paid in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Time for payment.--The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be paid on or before the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- (A) Fuel alcohol.--The term ``fuel alcohol'' has the meaning given such term by section 4083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by this section.
Held by a person.--Fuel alcohol shall be considered as ``held by a person'' if title thereto has passed to such person (whether or not delivery to the person has been made).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate.
Exception for exempt uses.--The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall not apply to fuel alcohol held by any person exclusively for any use to the extent a credit or refund of the tax imposed by section 4081 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is allowable for such use.
Exception for fuel held in vehicle tank.--No tax shall be imposed by paragraph (1) on fuel alcohol held in the tank of a motor vehicle or motorboat.
Exception for certain amounts of fuel.-- (A) In general.--No tax shall be imposed by paragraph (1) on fuel alcohol held on the date of the enactment of this Act by any person if the aggregate amount of fuel alcohol held by such person on such date does not exceed 2,000 gallons.
The preceding sentence shall apply only if such person submits to the Secretary (at the time and in the manner required by the Secretary) such information as the Secretary shall require for purposes of this paragraph.
Exempt fuel.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), there shall not be taken into account fuel held by any person which is exempt from the tax imposed by paragraph (1) by reason of paragraph (4) or (5).
Controlled groups.--For purposes of this paragraph-- (i) Corporations.-- (I) In general.--All persons treated as a controlled group of corporations shall be treated as 1 person.
Controlled group of corporations.--The term ``controlled group of corporations'' has the meaning given to such term by subsection (a) of section 1563 of such Code; except that for such purposes the phrase ``more than 50 percent'' shall be substituted for the phrase ``at least 80 percent'' each place it appears in such subsection.
Nonincorporated persons under common control.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, principles similar to the principles of clause (i) shall apply to a group of persons under common control where 1 or more of such persons is not a corporation.
Other laws applicable.--All provisions of law, including penalties, applicable with respect to the taxes imposed by section 4081 of such Code shall, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this subsection, apply with respect to the floor stock taxes imposed by paragraph (1) to the same extent as if such taxes were imposed by such section 4081.