ADDITIONAL CERTIFICATION REGARDING DRUG-PRODUCING AND DRUG- TRANSIT COUNTRIES.
Additional Certification.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (b)(1) of section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2291j) is amended-- (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (A); (B) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); (C) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph (B): ``(B) during the previous year, the country-- ``(i) has cooperated with the United States, or has taken steps on its own, to achieve compliance with the goals and objectives established by the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances; but; ``(ii) has not made adequate progress toward meeting certain plans, programs, or timetables (including plans, programs, or timetables relating to the Convention) identified in the most recent report of the President under section 489(a)(4); or''; and (D) in subparagraph (C), as so redesignated, by inserting ``or (B)'' after ``subparagraph (A)''.
Conforming amendments.--That section is further amended-- (A) in subsection (b)(3), by striking ``paragraph (1)(B)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)(C)''; (B) in subsection (c), by striking ``subsection (b)(1)(A)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (b)(1)''; and (C) in subsection (f)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``subsection (b)(1)(A) or (b)(1)(B)'' and inserting ``subsection (b)''; and (ii) in paragraph (2)-- (I) by striking ``subsection (b)(1)(B)'' each place it appears and inserting ``subsection (b)(1)(C)''; and (II) in clause (ii)(I), by striking ``subsection (b)(1)(A)'' and inserting ``subsection (b)(1)(A) or (b)(1)(B)''.
Additional Requirements Relating to Qualified Certification.-- That section is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i) Additional Requirements Relating to Qualified Certification.-- ``(1) High-level contact group.--In the event of a certification with respect to a country under subsection (b)(1)(B), a high-level contact group should be convened consisting of, but not limited to, the following officials (or their designees) from the United States and their counterparts from the country: ``(A) The Attorney General.
The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy.
The Secretary of the Treasury.
The Secretary of State.
The Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration.
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The Commissioner of Customs.
Responsibilities.-- ``(A) In general.--Each high-level contact group with respect to a country should establish specific, achievable benchmarks for the country for each plan, program, and timetable referred to in subsection (b)(1)(B)(ii) for which inadequate progress has been made.
Purpose.--The purpose of a benchmark under this paragraph is to permit the United States and the country concerned to verify in an objective manner the progress of the country under the plan, program, or timetable concerned.
Elements.--Each benchmark under this paragraph shall-- ``(i) establish one or more specific, measurable goals or objectives with respect each plan, program, or timetable concerned, including a goal or objective relating to arrests, extradition, eradication of drug- related crops, money-laundering, and other appropriate matters; and ``(ii) fix the time in which each such goal or objective is to be met.
Deadline.--A high-level contact group with respect to a country should complete its activities under paragraph (2) not later than 60 days after the date of the certification with respect to the country under subsection (b)(1)(B).
Benchmark report.-- ``(A) Requirement.--Not later than September 1 each year, the President shall, after consultation with the Attorney General, submit to Congress a report setting forth the benchmarks established under this subsection during that year.
Elements.--A report under subparagraph (A) shall-- ``(i) identify each country covered by the report; ``(ii) set forth each benchmark established with respect to the country; and ``(iii) describe any progress made by the country in meeting each such benchmark.
Report on progress.--With respect to each country for which benchmarks are established under this subsection in a year, the President shall, after consultation with the Attorney General, include in the report submitted to Congress under section 489(a) in the following year a report that describes the progress made by the country in meeting such benchmarks.
Use of Benchmarks in Future Certifications.--In the case of a country for which benchmarks are established under subsection (i) in a year, the President shall place the greatest emphasis on the progress made by the country with respect to each such benchmark (as described in the report under paragraph (5) of that subsection) in making a certification with respect to the country under this section in the following year.''.
Applicability to Mexico.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) a high-level contact group should be convened with respect to Mexico in 1998, as described in subsection (i) of section 490 of the Foreign Assistance of 1961, as added by subsection (b); (2) the provisions of such subsection (i) should apply to the activities of the contact group; and (3) the provisions of subsection (j) of that section, as so added, should apply to the certification of Mexico in 1999 under such section.