Redesignation of Directorate for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection.--Section 201 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1)-- (A) by striking ``a Directorate for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``an Office of Intelligence and Analysis''; and (B) by striking ``an Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``an Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis''; (2) by striking subsection (b) and redesignating subsections (c) through (g) as subsections (b) through (f), respectively; (3) in subsection (b), as so redesignated-- (A) by striking ``and infrastructure protection'' before ``are carried out'' and inserting ``and intelligence''; and (B) by striking ``the Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis''; (4) in subsection (c), as so redesignated-- (A) by striking ``the Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis''; (B) by striking paragraphs (2), (5), and (6), and redesignating paragraphs (3) through (17) as paragraphs (2) through (14), respectively; (C) by redesignating paragraphs (18) and (19) as paragraphs (20) and (21), respectively; (D) in paragraph (2), as so redesignated, by striking ``To integrate'' and inserting ``To participate in the integration of''; (E) in paragraph (14), as so redesignated, by inserting ``the Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection and'' after ``coordinate with''; and (F) by inserting after paragraph (14), as redesignated by subparagraph (B), the following new paragraphs: ``(15) To coordinate and enhance integration among intelligence components of the Department.
To establish intelligence priorities, policies, processes, standards, guidelines, and procedures for the Department.
To establish a structure and process to support the missions and goals of the intelligence components of the Department.
To ensure that, whenever possible-- ``(A) the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis produces and disseminates reports and analytic products based on open-source information that do not require a national security classification under applicable law; and ``(B) such unclassified open source reports are produced and disseminated contemporaneously with reports or analytic products concerning the same or similar information that the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis produces and disseminates in a classified format.
To establish within the Office of Intelligence Analysis an Internal Continuity of Operations (COOP) Plan that-- ``(A) assures that the capability exists to continue uninterrupted operations during a wide range of potential emergencies, including localized acts of nature, accidents, and technological or attack-related emergencies, that is maintained at a high level of readiness and is capable of implementation with and without warning; and ``(B) includes plans and procedures governing succession to office within the Office of Intelligence and Analysis, including-- ``(i) emergency delegations of authority (where permissible, and in accordance with applicable law); ``(ii) the safekeeping of vital resources, facilities, and records; ``(iii) the improvisation or emergency acquisition of vital resources necessary for the performance of operations of the Office; and ``(iv) the capability to relocate essential personnel and functions to and to sustain the performance of the operations of the Office at an alternate work site until normal operations can be resumed.
''; (5) in subsections (d) and (e), as redesignated by subsection (a)(2), by striking ``Directorate'' each place it appears and inserting ``Office''; and (6) in subsection (f), as redesignated by subsection (a)(2)-- (A) by striking ``the Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis and the Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection''; and (B) by inserting ``and section 203'' after ``under this section''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Homeland security act.--The Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101 et sequentes) is amended-- (A) in section 103(2), by striking ``Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``Intelligence and Analysis''; (B) in section 223, by striking ``Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis, in cooperation with the Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection''; (C) in section 224, by striking ``Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection''; (D) in section 302(3), by striking ``Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis and the Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection''; (E) in the first section 510(d)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``Directorate for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``Office of Intelligence and Analysis''; and (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking ``Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis''; and (F) by redesignating the second section 510 as section 511.
Headings.-- (A) Section 201.--The heading for section 121 of such Act is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
OFFICE OF INTELLIGENCE AND ANALYSIS.''.
Section 201(a).--The heading for subsection (a) of section 121 of such Act is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Intelligence and Analysis.--''.
Section 201(b).--The heading for subsection (b) of section 121 of such Act, as redesignated by subsection (a)(2), is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Discharge of Intelligence and Analysis.--''.
National security act of 1947.--Section 106(b)(2)(I) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 403-6) is amended to read as follows: ``(I) The Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Intelligence and Analysis.''.
Intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004.--Section 7306(a)(1) of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-458; 118 United States Statutes at Large 3848) is amended by striking ``Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection'' and inserting ``Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by adding after the items relating to section 509 the following: ``Sec.
Procurement of security countermeasures for strategic national stockpile.
Urban and other high risk area communications capabilities.''.
INTELLIGENCE COMPONENTS OF DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY.
Responsibilities.--Subtitle A of title II of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 6 United States Code 201 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Responsibilities.--Subject to the direction and control of the Secretary, the responsibilities of the head of each intelligence component of the Department are as follows: ``(1) To ensure that duties related to the acquisition, analysis, and dissemination of homeland security information are carried out effectively and efficiently in support of the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis.
To support and implement the goals established in cooperation with the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis.
To incorporate the input of the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis with respect to performance appraisals, bonus or award recommendations, pay adjustments, and other forms of commendation.
To coordinate with the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis in the recruitment and selection of intelligence officials of the intelligence component.
To advise and coordinate with the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis on any plan to reorganize or restructure the intelligence component that would, if implemented, result in realignments of intelligence functions.
To ensure that employees of the intelligence component have knowledge of and comply with the programs and policies established by the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis and other appropriate officials of the Department and that such employees comply with all applicable laws and regulations.
To perform such other duties relating to such responsibilities as the Secretary may provide.
Training of Employees.--The Secretary shall provide training and guidance for employees, officials, and senior executives of the intelligence components of the Department to develop knowledge of laws, regulations, operations, policies, procedures, and programs that are related to the functions of the Department relating to the handling, analysis, dissemination, and acquisition of homeland security information.''.
Intelligence Component Defined.--Section 2 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(17) The term `intelligence component of the Department' means any directorate, agency, or element of the Department that gathers, receives, analyzes, produces, or disseminates homeland security information except-- ``(A) a directorate, agency, or element of the Department that is required to be maintained as a distinct entity under this Act; or ``(B) any personnel security, physical security, document security, or communications security program within any directorate, agency, or element of the Department.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to such subtitle the following the following: ``Sec.
OFFICE OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION.
Establishment.--Subtitle A of title II of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 6 United States Code 201 et sequentes), as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
OFFICE OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION.
Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection.-- ``(1) In general.--There shall be in the Department an Office of Infrastructure Protection headed by an Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection.
Responsibilities.--The Assistant Secretary shall assist the Secretary in discharging the responsibilities assigned by the Secretary.
Discharge of Infrastructure Protection.--The Secretary shall ensure that the responsibilities of the Department regarding infrastructure protection are carried out through the Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection.
Responsibilities of Assistant Secretary.--Subject to the direction and control of the Secretary, the responsibilities of the Assistant Secretary for Infrastructure Protection shall be as follows: ``(1) To carry out comprehensive assessments of the vulnerabilities of the key resources and critical infrastructure of the United States, including the performance of risk assessments to determine the risks posed by particular types of terrorist attacks within the United States (including an assessment of the probability of success of such attacks and the feasibility and potential efficacy of various countermeasures to such attacks).
To participate in the integration of relevant information, analyses, and vulnerability assessments (whether such information, analyses, or assessments are provided or produced by the Department or others) in order to identify priorities for protective and support measures by the Department, other agencies of the Federal Government, State and local government agencies and authorities, the private sector, and other entities.
To develop a comprehensive national plan for securing the key resources and critical infrastructure of the United States, including power production, generation, and distribution systems, information technology and telecommunications systems (including satellites), electronic financial and property record storage and transmission systems, emergency preparedness communications systems, and the physical and technological assets that support such systems.
To recommend measures necessary to protect the key resources and critical infrastructure of the United States in coordination with other agencies of the Federal Government and in cooperation with State and local government agencies and authorities, the private sector, and other entities.
To coordinate with the Under Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis and elements of the intelligence community and with Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies, and the private sector, as appropriate.
To perform such other duties relating to such responsibilities as the Secretary may provide.
Staff.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall provide the Office with a staff having appropriate expertise and experience to assist the Assistant Secretary in discharging responsibilities under this section.
Private sector staff.--Staff under this subsection may include staff from the private sector.
Security clearances.--Staff under this subsection shall possess security clearances appropriate for their work under this section.
Detail of Personnel.-- ``(1) In general.--In order to assist the Office in discharging responsibilities under this section, personnel of other Federal agencies may be detailed to the Department for the performance of analytic functions and related duties.
Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary and the head of the agency concerned may enter into cooperative agreements for the purpose of detailing personnel under this subsection.
Basis.--The detail of personnel under this subsection may be on a reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to such subtitle the following: ``Sec.
Office of Infrastructure Protection.