This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Gifts Accountability Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) There is no clear accountability for Presidential gifts, since multiple lists of such gifts are separately maintained by different Federal agencies, including by the White House Gifts Unit, the National Park Service, and the National Archives and Records Administration.
House Report 107-768, ``Problems with the Presidential Gifts System'', presents additional information about the complexity of and problems with the current system.
The lack of a consolidated record of the receipt, administration, and disposition of Presidential gifts creates confusion about the status of some of those gifts.
Requiring the National Archives and Records Administration to maintain an inventory of Presidential gifts would eliminate such confusion and ensure accountability.
INVENTORY OF PRESIDENTIAL GIFTS.
In General.--Chapter 22 of title 44, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Inventory of Presidential gifts ``(a) The Archivist shall maintain a current inventory of all Presidential gifts.
The inventory shall include, with respect to each Presidential gift, the following information: ``(1) The date of receipt by the Federal Government.
The estimated cost or appraised value.
Any indication of whether the intent of the donor was to make the gift to the United States or to the President personally.
The current location and status of the gift, including identification of the Federal agency or other person having control of the gift.
The head of a Federal office or agency, including any unit in the Executive Office of the President, having possession of any record containing information regarding the receipt, location, control, or disposition of a Presidential gift shall, upon receipt of such information, report such information to the Archivist in accordance with regulations issued by the Archivist under this section.
(1) The Archivist shall make available to the public, upon request, any information in the inventory maintained under this section.
(A) With respect to each Presidential gift in a year from any person who makes Presidential gifts in the year having a cumulative value of $100 or more, the Archivist shall disclose to the public by not later than May 15 of the succeeding year the following information: ``(i) The date of receipt by the Federal Government.
The estimated cost or appraised value.
The donor and the donor's employer.
The circumstance under which the gift was made.
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to any gift from a foreign government (as that term is defined in section 7342(a) of title 5).
The Archivist shall report to the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Government Reform of the House of Representatives each disposition of a Presidential gift other than a gift having a value of less than $100.
(1) The Archivist shall issue regulations implementing this section.
The Archivist may not issue any nonbinding guidance for purposes of this section.
In this section: ``(1) The term `gift' has the meaning that term has under section 109 of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978.
The term `Presidential gift'-- ``(A) subject to subparagraph (B), means any gift to or for the benefit of-- ``(i) the President personally, the spouse of the President, or any dependent child of the President; ``(ii) the President in his or her official capacity; ``(iii) the Executive Residence at the White House; or ``(iv) a Presidential archival depository (as that term is used in chapter 21); and ``(B) does not include a gift from a relative of an individual to whom the gift is made.
The term `relative', with respect to an individual-- ``(A) means another individual-- ``(i) who is related to the individual concerned, as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, or ``(ii) who is the grandfather or grandmother of the spouse of the individual concerned; and ``(B) includes the fiance or fiancee of the individual concerned.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 22 of title 44, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``2208.
Inventory of Presidential gifts.''.
RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO GIFTS TO THE PRESIDENT OR SPOUSE OF THE PRESIDENT.
Title I of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 App.
United States Code) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``restrictions relating to gifts to the president or spouse of the president.
The President, and the spouse of the President, may not-- ``(1) accept any gift of stock in a corporation or any gift certificate; ``(2) accept gifts from a single source in a year having a cumulative value greater than $1,000, except a personalized, honorific award; ``(3) accept any gift in the period beginning on the date of any presidential election occurring in the President's term of office and ending on the date of the beginning of the next presidential term of office, unless the President is reelected to serve as President for that next term; ``(4) solicit or coordinate the making of any gift to the President or the spouse of the President; or ``(5) seek to have any other person solicit or coordinate the making of any gift to the President or the spouse of the President.
An individual elected as President, and the spouse of the individual, may not accept any gift in the period beginning on the date of the election of the individual as President and ending on the date of the beginning of the next presidential term of office.
Any gift that a President, individual elected as President, or spouse is prohibited from accepting under this section-- ``(1) shall be returned to the person making the gift, by not later than 90 days after the date the gift is made; or ``(2) if not returned within that period-- ``(A) shall be the property of the United States; and ``(B) shall not be deposited in a Presidential archival depository, as that term is used in chapter 21 of title 44, United States Code.
This section does not apply with respect to any gift from a foreign government (as that term is defined in section 7342(a) of title 5) or from a relative of an individual to whom the gift is made.