This Act may be cited as the ``Latina Health Access Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) As of 2006, there are 18,000,000 Latinas residing in the United States.
The number of Latinas is expected to grow considerably.
It is estimated that by the year 2050, 1 out of every 4 women in the United States will be a Latina.
Latinas are particularly at risk for being uninsured.
37 percent of Latinas are uninsured, almost double the national average.
With respect to sexually transmitted diseases-- (A) the HIV infection rate is 7 times more for Latinas than their white counterparts, and Latinas represent 18 percent of new HIV infections among women; (B) the AIDS case rate for Latinas is more than 5 times more than the rate for white women; (C) the rate of chlamydia for Latinas is 4 times more than the rate for white women; and (D) among Latinas, the gonorrhea incidence is nearly double that of white women.
With respect to cancer-- (A) The national incidence rate for cervical cancer in Latinas over the age of 30 is nearly double that of non-Latinas; (B) 1 in 12 Latinas nationwide will develop breast cancer; and (C) while white women have the highest rates of breast cancer, Latinas have among the lowest rates of breast cancer screening, diagnosis and treatment and, as a result, are more likely to die from breast cancer compared to white women.
The prevalence of diabetes is at least 2 to 4 times more among Latinas than among white women.
More than 25 percent of Latinas aged 65 to 74 have Type II diabetes.
Heart disease is the main cause of death for all women, and heart disease risk and death rates are higher among Latinas partly because of higher rates of obesity and diabetes.
Therefore, despite their growing numbers, Latinas continue to face serious health concerns (including sexually transmitted diseases, diabetes, and cancer) that are otherwise preventable, or treatable, with adequate health access.
HEALTH ACCESS FOR UNINSURED AND LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS.
The Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 201 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE XXIX--HEALTH ACCESS FOR UNINSURED AND LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS ``SEC.
HEALTH CARE ACCESS FOR PREVENTABLE HEALTH PROBLEMS.
Definition of Eligible Entity.--In this section, the term `eligible entity' means-- ``(1) a high-performing hospital or community health center that serves medically underserved areas with large numbers of uninsured and low-income individuals, such as Latina populations; ``(2) a State or local government; or ``(3) a private nonprofit entity.
In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to enable the eligible entities to provide programs and activities that provide health care services to uninsured and low- income individuals in medically underserved areas.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Authorized Activities.--An eligible entity receiving a grant under this section shall use grant funds to carry out programs and activities that provide access to care for a full spectrum of preventable and treatable health care problems in a culturally and linguistically appropriate manner, including-- ``(1) family planning services and information; ``(2) prenatal and postnatal care; and ``(3) assistance and services with respect to asthma, cancer, HIV disease and AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases, mental health, diabetes, and heart disease.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $18,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 and each succeeding fiscal year.
FOCUS ON UNINSURED AND LOW-INCOME POPULATIONS.
Prioritizing Health Grants To Increase Funding Equity.--In order to create a more diverse movement, cultivate new leaders, and address health issues within medically underserved areas, the Secretary shall, in awarding grants and other assistance under this Act, reserve a portion of the grants and assistance for entities that-- ``(1) represent medically underserved areas or populations with a large number of uninsured and low-income individuals; and ``(2) otherwise meet all requirements for the grant or assistance.
Research Benefitting Populations With a Lack of Health Data.-- ``(1) Grants authorized.--From amounts appropriated under paragraph (3) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to research institutions in order to enable the institutions-- ``(A) to conduct research on the health status of populations for which there is an absence of health data, such as the Latina population; or ``(B) to work with organizations that focus on populations for which there is an absence of health data, such as the Latina population, on developing participatory community-based research methods.
Application.--A research institution desiring a grant under this subsection shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $18,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 and each of the succeeding fiscal years.
Joint Effort for Health Outcomes.--In order to improve health outcomes for uninsured and low-income individuals, the Secretary shall, through a joint effort with health care professionals, health advocates, and community-based organizations in medically underserved areas, provide outreach, education, and delivery of comprehensive health services to uninsured and low-income individuals in a culturally competent manner.
Targeted Health Education Programs.--The Secretary shall carry out a health education program targeted specifically to populations of uninsured and low-income individuals, including the Latina population, through community centered informational forums, public service announcements, and media campaigns.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $18,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 and each succeeding fiscal year.