This Act may be cited as the ``Violent and Repeat Offender Accountability Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) it is the responsibility of the Federal Government to provide States help in certain areas, including efforts to reduce violent crime; (2) Federal legislation relating to criminal justice, including the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (``RICO'') and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, has been very effective in dealing with crimes to which the legislation applies; (3) the responsibility for protecting citizens against most violent crimes and for punishing most violent criminal offenders is primarily a matter of State and local governance; (4) violent crimes nationwide have risen dramatically and constitute a national priority of the highest order; (5) the persistence and increasing incidence of violent crime, despite the efforts of State and local governments, has resulted in a vastly increased Federal role in this area, and there is pressure for even greater Federal involvement in criminal matters traditionally handled by State and local governments; (6) the Federal courts especially have become overburdened with criminal matters more properly handled by State and local governments; (7) a major impetus for this increased Federal role in combating violent crime is the lack of effective tools with which State and local governments can prosecute violent criminal offenders; (8) a more uniform, proportionate, and appropriately punitive system of sentencing for violent criminal offenders would serve both to reduce the incidence of violent crime and to reduce the need for direct Federal involvement in criminal matters traditionally handled by State and local governments; (9) a more appropriate and effective role for the Federal Government in the struggle against most violent crime is to encourage each State to take the steps necessary to reduce crime in such State which would also reduce the national crime rate; (10) the United States Sentencing Guidelines have proven to be an effective means of achieving, at the Federal level, a more uniform, proportionate, and appropriately punitive criminal sentencing system; and (11) each State should be required to analyze its criminal sentencing system and to consider whether the adoption of a revised sentencing system would enable it to combat violent crime more effectively.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to require each State to undertake a comprehensive examination of the State's criminal sentencing scheme and to create a sentencing system which more effectively governs the sentencing of violent offenders; and (2) to provide funds to States that comply with the requirements of section 5(b) to implement necessary changes to the State criminal sentencing system, including increasing the capacity of State correctional facilities if necessary.
For the purpose of this Act, the term ``State'' means any State of the United States.
In General.--Each State, in order to be eligible for funds under this Act, must conduct a systematic review of its criminal sentencing laws and practices.
State Sentencing Reviews.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the government of each State shall submit to the Attorney General a report detailing the results of the State's review of its criminal sentencing system.
The report also shall include the following: (1) An analysis of the State statutory criminal sentencing scheme, including information regarding murder (all degrees), arson, burglary, assault, robbery, kidnapping, extortion, rape, and child molestation.
This analysis should include-- (A) the minimum and maximum sentence available for each offense; (B) the basis for distinguishing between different degrees of the same offense; (C) whether factors in addition to the actual crime (such as criminal history, victim impact, or use of a weapon) should be considered by the sentencing authority; and (D) whether probation or some other non-custodial alternatives to incarceration are a sentencing option.
An analysis of the sentences actually imposed by State court judges for the crimes listed in paragraph (1).
An analysis of the time which has actually been served for the conviction of crimes listed in paragraph (1).
An analysis of the practices and procedures of the State relating to probation, parole, and other alternatives to incarceration, with particular emphasis on crimes which have been committed by convicted criminals while on parole or probation or otherwise not incarcerated.
An analysis of whether the State sentencing system permits or requires the sentencing authority to order convicted criminals to pay restitution to the victim, the victim's family, or the State, and the percentage of restitution orders which are actually collected.
An analysis of whether and under what circumstances State law permits the pretrial detention without bond of dangerous offenders.
An analysis of whether and under what circumstances State law gives victims the right to be informed, present, and heard at all critical stages of a case from arrest through parole.
An analysis of whether and how State law establishes post conviction relief procedures which limit repetitive challenges by convicted offenders.
An analysis of State law regarding the application of adult sentencing laws to juvenile offenders charged with the crimes listed in section 4(b)(1) of this Act.
An analysis of the State prison capacity and whether court orders limit, or otherwise impact such capacity and whether a lack of capacity impacts sentencing or release decisions at the judicial or administrative level.
In General.--Each State, in order to comply with this Act, must submit for approval a plan to the Attorney General that evaluates the criminal sentencing system and, if necessary, creates a sentencing system which complies with the requirements of subsection (b).
State Sentencing System.--In addition to responding to the reporting requirement of section 4(b) of this Act, the State, in a subsequent report to the Attorney General, shall describe in detail any changes in the State's criminal sentencing system designed to meet the requirements of this Act.
The elements of a sentencing system that the States must have in order to be in compliance with this Act shall include at least the following: (1) State constitutional or statutory authority for pretrial detention of dangerous criminals.
Mandatory minimum prison sentences, which do not allow probation or suspension of sentence, for violent offenders or repeat offenders who-- (A) intentionally or knowingly inflict serious physical injury; (B) use or exhibit deadly weapons in the commission of the crimes listed in section 4(b)(1) of this Act.
commit violent or sexual offenses against children; and (D) commit sexual assault.
Mandatory life sentence with no release for third or subsequent conviction of violent crime.
Truth in sentencing provisions which restrict parole, good-time credit release for violent offenders, or other forms of early release to not more than a total reduction of 15 percent of the sentence imposed.
State constitutional or statutory provisions which guarantee to victims the right to be informed, present, and heard at all critical stages of the criminal case, and provisions to ensure the collection, tracking, and enforcement of restitution from the offender in all cases involving economic loss to the victim.
Funding.--There shall be available to carry out the purposes of this Act, for fiscal year 1994, $1,000,000; for fiscal year 1995, $1,500,000; for fiscal year 1996, $2,000,000; for fiscal year 1997, $2,500,000; and for fiscal year 1998, $3,000,000; from amounts appropriated for foreign operations during such fiscal years (specifically from the amounts allocated for the Multilateral Development Banks, the International Development Association, the Agency for International Development, Public Law 83-480, and the Export-Import Development Bank) and from amounts appropriated from Federal land purchases and from amounts appropriated for trade promotion activities and travel and tourism activities.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of a grant made under this Act may not exceed 50 percent of the total costs of the projects which receive funds under this Act.
Compliance.--Beginning 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall eliminate funding to a State that does not comply with the requirements of this Act.