This Act may be cited as the ``Sugar Loaf Fire Protection District Land Exchange Act''.
In this Act: (1) District.--The term ``District'' means the Sugar Loaf Fire Protection District of Boulder, Colorado.
Federal land.--The term ``Federal land'' means-- (A) the parcel of approximately 1.52 acres of land in the National Forest that is generally depicted on the map numbered 1, entitled ``Sugarloaf Fire Protection District Proposed Land Exchange'', and dated November 12, 2009; and (B) the parcel of approximately 3.56 acres of land in the National Forest that is generally depicted on the map numbered 2, entitled ``Sugarloaf Fire Protection District Proposed Land Exchange'', and dated November 12, 2009.
National forest.--The term ``National Forest'' means the Arapaho-Roosevelt National Forests located in the State of Colorado.
Non-federal land.--The term ``non-Federal land'' means the parcel of approximately 5.17 acres of non-Federal land in unincorporated Boulder County, Colorado, that is generally depicted on the map numbered 3, entitled ``Sugarloaf Fire Protection District Proposed Land Exchange'', and dated November 12, 2009.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
In General.--Subject to the provisions of this Act, if the District offers to convey to the Secretary all right, title, and interest of the District in and to the non-Federal land, and the offer is acceptable to the Secretary-- (1) the Secretary shall accept the offer; and (2) on receipt of acceptable title to the non-Federal land, the Secretary shall convey to the District all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the Federal land.
Applicable Law.--Section 206 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716) shall apply to the land exchange authorized under subsection (a), except that-- (1) the Secretary may accept a cash equalization payment in excess of 25 percent of the value of the Federal land; and (2) as a condition of the land exchange under subsection (a), the District shall-- (A) pay each cost relating to any land surveys and appraisals of the Federal land and non-Federal land; and (B) enter into an agreement with the Secretary that allocates any other administrative costs between the Secretary and the District.
Additional Terms and Conditions.--The land exchange under subsection (a) shall be subject to-- (1) valid existing rights; and (2) any terms and conditions that the Secretary may require.
Time for Completion of Land Exchange.--It is the intent of Congress that the land exchange under subsection (a) shall be completed not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Authority of Secretary To Conduct Sale of Federal Land.-- (1) In general.--In accordance with paragraph (2), if the land exchange under subsection (a) is not completed by the date that is 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary may offer to sell to the District the Federal land.
Value of federal land.--The Secretary may offer to sell to the District the Federal land for the fair market value of the Federal land.
Disposition of Proceeds.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall deposit in the fund established under Public Law 90-171 (commonly known as the ``Sisk Act'') (16 United States Code 484a) any amount received by the Secretary as the result of-- (A) any cash equalization payment made under subsection (b); and (B) any sale carried out under subsection (e).
Use of proceeds.--Amounts deposited under paragraph (1) shall be available to the Secretary, without further appropriation and until expended, for the acquisition of land or interests in land in the National Forest.
Management and Status of Acquired Land.--The non-Federal land acquired by the Secretary under this section shall be-- (1) added to, and administered as part of, the National Forest; and (2) managed by the Secretary in accordance with-- (A) the Act of March 1, 1911 (commonly known as the ``Weeks Law'') (16 United States Code 480 et sequentes); and (B) any laws (including regulations) applicable to the National Forest.
Revocation of Orders; Withdrawal.-- (1) Revocation of orders.--Any public order withdrawing the Federal land from entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws is revoked to the extent necessary to permit the conveyance of the Federal land to the District.
Withdrawal.--On the date of enactment of this Act, if not already withdrawn or segregated from entry and appropriation under the public land laws (including the mining and mineral leasing laws) and the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1001 et sequentes), the Federal land is withdrawn until the date of the conveyance of the Federal land to the District.
Passed the House of Representatives July 13, 2010.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.