This Act may be cited as the ``Jefferson Commemorative Coin Act of 1993''.
One-Dollar Silver Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 600,000 one-dollar coins, which shall weigh 26.73 grams, have a diameter of 1.500 inches, and contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of the coins issued under this Act shall be emblematic of a Jefferson profile and frontal view of his home Monticello.
On each coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1993'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act (50 United States Code 98 et sequentes).
Subject to section 2(a)(2), the design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Executive Director of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation and the Commission of Fine Arts.
As required by section 5135 of title 31, United States Code, the design shall also be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act during the period beginning on July 4, 1993, and ending on July 4, 1994.
Sale Price.--The coins authorized under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge provided in subsection (c) with respect to such coins, and the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins authorized under this Act prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sale prices with respect to such prepaid orders shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
No provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Nothing in this section shall relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary-- (1) in the case of surcharges received in connection with the sale of the first 500,000 coins issued, to the Jefferson Endowment Fund, to be used-- (A) to establish and maintain an endowment to be a permanent source of support for Monticello and its historic furnishings; and (B) for the Jefferson Endowment Fund's educational programs, including the International Center for Jefferson Studies; and (2) in the case of surcharges received in connection with the sale of all other such coins, to the Corporation for Jefferson's Poplar Forest, to be used for the restoration and maintenance of Poplar Forest.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the entities specified in section 8, as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under section 8.
NUMISMATIC PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND.
The coins issued under this Act are subject to the provisions of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.
It is the sense of the Congress that this coin program shall be self-sustaining, and should be administered to result in no net cost to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.
Passed the Senate May 27 (legislative day, April 19), 1993.
Attest: WALTER J. STEWART, Secretary.