This Act may be cited as the ``FHA Modernization Act''.
Selection.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall select a computer system under this section (including appropriate mechanical, electronic, and programming elements) for use in administrating the single family and multifamily housing mortgage insurance programs under title II of the National Housing Act and shall use such system to carry out the activities under subsection (b) of this section.
Use of existing systems and programs.--In selecting the computer system, the Secretary shall survey and review various computer systems and programs that are commercially available and used for processing housing and residential mortgage applications.
The Secretary shall identify the programs, methods, and procedures that are most effective and applicable for use under this section.
Contract.--Pursuant to the survey and review under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall, to the extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, enter into a contract with an appropriate private entity for the use and adaptation (if necessary) of the computer system that best meets the specifications established under subsection (b).
Requirements.--The computer system selected under this section shall meet the specifications established by the Secretary to carry out activities with respect to the single family and multifamily housing mortgage insurance programs under title II of the National Housing Act, as follows: (1) To administer the processing of applications for mortgage insurance.
To maintain and update any records and information maintained by the Secretary.
To facilitate, coordinate, and simplify interaction between the Department of Housing and Urban Development and mortgagees, including determination of eligibility, review and certification of underwriting, making insurance commitments and endorsements, closing, and other mortgage insurance activities.
To monitor the performance of the Department with respect to each function identified in the performance standards established under section 4.
To monitor the performance of mortgagees, servicers, and other entities involved in the mortgage insurance programs, entities to whom processing functions have been delegated by the Secretary under section 328 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, and mortgagees approved for direct endorsement.
STUDY OF PRIVATE MANAGEMENT OF INSURANCE PROGRAMS USING COMPUTER SYSTEM.
Study.--The Secretary shall conduct a study to determine the effectiveness and feasibility of utilizing private contractors to administer the single family and multifamily housing mortgage insurance programs under the National Housing Act using the computer system selected under section 2.
The study shall analyze whether the purposes of the mortgage insurance programs would be carried out more efficiently and economically by using contractors with demonstrated capabilities to carry out the mortgage insurance functions currently performed by the staff of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Report.--The Secretary shall submit a report regarding the study to the Congress not later than the expiration of the 4-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, which shall contain findings and recommendations regarding the use and cost of private contractors.
The Secretary shall establish standards by which to evaluate the performance of the Department of Housing and Urban Development with respect to functions performed by the Department in carrying out the single family and multifamily housing mortgage insurance programs under title II of the National Housing Act, including standards for prompt servicing of applications, accuracy of records, accounting for funds, prompt handling of delinquencies, and any other separately identifiable functions performed by the Department in carrying out such programs.
PERIODIC REPORTS REGARDING CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE.
Using information compiled and available through the computer system selected under section 2, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report for each calendar year regarding the performance of mortgagees, servicers, and contractors involved in the single family and multifamily housing mortgage insurance programs under title II of the National Housing Act, entities to whom processing functions have been delegated by the Secretary under section 328 of the Cranston- Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, and mortgagees approved for direct endorsement.
Each report under this section shall be submitted not later than the March 31 of the year following the year for which the report is made.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.