This Act may be cited as the ``Working And Reacting (WAR) Against Meth Act of 2000''.
MANUFACTURING AND DISTRIBUTION OF AMPHETAMINE.
Manufacture or Distribution of Substantial Quantities of Amphetamine.--Subparagraph (A) of section 401(b)(1) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 841(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (vii); (2) by adding ``or'' at the end of clause (viii); and (3) by inserting after clause (viii) the following new clause: ``(ix) 50 grams or more of amphetamine, its salts, optical isomers, and salts of its optical isomers or 500 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of amphetamine, its salts, optical isomers, or salts of its optical isomers;''.
Manufacture or Distribution of Lesser Quantities of Amphetamine.--Subparagraph (B) of such section 401(b)(1) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (vii); (2) by adding ``or'' at the end of clause (viii); and (3) by inserting after clause (viii) the following new clause: ``(ix) 5 grams or more of amphetamine, its salts, optical isomers, and salts of its optical isomers or 50 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of amphetamine, its salts, optical isomers, or salts of its optical isomers;''.
IMPORT AND EXPORT OF AMPHETAMINE.
Import or Export of Substantial Quantities of Amphetamine.-- Paragraph (1) of section 1010(b) of the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act (21 United States Code 960(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (G); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following new subparagraph: ``(I) 50 grams or more of amphetamine, its salts, optical isomers, and salts of its optical isomers or 500 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of amphetamine, its salts, optical isomers, or salts of its optical isomers;''.
Import or Export of Lesser Quantities of Amphetamine.-- Paragraph (2) of such section 1010(b) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (G); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following new subparagraph: ``(I) 5 grams or more of amphetamine, its salts, optical isomers, and salts of its optical isomers or 50 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of amphetamine, its salts, optical isomers, or salts of its optical isomers;''.
ENDANGERING HUMAN LIFE OR THE ENVIRONMENT WHILE ILLEGALLY MANUFACTURING CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
Harm to the Environment.--(1) Section 417 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 858) is amended by inserting ``or, if the controlled substance consists of methamphetamine, its salts, isomers, or salts of its isomers, or a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of methamphetamine, its salts, isomers, or salts of its isomers, the environment (as defined in section 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601))'' after ``to human life''.
The table of contents for that Act is amended in the item relating to section 417 by inserting ``or the environment'' after ``to human life''.
Enhanced Penalty for Establishment of Manufacturing Operation.--That section is further amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``Whoever''; (2) in subsection (a), as so designated-- (A) by inserting ``or violating section 416,'' after ``to do so,'' the first place it appears; and (B) by striking ``shall be fined'' and all that follows and inserting ``shall be imprisoned not more than 40 years, and, in addition, may be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Any penalty under subsection (a) for a violation that is also a violation of section 416 shall be in addition to any penalty under section 416 for such violation.''.
Nature of Particular Conduct.--That section is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) In any case where the conduct at issue is, relates to, or involves the manufacture of amphetamine or methamphetamine, such conduct shall, by itself, be rebuttably presumed to constitute the creation of a substantial risk of harm to human life or the environment within the meaning of subsection (a).''.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR METHAMPHETAMINE CLANDESTINE LABORATORY INFORMATION.
Establishment.--At the direction of the Attorney General, the El Paso Intelligence Center (hereinafter in this section referred to as ``EPIC'') and the Los Angeles County Regional Criminal Information Clearinghouse (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``LA Clearinghouse'') shall jointly and in concert constitute the National Center for Methamphetamine Clandestine Laboratory Information.
EPIC's National Clandestine Laboratory Seizure Intelligence database shall provide for the nationwide electronic reporting, capture, and retrieval of clandestine laboratory seizure information.
This information shall be analyzed by the LA Clearinghouse, in concert and coordination with EPIC, and disseminated to appropriate law enforcement agencies in a timely manner.
Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section for fiscal year 2000 and each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years not to exceed $2,300,000.