This Act may be cited as the ``Puerto Rico Karst Conservation Act of 2003''.
FINDINGS, PURPOSES, AND DEFINITIONS.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Karst Region of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico contains some of the largest areas of tropical forests in Puerto Rico with a higher density of tree species than any other area on the island.
The Karst Region has unique geological formations that are critical to the maintenance of aquifers and watersheds that constitute a principal water supply for much of Puerto Rico.
The Karst Region is threatened by development that, if unchecked, could permanently damage aquifers supplying fresh water and cause irreparable damage to natural and environmental assets that are unique to the United States and Puerto Rico.
Puerto Rico is one of the most densely populated areas of the United States, which makes the protection of the Karst Region an imperative for the maintenance of the public health and welfare of the citizens of Puerto Rico.
The Karst Region possesses extraordinary ecological diversity, including the habitats of several endangered and threatened species and tropical migrants, and is, therefore, an area of critical value to research in tropical forest management.
Coordinated efforts at land protection by the Federal Government and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico will be necessary to conserve the environmentally critical Karst Region.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to authorize and support conservation efforts to acquire, manage, and protect the tropical forest areas of the Karst Region of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, with particular emphasis on protecting water quality and the aquifers which are vital to the health and well being of the citizens of Puerto Rico; and (2) to promote cooperation among the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Federal Agencies, corporations, organizations, and individuals in such conservation efforts.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Commonwealth.--The term ``Commonwealth'' means the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
Karst region.--The term ``Karst Region'' means those areas in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico generally depicted on the map entitled ``Karst Region Conservation Area'' and dated March, 2001.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Secretary, Puerto Rico Department of Natural and Environmental Resources, and the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
Land.--The term ``land'' includes lands, waters, and interests in lands and waters.
Forest legacy program.--The term ``Forest Legacy Program'' means the program established pursuant to section 7 of the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 2103c).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
CONSERVATION OF KARST REGION, COMMONWEALTH OF PUERTO RICO.
Federal Cooperation and Assistance.--The Secretary may-- (1) make grants to, and enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with, the Commonwealth, other Federal agencies, organizations, corporations, and individuals for the purposes of furthering the acquisition, management, and protection of land in and adjacent to the Karst Region and implementing related natural resources conservation strategies; and (2) utilize all authorities available to the Secretary, including the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Research Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 1641 et.
), section 1472 of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 3318), and section 12 of the Stevenson- Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 United States Code 3710a), for such purposes.
Funding Sources.--The activities authorized by this section may be carried out using amounts in the Puerto Rico Karst Conservation Fund, the fund established by section 4(b) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Research Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 1643(b)), funds appropriated from the Land and Water Conservation Fund, funds appropriated for the Forest Legacy Program, and any other funds made available for this section.
Management of Acquired Lands.-- (1) Management purpose.--Land acquired under the authority of this section or using funds made available under this section shall be managed in a manner to protect and conserve the water quality and aquifers and the geological, ecological, fish and wildlife, and other natural values of the Karst Region.
Any Federal land within the Karst Region acquired pursuant to this section or the Forest Legacy Program shall be managed by the Secretary pursuant to the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Research Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 1641 et.
United states interest.--In deeds, grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements implementing this section and the Forest Legacy Program in Puerto Rico, the Secretary may require that title to land acquired by the Commonwealth or other cooperating entity under the authority of this section or using funds made available under this section will vest, at the discretion of the Secretary, in the United States if the land is sold or conveyed whole or part, or is not managed in conformity with paragraph (1).
Willing Sellers.--Any land acquisition by the Secretary within the Karst Region under the authority of this section and using funds made available under this section shall be on a willing seller basis.
Relation to Other Land Authorities.--Nothing in this Act shall diminish any other authority that the Secretary may have to acquire, manage, and protect lands and natural resources in the Commonwealth.
Relation to Commonwealth Water Laws.--Nothing in this section shall constitute an express or implied claim or denial on the part of the Federal Government as to exemption from Commonwealth water laws.
PUERTO RICO KARST CONSERVATION FUND.
Establishment.--There is hereby established on the books of the Treasury an interest bearing account to be known as the ``Puerto Rico Karst Conservation Fund''.
Credits to Funds.--There shall be credited to the Fund the following: (1) Amounts appropriated to the Fund.
All moneys donated to the Fund.
All moneys generated from the Caribbean National Forest which would otherwise be deposited as miscellaneous receipts in the Treasury of the United States, but not including those moneys authorized by law for payments to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or authorized by law for retention by the Forest Service for any purpose.
All moneys received by the Administrator of General Services from the disposal of surplus real property in Puerto Rico pursuant to title 40, United States Code, or any other provision of law.
Interest derived from amounts in the Fund and any other moneys donated for deposit in the Fund.
Use of Fund.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available to the Secretary until expended, without further appropriation, to carry out section 3.
Donations.-- (1) Acceptance.--The Secretary may accept donations, including land and money, made by public and private agencies, corporations, organizations, and individuals in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
The Secretary may accept such donations even though the donor is regulated by, conducts business with, or seeks to conduct business with, the Department of Agriculture or any other department or agency of the United States.
Treatment of donations.--Public Law 95-442 (7 United States Code 2269) shall apply to donations accepted by the Secretary under this subsection.
RELATION TO FOREST LEGACY PROGRAM.
Inclusion of Karst Region.--All lands in the Karst Region shall be eligible for inclusion in the Forest Legacy Program.
Cost Sharing.--The Secretary may credit donations made under section 4(d) to satisfy any cost sharing requirements of the Forest Legacy Program.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Puerto Rico Karst Conservation Fund such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.