This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Support Payment Act''.
Right To Support.--The Congress hereby declares that every unemancipated child has a natural, moral, social, and Federal right to be supported by such child's parent or parents and that such right transcends the status of debt.
Effect of Exercise of Right To Travel.--The Congress further declares that while sound national policy requires that migration throughout the United States be unrestricted, experience has disclosed that in the exercise of the right of migration and travel many individuals leave behind them dependent and neglected children; and that although the courts of the State in which such children reside may have properly ordered an individual to meet his or her natural, moral, social, and Federal obligation to such children, once such individual has traveled to another State such individual has a practical sanctuary against jurisdiction of the original State of residence.
Instances of Departure Preceding Court Jurisdiction.--The Congress further declares that in other instances the departure preceded acquisition of jurisdiction over the individual by courts of the original State with like result.
Child Support Enforcement Amendments of 1984 Were Significant Steps.--In enacting the Child Support Enforcement Amendments of 1984 the Congress took significant steps to assist children in obtaining needed financial support from their parents regardless of their circumstances, but many of the evils outlined above remain.
Policy.--It is the policy of Congress in this Act to correct these evils-- (1) by requiring that orders of State courts directing individuals to meet their natural, moral, social, and Federal obligations to such children shall be enforced in the State courts in areas to which such individuals have migrated from the original jurisdiction within the United States; and (2) by giving State courts, in States to which such individuals have migrated, original jurisdiction in suits brought by citizens of other States to order such migrants to meet such obligations, to the end that such children will not suffer want or be made the objects of public welfare and thus become an unnecessary burden to the general public and be themselves thereby humiliated.
ENFORCEMENT OF STATE COURT ORDERS.
In General.--Part VI of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 180.--ENFORCEMENT OF STATE COURT SUPPORT ORDERS ``Sec.
Registration of support orders.
Notice to original court.
Definitions ``As used in this chapter-- ``(1) the term `support order' means an order of a State court having jurisdiction over an individual, directing such individual to make payments periodically to (or for the support of) such individual's child (whether the issue of such individual's body, legitimate or illegitimate, or adopted); ``(2) the term `obligor', with respect to a support order, means an individual who is directed to make payments under the order; ``(3) the term `obligee' means any individual to whom the proceeds of a support order are payable for such individual, or for the use or benefit of another individual, or such other individual's guardian or guardian ad litem; ``(4) the term `original court', with respect to a support order, means the court in which the order was made; ``(5) the term `State' includes the territories and the District of Columbia; and ``(6) the term `registered', with respect to a support order, means registered under section 3102 of this title.
Registration of support orders ``Any obligee of a support order may register the order in any court of any State in which an obligor of the order resides, if the court is located outside the State in which the order was made, and has jurisdiction to issue support orders.
Registration shall be accomplished by filing with the clerk of the court a certified copy of the support order and of each order of the original court modifying the support order.
Enforcement ``(a) Any court in which a support order is registered shall entertain contempt proceedings, in the same manner as if the order were an order of such court, against an obligor who fails to comply with the order within thirty days after being served notice that it has been registered.
No proceedings to enforce a support order shall be begun in any court under this section unless a copy of each order of the original court modifying the support order is registered under section 3102 of this title.
The cost of enforcement proceedings under this section shall be taxed against the party against whom the issues are resolved.
The obligor shall be required to pay a reasonable attorney fee to the obligee if the court finds the proceedings were necessary to compel the obligor to comply with the support order.
Notice to original court ``When, in any court, any support order is registered under section 3102 of this title or any proceedings are taken under section 3103 of this title to enforce a support order, written notice of such action under the seal of such court shall be sent to the original court.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part VI of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``180.
Enforcement of State Court Support Orders............ 3801''.
Section 1332 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) State courts shall have original jurisdiction of civil actions brought by a citizen of another State to order a citizen of the State in which the court is located to make payments periodically to (or for the support of) such citizen's child (whether the issue of such citizen's body, legitimate or illegitimate, or adopted) if under the law of such State a State court is authorized to make such an order, as an incident to a divorce proceeding or otherwise.