OF IDENTITY THEFT DISPUTES.
The Commission shall require entities that receive disputes regarding the unauthorized use of accounts of such entities from consumers that have reason to believe that they are victims of identity theft to conduct any necessary investigation and decide an outcome of a claim within 90 days from the date on which all necessary information to investigate the claim has been submitted to the entity.
IMPROVEMENTS TO CONSUMER CLEARINGHOUSE.
The Commission shall utilize the Identity Theft Clearinghouse to permit consumers that have a reasonable belief that they are victims of identity theft to submit any information relevant to such identity theft to the Clearinghouse (including by means of an Identity Theft Affidavit), so that such information may be transmitted by the Clearinghouse to appropriate entities for necessary protective action and to mitigate losses resulting from such identity theft.
IMPROVED IDENTITY THEFT DATA.
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) establish a process to contact, not less than annually, public and private entities that receive and process complaints from consumers that have a reasonable belief that they are victims of identity theft; and (2) obtain accurate data on the incidences and nature of complaints from such entities.
Inclusion in Database.--Such information shall be made part of the Commission's Identity Theft Clearinghouse database.
CHANGE OF ADDRESS PROTECTIONS.
The Commission shall require appropriate entities to take reasonable steps to verify the accuracy of a consumer's address, including by confirming a consumer's change of address by sending a confirmation of such change to the old and the new address of the consumer.
This title shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--INTERNATIONAL PROVISIONS SEC.
STUDY BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study and issue a report analyzing the impact on the interstate and foreign commerce of the United States of information privacy laws, regulations, or agreements enacted, promulgated, or adopted by other nations, including regional or international agreements between nations, and whether the enforcement mechanisms or procedures of those laws, regulations, or agreements result in discriminatory treatment of United States entities.
The first report under this section shall be issued not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act and subsequent reports shall be issued every 3 years thereafter.
REMEDIATION OF DISCRIMINATORY IMPACT BY SECRETARY OF COMMERCE.
If the Comptroller General of the United States finds, in the study and report under section 301, that such information privacy laws, regulations, or agreements substantially impede interstate and foreign commerce of the United States and that the enforcement mechanisms or procedures of the information privacy laws, regulations, or agreements described in such subsection result in discriminatory treatment of United States entities, the Secretary of Commerce shall, to the extent permitted by law take all steps necessary to mitigate against such discriminatory impact within 180 days after the report making such findings is issued.
Recommendations.--If by the end of the 180-day period described in section 302, the Secretary of Commerce has not attained complete relief from the discriminatory impact described in such subsection, the Secretary shall report to the Congress and the President recommendations on action to relieve any such remaining discriminatory impact.
Federal Agency Action After Consideration by Congress.--During the period after the Secretary reports recommendations under subsection (a) for mitigation of discriminatory impact and before the Congress acts with respect to such recommendations, no officer or employee of any Federal agency may take or continue any action to enjoin, or impose any penalty on, a United States entity, or a citizen or legal resident of the United States, for the purpose of fulfilling an international obligation of the United States under an international privacy agreement (other than such an obligation under a ratified treaty) that resulted in such discriminatory impact.
HARMONIZATION OF INTERNATIONAL PRIVACY LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND AGREEMENTS.
Beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall provide notice of the provisions of this Act to other nations, individually, or as members of international organizations or unions that have enacted, promulgated, or adopted information privacy laws, regulations, or agreements, and shall seek recognition of this Act by such nations, organizations, or unions.
The Secretary shall seek the harmonization of this Act with such information privacy laws, regulations, or agreements, to the extent such harmonization is necessary for the advancement of transnational commerce, including electronic commerce.