UNDER SECRETARY FOR POLICY.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Homeland Security Policy Act of 2005''.
In General.--The Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101 et seq.)
is amended-- (1) by redesignating title VI and section 601 as title XVIII and section 1801, respectively, and transferring that title to the end of the Homeland Security Act of 2002; and (2) by inserting after title V, the following: ``TITLE VI--UNDER SECRETARY FOR POLICY ``SEC.
UNDER SECRETARY FOR POLICY.
In General.--There shall be in the Department an Under Secretary for Policy, who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Responsibilities.--Subject to the direction, authority, and control of the Secretary, the responsibilities of the Under Secretary for Policy shall be as follows: ``(1) Policy.-- ``(A) To serve as the principal policy advisor to the Secretary.
To provide overall direction and supervision for policy development to programs, offices, and activities of the Department.
To establish and direct a formal policymaking process for the Department.
To analyze, evaluate, and review completed, ongoing, and proposed programs, to ensure they are compatible with the Secretary's priorities, strategic plans, and policies.
Strategic planning.-- ``(A) To conduct long-range, strategic planning for the Department.
To prepare national and Department strategies, as appropriate.
To conduct net assessments of issues facing the Department.
To conduct reviews of the Department to ensure the implementation of this paragraph.
International responsibilities.-- ``(A) To promote informational and educational exchange with nations friendly to the United States in order to promote sharing of best practices and technologies relating to homeland security, including-- ``(i) the exchange of information on research and development on homeland security technologies; ``(ii) joint training exercises of first responders; and ``(iii) exchanging expertise and information on terrorism prevention, response, and crisis management.
To identify areas for homeland security informational and training exchange where the United States has a demonstrated weakness and another friendly nation or nations have a demonstrated expertise.
To plan and undertake international conferences, exchange programs (including the exchange of scientists, engineers, and other experts), and other training activities.
To manage international activities within the Department in coordination with other Federal officials with responsibility for counterterrorism matters.
Private sector.-- ``(A) To create and foster strategic communications with the private sector to enhance the primary mission of the Department to protect the American homeland.
To advise the Secretary on the impact of the policies, regulations, processes, and actions of the Department on the private sector.
To interface with other relevant Federal agencies with homeland security missions to assess the impact of the actions of such agencies on the private sector.
To create and manage private sector advisory councils composed of representatives of industries and associations designated by the Secretary-- ``(i) to advise the Secretary on private sector products, applications, and solutions as they relate to homeland security challenges; and ``(ii) to advise the Secretary on homeland security policies, regulations, processes, and actions that affect the participating industries and associations.
To work with Federal laboratories, federally funded research and development centers, other federally funded organizations, academia, and the private sector to develop innovative approaches to address homeland security challenges to produce and deploy the best available technologies for homeland security missions.
To promote existing public-private partnerships and develop new public-private partnerships to provide for collaboration and mutual support to address homeland security challenges.
To assist in the development and promotion of private sector best practices to secure critical infrastructure.
To coordinate industry efforts, with respect to functions of the Department, to identify private sector resources and capabilities that could be effective in supplementing Federal, State, and local government agency efforts to prevent or respond to a terrorist attack.
To coordinate among Department operating entities and with the Assistant Secretary for Trade Development of the Department of Commerce on issues related to the travel and tourism industries.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--The Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 103-- (A) by redesignating paragraphs (6) through (10) as paragraphs (7) through (11), respectively; and (B) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following: ``(6) An Under Secretary for Policy.
''; (2) by striking section 879; (3) by redesignating sections 880 through 890 as sections 879 through 889, respectively; and (4) in the table of contents-- (A) by redesignating the items relating to title VI and section 601 as relating to title XVIII and section 1801, respectively, and transferring the items relating to that title and section to the end of the table of contents; (B) by inserting before the item relating to title VII the following: ``TITLE VI--UNDER SECRETARY FOR POLICY ``Sec.
Under Secretary for Policy.
''; (C) by striking the item relating to section 879; and (D) by redesignating the items relating to sections 880 through 890 as relating to sections 879 through 889, respectively.