This Act may be cited as the ``Disaster Recovery Improvement Act''.
Section 404 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5170c) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Additional Mitigation Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--If, at the time of a declaration of a major disaster, the affected State has in effect and is actively enforcing throughout the State an approved State building code, the President may increase the maximum total of contributions under this section for the major disaster, as specified in subsection (a), by an amount equal to 5 percent of the estimated aggregate amount of grants to be made (less any associated administrative costs) under this Act with respect to the major disaster.
Submission.--To be eligible for an increased Federal share under paragraph (1), a State, at least once every 4 years, shall submit its State building code to the President for approval.
Approval.--The President shall approve a State building code submitted under paragraph (2) if the President determines that the building code-- ``(A) is consistent with the most recent version of a nationally recognized model building code; ``(B) has been adopted by the State within 4 years of the most recent version of the nationally recognized model building code; and ``(C) uses the nationally recognized model building code as a minimum standard.
Definitions.--In this subsection, the following definitions apply: ``(A) Actively enforcing.--The term `actively enforcing' means effective jurisdictional execution of all phases of a State building code in the process of examination and approval of construction plans, specifications, and technical data and the inspection of new construction or renovation.
Nationally recognized model building code.-- The term `nationally recognized model building code' means a building code for residential and commercial construction and construction materials that-- ``(i) has been developed and published by a code organization in an open consensus type forum with input from national experts; and ``(ii) is based on national structural design standards that establish minimum acceptable criteria for the design, construction, and maintenance of residential and commercial buildings for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the building's users against natural disasters.
State building code.--The term `State building code' means requirements and associated standards for residential and commercial construction and construction materials that are implemented on a statewide basis by ordinance, resolution, law, housing or building code, or zoning ordinance.
At a minimum, such requirements and associated standards shall apply-- ``(i) to construction-related activities of residential building contractors applicable to single-family and two-family residential structures; and ``(ii) to construction-related activities of engineers, architects, designers, and commercial building contractors applicable to the structural safety, design, and construction of commercial, industrial, and multifamily structures.
Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the President, acting through the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this subsection.''.
Section 406 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5172) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Expedited Payments.-- ``(1) Grant assistance.--In making a contribution under subsection (a)(1), the President shall provide not less than 50 percent of the President's initial estimate of the Federal share of assistance as an initial payment in accordance with paragraph (2).
Date of payment.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the estimate described in paragraph (1), and not later than 90 days after the date on which the State or local government or owner or operator of a private nonprofit facility applies for assistance under this section, the initial payment described in paragraph (1) shall be paid.''.
Debris Management Plans.--Section 407(d) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5173(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Federal share shall be increased by 5 percent for States and local governments that (1) have a debris management plan approved by the Administrator; and (2) have prequalified 2 or more debris and wreckage removal contractors before the date of declaration of the major disaster.
To qualify for the increased Federal share under the preceding sentence, a debris management plan shall be resubmitted to the Administrator for approval every 4 years.''.
Financial Incentives for Debris Recycling.--Section 407 such Act (42 United States Code 5173) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Debris Recycling.-- ``(1) In general.--A grant recipient under subsection (a)(2) may use funds from the grant for the costs of recycling debris and wreckage resulting from a major disaster, including the sorting of such materials.
Value of salvaged material.-- ``(A) Retention of financial benefits.--A grant recipient under subsection (a)(2) may retain any financial benefit received from the salvage of recycled debris or wreckage.
Treatment of financial benefits.--Any such financial benefit shall not be considered to be program income for purposes of section 13.25 of title 44, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation).
Contracts.--Any arrangement between a grant recipient under subsection (a)(2) and a contractor in which the contractor will retain possession of recyclable materials shall be reflected in the contractor's bid price.
Reporting.-- ``(A) Recipients that recycle debris.--A grant recipient under subsection (a)(2) that recycles debris or wreckage during disaster operations shall submit to the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency a written description of what the recipient did to recycle the debris or wreckage, the volume of the debris or wreckage that was recycled, and the monetary or nonmonetary benefits received, if any.
Recipients that do not recycle debris.--A grant recipient under subsection (a)(2) that chooses not to recycle debris or wreckage during disaster operations shall submit to the Administrator a written statement describing why this option was not used.''.
Timing.--Section 423(b) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5189a(b)) is amended by striking ``90 days'' and inserting ``60 days''.
Regulations.--The Administrator shall issue rules regarding the information that must be provided to an applicant in the event that a project worksheet is denied.
The required information shall include, at a minimum-- (1) all reasons for which the project worksheet was denied; (2) the specific items, if any, in the project worksheet that are disputed; and (3) a description of any additional information the applicant needs to provide.
In order to provide more objective criteria for evaluating the need for assistance to individuals and to speed a declaration of a major disaster or emergency under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5121 et sequentes), not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in cooperation with representatives of State and local emergency management agencies, shall review, update, and revise through rulemaking the factors considered under section 206.48 of title 44, Code of Federal Regulations, to measure the severity, magnitude, and impact of a disaster.
HOUSEHOLD PETS AND SERVICE ANIMALS.
Section 502(a) of Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5192(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (7); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(9) provide assistance for rescue, care, shelter, and essential needs-- ``(A) to individuals with household pets and service animals; and ``(B) to such pets and animals.