This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security Reporting Improvements Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Social Security Advisory Board, the Technical Panel on Assumptions and Methods of the Social Security Advisory Board (in this Act referred to as the ``Panel''), and the Office of the Chief Actuary of the Social Security Administration should be commended for their professional, nonpartisan work to project the future financial operations of the social security program established under title II of the Social Security Act.
The Panel reported its recommendations in November 1999.
The Panel recommended a series of changes to current projections of the financial operations of the social security program which would, if adopted, increase existing estimates of the program's unfunded obligations.
The Panel further recommended the use of standards of comparison that emphasize program sustainability, such as showing the program's projected annual income rates, cost rates, and balances with an emphasis that is equal to 75-year program solvency.
The Panel further recommended that reform proposals be evaluated using standards of comparison that include the proposal's impact on the Federal unified budget, as well as a recognition of the funding shortfalls present under current law.
The Panel made several other recommendations that are worthy of consideration, involving issues that include, but are not limited to, workforce participation, poverty rates among the elderly, and assumptions regarding equity investment returns.
Adoption of the Panel's recommendations would assist in developing a fiscally responsible reform solution that avoids passing hidden costs to future taxpayers.
ANNUAL REPORT FROM THE COMMISSIONER OF SOCIAL SECURITY.
In General.--Section 704 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 904) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Annual Report to Congress ``(f) The Commissioner, in conjunction with the Secretary, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall submit an annual report to Congress that includes the following: ``(1) Projections of the old-age, survivors, and disability insurance program's (in this subsection referred to as the `program') annual income rates, cost rates, and annual balances throughout the 75-year valuation window used by the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund (in this subsection referred to as the `Board of Trustees').
A clear and explicit presentation of the program's financing shortfalls, expressed as the excess in dollars of program outlays over revenues, in years that the sum of payroll tax revenues and revenues resulting from taxes imposed on benefits provided under the program are projected by the Board of Trustees to be less than program outlays.
A presentation of benefit levels under the program and tax rates throughout the long-range valuation period used by the Board of Trustees that reflects the extent to which benefits would need to be reduced to be funded under currently projected program revenues, and the percentage that taxes would need to be increased in order to fund promised benefits.
An evaluation of the effects upon national savings levels and on the fiscal operations of the Federal Government of enacted provisions of law relating to the program.
Estimates of average lifetime values of benefits for different age, income, and gender cohorts, respectively, for recipients of benefits under the program, that are consistent with the estimates of the Board of Trustees of the percentage of benefits that can be funded under such enacted provisions of law.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to reports made for calendar years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM LEGISLATION.
It is the sense of Congress that Congress and the President should not miss a critical opportunity to enact comprehensive bipartisan social security reform legislation that meets the standard of 75-year actuarial solvency and also addresses the following issues: (1) The permanent sustainability of the social security program.
The long-term impact of reform upon the fiscal operations of the Federal Government as a whole.
The need for a clear and explicit presentation of the anticipated reduction in the social security program's unfunded obligations.
Ensured continued solvency under alternative assumptions regarding mortality, fertility, rates of return, and other appropriate economic and demographic assumptions.
The total amount of retirement income provided under proposed reform in comparison to a standard that explicitly recognizes the benefit reductions or tax increases that enacted provisions of law relating to the social security program would require, according to the estimates in the most recent report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund.
The long-term impact of the current projections of insolvency and of alternative reform proposals upon workforce participation, poverty among the elderly, national savings levels, and other issues identified by the Panel.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS.
It is the sense of Congress that the recommendations of the Panel should be implemented to the extent deemed reasonable by the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund, in consultation with the agencies and offices that have research, estimating, and reporting responsibilities pertinent to the social security program.