This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on the Comprehensive Study of Voting Procedures Act of 2001''.
Congress finds that-- (1) Americans are increasingly concerned about current voting procedures; (2) Americans are increasingly concerned about the speed and timeliness of vote counts; (3) Americans are increasingly concerned about the accuracy of vote counts; (4) Americans are increasingly concerned about the security of voting procedures; (5) the shift in the United States is to the increasing use of technology which calls for a reassessment of the use of standardized technology for Federal elections; and (6) there is a need for Congress to establish a method for standardizing voting procedures in order to ensure the integrity of Federal elections.
There is established the Commission on the Comprehensive Study of Voting Procedures (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION; MATCHING GRANT PROGRAM.
Study.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which all of the members of the Commission have been appointed under section 5, the Commission shall complete a thorough study of all issues relating to voting procedures in Federal, State, and local elections, including the following: (1) Voting procedures in Federal, State, and local government elections.
Voting procedures that represent the best practices in Federal, State, and local government elections.
Legislation and regulatory efforts that affect voting procedures issues.
The implementation of standardized voting procedures, including standardized technology, for Federal, State, and local government elections.
The speed and timeliness of vote counts in Federal, State and local elections.
The accuracy of vote counts in Federal, State and local elections.
The security of voting procedures in Federal, State and local elections.
The accessibility of voting procedures for individuals with disabilities and the elderly.
The level of matching grant funding necessary to enable States and localities to implement the recommendations made by the Commission under subsection (b) for the modernization of State and local voting procedures.
Recommendations.--The Commission shall develop recommendations with respect to Federal elections matters.
Reports.-- (1) Final report.--Not later than 180 days after the expiration of the period referred to in subsection (a), the Commission shall submit a report, that has been approved by a majority of the members of the Commission, to the President and Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
Interim reports.--The Commission may submit to the President and Congress any interim reports that are approved by a majority of the members of the Commission.
Additional reports.--The Commission may, together with the report submitted under paragraph (1), submit additional reports that contain any dissenting or minority opinions of the members of the Commission.
Matching Grant Program.-- (1) Authority.--After the submission of the final report under subsection (c)(1), the Attorney General, acting through the Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Justice Programs, shall award grants to State and local governments to enable such governments to implement the recommendations made by the Commission under subsection (b).
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under paragraph (1), a State or local government shall prepare and submit to the Attorney General an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Attorney General may require including an assurance that the applicant will comply with the requirements of paragraph (3).
Matching funds.--The Attorney General may not award a grant to a State or local government under this subsection unless the government agrees to make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward the activities to be conducted under the grant in an amount equal to not less than $1 for each $1 of Federal funds provided under the grant.
Amount of grant.--The Attorney General shall determine the amount of each grant under this subsection based on the recommendations made by the Commission under subsection (b).
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, the amounts recommended for each fiscal year by the Commission under subsection (b) as being necessary for the modernization of State and local voting procedures with respect to Federal elections.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of-- (1) five voting members of whom-- (A) one shall be appointed by the President; (B) one shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; (C) one shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate; (D) one shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; and (E) one shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; and (2) the Director of the Office of Election Administration of the Federal Election Commission who shall be an advisory, nonvoting member.
Date of Appointment.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may hold such hearings for the purpose of carrying out this Act, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out this Act.
The Commission may administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Website.--For purposes of conducting the study under section 4(a), the Commission shall establish a website to facilitate public comment and participation.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the Administrator of the General Services Administration shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services that are necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Contracts.--The Commission may contract with and compensate persons and Federal agencies for supplies and services without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (42 United States Code 5).
Gifts and Donations.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property to carry out this Act.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
LIMITATION ON CONTRACTING AUTHORITY.
Any new contracting authority provided for in this Act shall be effective only to the extent, or in the amounts, provided for in advance in appropriations Acts.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 4.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit the enactment of an Act with respect to voting procedures during the period in which the Commission is carrying out its duties under this Act.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to the Commission to carry out this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.