FORT PRESQUE ISLE NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
Findings and Purposes.-- (1) Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (A) Fort Presque Isle was a frontier outpost located on Garrison Hill in the area of present-day Erie, Pennsylvania, which was the site of the American installations built from 1795 to 1796 and in the War of 1812.
General Anthony Wayne was a Revolutionary War hero who served under General George Washington and, at one point, was Commander in Chief of the United States Army.
He first arrived in the area in 1786.
Legend has it that Anthony Wayne was nicknamed ``Mad'' by his troops, not for being rash or foolish, but for his leadership and bravery on and off the battlefield.
The original blockhouse of Fort Presque Isle was built in 1795 by 200 Federal troops from General Wayne's army, under the direction of Captain John Grubb.
It was the first blockhouse used as part of a defensive system established to counter Native American uprisings.
It was also used during the War of 1812.
Anthony Wayne was stricken ill at Fort Presque Isle, and died there in 1796.
At his request, his body was buried under the flagpole of the northwest blockhouse of the fort.
The original blockhouse burned in 1852, and the existing structure was built by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in 1880 as a memorial to Anthony Wayne.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are the following: (A) To provide for reconstruction of the frontier fort at Presque Isle for the benefit, inspiration, and education of the people of the United States.
To preserve the original grave site of General ``Mad'' Anthony Wayne at Fort Presque Isle.
To broaden understanding of the historical significance of Fort Presque Isle.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Historic site.--The term ``historic site'' means the Fort Presque Isle National Historic Site established by subsection (c).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Establishment of Fort Presque Isle National Historic Site.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established the Fort Presque Isle National Historic Site in Erie, Pennsylvania.
Description.-- (A) In general.--The historic site shall consist of land and improvements comprising the historic location of Fort Presque Isle, including the existing blockhouse replica at that location, as depicted on a map entitled ``________'', numbered ________ and dated ________, comprising approximately ________ acres.
Map and boundary description.--The map referred to in subparagraph (A) and accompanying boundary description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director of the National Park Service and any other office of the National Park Service that the Secretary determines to be an appropriate location for filing the map and boundary description.
Administration of the Historic Site.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall administer the historic site in accordance with this section and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666, chapter 593; 16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Cooperative agreements.--To further the purposes of this section, the Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with any interested individual, public or private agency, organization, or institution.
Technical and preservation assistance.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may provide to any eligible person described in subparagraph (B) technical assistance for the preservation of historic structures of, the maintenance of the cultural landscape of, and local preservation planning for, the historic site.
Eligible persons.--The eligible persons described in this subparagraph are-- (i) an owner of real property within the boundary of the historic site, as described in subsection (c)(2); and (ii) any interested individual, agency, organization, or institution that has entered into an agreement with the Secretary pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection.
Acquisition of Real Property--The Secretary may acquire by donation, exchange, or purchase with funds made available by donation or appropriation, such lands or interests in lands as may be necessary to allow for the interpretation, preservation, or restoration of the historic site.
General Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than the last day of the third full fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, in consultation with the officials described in paragraph (2), prepare a general management plan for the historic site.
Consultation.--In preparing the general management plan, the Secretary shall consult with an appropriate official of each appropriate political subdivisions of the State of Pennsylvania that have jurisdiction over all or a portion of the historic site.
Submission of plan to congress.--Upon the completion of the general management plan, the Secretary shall submit a copy of the plan to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.