This Act may be cited as the ``National Commemorative Events Advisory Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the preparation and consideration of the multitude of bills proposing particular days, weeks, months, or years for recognition through Presidential proclamation unduly burdens the Congress and consumes an inordinate amount of time; (2) such proposals could be more efficiently considered by a commission whose sole function would be to review proposals for national commemorative events and to make positive or negative recommendations thereon to the President; (3) such a commission would streamline the process by which such proposals are currently considered and save the Congress considerable time and resources which could be devoted to matters of more pressing national concern; and (4) such a commission would better ensure the impartial review of proposals for national commemorative events generated by a wide variety of constituent groups.
In General.--There shall be established a commission to be known as the ``President's Advisory Commission on National Commemorative Events'' (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Members.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members of whom-- (1) 2 members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, after consultation with the majority and minority leaders of the House of Representatives; (2) 2 members shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, after consultation with the majority and minority leaders of the Senate; and (3) 7 members shall be appointed by the President.
Qualifications.--(1) All members of the Commission shall be citizens of the United States.
Members appointed under subsection (b)(3)-- (A) to the greatest extent possible, shall represent a wide range of educational, geographical, and professional backgrounds; and (B) may not be Members of Congress.
Terms.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member shall be appointed for a term of 2 years.
Of the members first appointed under subsection (b)(3) the President shall designate-- (A) 3 who shall be appointed for 1 year; and (B) 4 who shall be appointed for 2 years.
If a member was appointed to the Commission as a Member of Congress and the member ceases to be a Member of Congress, that member may continue as a member for not longer than the 30-day period beginning on the date that member ceases to be a Member of Congress.
Vacancies.--A vacancy shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of such term.
Chairman.--The Chairman of the Commission shall be designated by the President from among the members under subsection (b)(3).
The term of office of the Chairman shall be 2 years.
Quorum.--6 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Action by a quorum shall be necessary for the Commission to issue a recommendation under section 6(d).
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet on at least a quarterly basis.
Meetings shall be held in the District of Columbia.
Pay.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall be paid the daily equivalent of the maximum rate of basic pay payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule for each day, including traveltime, during which such member is performing duties of the Commission.
Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress may not receive additional pay for service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including a per diem allowance in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the Government service are allowed travel expenses under section 5703 of title 5 of the United States Code.
Limitation on Staff.--The Commission may not employ staff personnel.
Detail of Staff from Federal Agencies.--Any Federal employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold such hearings, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as it considers appropriate.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property, but not from a source having a direct interest in any matter before the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Criteria.--The Commission shall establish criteria for recommending to the President that a proposed commemorative event be approved or disapproved.
Submission of Proposals.--The Commission shall establish and publish in the Federal Register procedures for submitting proposals for national commemorative events to the Commission.
Review of Proposals.--The Commission shall review all proposals submitted to it in accordance with subsection (b).
Recommendation to the President.--The Commission shall issue a recommendation to the President for approval or disapproval of each proposal submitted to it in accordance with subsection (b).
Each recommendation shall be accompanied by a brief explanation of such recommendation.
Limitation on Designation of Events.--The Commission shall not issue a recommendation to the President for approval of an event which commemorates-- (1) a commercial enterprise, industry, specific product, or fraternal, political, business, labor, or sectarian organization; (2) a particular State or any political subdivision thereof, city, town, county, school, or institution of higher learning; or (3) a living person.
Nonpermanent Designations.--(1) Any day, week, month, year, or other specified period of time designated by the Commission for commemoration of an event may not be designated for a date or time period which begins more than 1 year after the date such designation is made.
No event which is commemorated by a day, week, month, year, or other specified period of time designated by the Commission may be commemorated by another designation within a single calendar year.
EFFECTIVE DATE; COMMENCEMENT AND TERMINATION PROVISIONS.
Effective Date.--This Act shall take effect on January 1, 1996.
Commencement; Termination.--(1) Members of the Commission shall be appointed, and the Commission shall first meet, within 90 days after the effective date of this Act.
The Commission shall terminate 5 years after the date on which it first meets.