This Act may be cited as the ``Iran Sanctions Enhancement Act of 2007''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The Islamic Republic of Iran is a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Iran is a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Iran has agreed to safeguards to ensure compliance with its non-proliferation commitments under the NPT.
The IAEA has reported numerous concerns with the implementation of such safeguards to ensure Iran's compliance with its non-proliferation commitments.
International inspections in 2003 and 2004 of Iran's nuclear program revealed significant undeclared activities with potential application for the development of nuclear weapons.
According to the IAEA, Iran has not declared the full scope of its nuclear program and has not allowed full and unrestricted access to all its nuclear sites.
In June 2006, Iran refused to consider economic incentives offered by the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) and Germany in exchange for a permanent halt to Iran's uranium enrichment program.
On July 31, 2006, the UNSC adopted Resolution 1696, setting a deadline of August 31, 2006, for Iran's full, unconditional, and immediate compliance with its obligations under the NPT.
Iran is in violation of UNSC Resolution 1696.
On March 23, 2007, the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Navy seized 15 British marines and sailors on the same day the UNSC considered a new resolution to sanction the Government of Iran for its continued defiance of the UNSC and the IAEA.
On March 24, 2007, the UNSC adopted Resolution 1747, imposing further economic sanctions on Iran for its non- compliance with previous UNSC resolutions.
Iran is in violation of UNSC Resolution 1747.
On May 14, 2007, IAEA Director General Mohammed El- Baradei announced that Iran had overcome its technical difficulties and now possesses the knowledge to enrich uranium to weapons-grade level.
On May 20, 2007, the head of Iran's Atomic Energy Organization announced the Iranian nuclear program was moving ahead as scheduled towards its previously stated goal of 50,000 centrifuges running at its Natanz facility.
On May 23, 2007, the IAEA reported that Iran not only ignored the UNSC's deadline to stop enriching uranium but markedly expanded its enrichment program.
More than 40 percent of Iranian gasoline comes from imports.
The Government of Iran is set to impose a daily gasoline ration of three liters for private cars and 15 to 20 liters for taxis.
If the supply of gasoline to Iran is restricted, the impact on Iran's economy would be considerable.
Diplomatic means present the most effective way to defuse the crisis regarding the Iranian nuclear program.
AMENDMENTS TO THE IRAN SANCTIONS ACT OF 1996.
Expansion of Sanctions to Refined Petroleum.--Section 5(a) of the Iran Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Sanctions With Respect to the Development of Petroleum Resources of Iran and Export of Refined Petroleum to Iran.--Except as provided in subsection (f), the President shall impose two or more of the sanctions described in paragraphs (1) through (6) of section 6 if the President determines that a person has, with actual knowledge-- ``(1) on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, made an investment of $20,000,000 or more (or any combination of investments of at least $5,000,000 each, which in the aggregate equals or exceeds $20,000,000 in any 12-month period), that directly and significantly contributed to the enhancement of Iran's ability to develop petroleum resources of Iran; or ``(2) on or after December 31, 2007, provided Iran with refined petroleum resources or engaged in an activity that could contribute to the enhancement of Iran's ability to import refined petroleum resources.''.
Presidential Waiver.--Section 9(c)(2)(C) of such Act is amended by striking ``section 5(a) or section 5(b) to Iran's ability to, respectively, develop its petroleum resources or its weapons of mass destruction or other military capabilities'' and inserting ``section 5(a)(1), section 5(a)(2), or section 5(b) to Iran's ability to, respectively, develop its petroleum resources, enhance its ability to import refined petroleum resources, or develop its weapons of mass destruction or other military capabilities''.
Reports on United States Efforts To Curtail the Export of Refined Petroleum to Iran.--Section 10 of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Reports on Refined Petroleum Exports to Iran.--Not later than January 30, 2008, and every six months thereafter, the President shall transmit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on any person who has provided Iran with refined petroleum resources or any activity by any person that could contribute to the enhancement of Iran's ability to import refined petroleum resources.
For each such activity, the President shall provide a description of such activity and what steps the United States has taken to respond to such activity.