This Act may be cited to as the ``Umatilla Basin Project Completion Act''.
AUTHORITY TO COMPLETE THIRD PHASE OF UMATILLA BASIN PROJECT.
The Umatilla Basin Project Act (102 United States Statutes at Large 2791) is amended by adding at the end the following new sections: ``SEC.
UMATILLA BASIN PROJECT PHASE III EXCHANGE.
Authorization of Project Construction.--(1) Effective upon the boundary adjustments under section 216(a), the Secretary is authorized to construct a third and final phase of the Umatilla Basin Project to provide additional flows in the Umatilla River for anadromous fish through a water exchange with Westland Irrigation District.
Prior to construction, the Secretary shall complete a feasibility study to identify alternatives to provide Westland Irrigation District and other Umatilla River Basin water users with exchange flows of approximately 220 cubic feet per second to restore the Umatilla River fishery, as determined through analysis in a feasibility study under paragraph (3).
(A) The feasibility study for the Phase III exchange facilities shall examine engineering, environmental, and economic factors associated with project alternatives, including but not limited to: technical engineering and hydrologic analyses pertinent to the identification and design of alternatives; biological analyses of instream flow levels to optimize anadromous fish restoration; and assessment of the best biological value per unit expenditure among the alternatives.
The feasibility study shall also include an analysis of inclusion of other irrigators in the exchange; consolidation of irrigation delivery facilities; potential for voluntary water transfers; optimization of water delivery scheduling for all four irrigation districts; appropriate backup systems; water conservation opportunities; and such other analyses as the Secretary may consider appropriate to improve the exchange project for fishery restoration purposes.
Prior to completion of Phase III facilities, the Secretary shall negotiate and execute an exchange agreement with the Westland Irrigation District to allow the use of Columbia River water in exchange for an equivalent amount of Umatilla River or McKay Reservoir water.
Additional exchange agreements with other water users may be executed either before or after the completion of Phase III.
The exchange agreement shall incorporate water delivery scheduling optimization, conservation, water transfer, and other technical operational measures recommended in the feasibility study.
Operation and Maintenance Costs.--All exchange system operation and maintenance costs and any increased operation and maintenance costs to the project caused by the Phase III exchange shall be the responsibility of the Federal Government and shall be nonreimbursable.
Power for Project Pumping.--The Administrator of the Bonneville Power Administration (hereinafter in this subsection referred to as the `Administrator'), consistent with provisions of the Columbia River Basin Fish and Wildlife Program established pursuant to the Pacific Northwest Electric Power Planning and Conservation Act (94 United States Statutes at Large 2697), shall provide for project power needed to effect the Phase III water exchange for purposes of mitigating anadromous fishery impacts.
The cost of power shall be calculated as an offset to the Administrator's annual Treasury payments for operation and maintenance of the Federal Columbia River Power System.
Integration and Coordination of Facilities.--Project facilities authorized by sections 215 through 219 shall be integrated and coordinated into the existing Umatilla Basin Project.
UMATILLA BASIN IRRIGATION DISTRICTS BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT.
In General.--(1) Effective upon completion of environmental reviews and approval by the Secretary, the boundaries of the Umatilla Basin Project irrigation districts are adjusted by operation of law as follows: ``(A) Hermiston Irrigation District's boundaries are adjusted to include the 1,091 acres identified in its 1993 request to the Bureau of Reclamation.
Stanfield Irrigation District's boundaries are adjusted to include the 3,549 acres identified in its 1993 request to the Bureau of Reclamation.
West Extension Irrigation District's boundaries are adjusted to include the 2,436.8 acres identified in the June 1993 Bureau of Reclamation Land Classification Report as irrigable.
Westland Irrigation District's boundaries are adjusted to include the 9,912 acres identified in its 1993 request to the Bureau of Reclamation.
The Secretary shall complete environmental reviews pursuant to this subsection no later than 6 months after the date of enactment of the Umatilla Basin Project Completion Act and at no cost to the Umatilla Basin Project irrigation districts.
Provision of McKay Reservoir Water for Environmental Enhancement.--(1) After the boundary adjustments under subsection (a), the Umatilla Basin Project irrigation districts shall provide water for environmental enhancement from McKay Reservoir to the Secretary in accordance with Option A or Option B, as specified by the Secretary.
(A)(i) Under Option A, the irrigation districts shall provide storage capacity from McKay Reservoir for environmental enhancement purposes each year equal the applicable amount stated in clause (ii), or the corresponding percentage of fill as determined by the Bureau of Reclamation, whichever is less.
The applicable amounts referred to in clause (i) are the following: ``(I) In 1997, 6,500 acre feet.
In 1998, 5,500 acre feet.
In 1999, 4,500 acre feet.
In 2000, 3,500 acre feet.
In 2001, 3,000 acre feet.
In 2002, 3,000 acre feet.
Under Option B, the irrigation districts shall provide storage capacity from McKay Reservoir for environmental enhancement purposes, equal to 6,500 acre feet of water or the corresponding percentage of fill as determined by the Bureau of Reclamation, whichever is less, in each calendar year beginning in 1997 and ending in the year 2002: Provided, That the Secretary grant $300,000 by March 1st of each calendar year 1997 through 2002 to the Westland Irrigation District of the Umatilla Project for water district improvements or other uses deemed appropriate by the District: Provided further, if the Secretary fails to grant the $300,000 by March 1st in any calendar year between 1997 and 2002 for purposes of this subsection the District is not required to provide any water for that calendar year.
Not later than 9 months after the date of enactment of the Umatilla Basin Project Completion Act, the Secretary shall specify Option A or Option B and notify the Umatilla Basin Project irrigation districts of that specification.
Requirements for Receiving Project Water.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no parcel may receive Umatilla Basin Project water unless it has a valid State water right and is classified as irrigable in the Bureau of Reclamation's Land Classification Report.
Provision of Description of Boundaries.--A legal description of the irrigation district boundaries as adjusted under subsection (a), including land classification and project boundary maps, shall be provided as an attachment to all 4 Umatilla Basin Project irrigation districts' existing contracts.
Limitation on Altering Ability To Pay Determination.--No alteration in the ability to pay determination for the Umatilla Basin Project irrigation districts may be made as a result of the irrigation district boundary adjustments made by subsection (a).
WATER PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT.
``The Secretary, in cooperation with the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Tribes'), shall initiate discussions with the State of Oregon (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `State') regarding the Tribes' water claims and other water needs in the Umatilla River Basin.
To facilitate these discussions of water claims, the Secretary shall do the following: ``(1) The Secretary, taking into account the facilities and analyses authorized by sections 215 through 219, shall work with the State, the Tribes, irrigation districts, the Bonneville Power Administration, and the affected public to develop a water management plan for the Umatilla River Basin.
The plan shall address restoration of the Umatilla River Basin anadromous fishery.
The Secretary shall also develop an integrated ground water/surface water model of the Upper Umatilla River Basin.
Within 2 years after the date of enactment of the Umatilla Basin Project Completion Act, the Secretary shall report to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives on the progress of-- ``(A) the facilities authorized by sections 215 through 219 of this title; ``(B) the water management plan; ``(C) the ground water/surface water model; and ``(D) the status of discussions of tribal water claims in the Umatilla River Basin.
JOINT WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
``Effective upon the boundary adjustments under section 216(a), the Secretary is authorized to contract with the Tribes for the construction of a portion of an off-stream storage reservoir of approximately 10,000 acre-feet capacity, with associated works.
Such authorization shall not include water treatment facilities.
Such reservoir is to be located on or adjacent to the Tribes' reservation in Oregon: Provided, That: ``(1) The Secretary can demonstrate through appropriate feasibility level planning and environmental studies that the facility can be built in a manner which conforms to all applicable Federal, State, and Tribal laws and that the project siting and construction minimizes any adverse effects on the Umatilla River fishery.
Diversions for storage will not reduce Umatilla River flows below the levels necessary to restore and support the Umatilla River anadromous fishery.
In diverting water for storage and operation of the reservoir, the Tribes and the city of Pendleton (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `City') may agree to higher levels of protection of instream flows.
The reservoir shall be filled only during periods of high flow, and in such a manner as to preserve the ecological value of high flow events in the Umatilla River, as determined by Federal, State, and tribal fishery experts.
The City agrees to provide up to $16,000,000 (in addition to the $6,500,000 authorized by section 219(4)) for the tribal share of feasibility level planning and environmental studies and to construct the reservoir and associated works provided for by this title.
Any cost overruns beyond the $22,500,000 estimated for the reservoir and associated works authorized by this section and section 219(4) shall be allocated 70 percent to the City and 30 percent to the Tribes, unless they mutually agree otherwise.
The City, subject to applicable Federal, State, and tribal laws, shall use all of its water rights to the Umatilla River and its tributaries with priority dates after January 1, 1910, including those rights identified in Oregon Regulatory Statute 538.450, for instream flow purposes to improve the Umatilla River anadromous fishery, provided that adequate water from the reservoir project is available for municipal use.
The City and the Tribes will share all operation and maintenance costs on a pro rata basis, determined by the amount of water in the reservoir reserved for each government's use, unless the City and the Tribes mutually agree to an alternative cost allocation.
Title to the reservoir facility will be held jointly in the name of the City and the United States, in trust for the Tribes.
The Secretary may negotiate a contract transferring operation and maintenance responsibility to either the Tribes or the City, pursuant to all applicable State, Federal, and tribal law.
The Secretary may direct that funds authorized under this section be contracted to the Tribes, under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450 et sequentes).
``Effective upon the boundary adjustments under section 216(a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, plus or minus such amounts as may be justified by reason of ordinary fluctuations of applicable cost indexes, the following sums, without fiscal year limitation: ``(1) Not to exceed $64,000,000 for feasibility studies, environmental studies, and construction of the Phase III Exchange: Provided, That all costs of Phase III planning and construction, including operation and maintenance costs allocated to the mitigation of anadromous fish species and the study authorized by section 215 of this Act, shall be nonreimbursable: Provided further, That not more than 25 percent of the amount appropriated under this paragraph may be expended for administrative overhead costs.
Not to exceed $500,000 for tribal water claims discussions, a water management plan, and an integrated ground water/surface water model, as provided for in section 217(a).
Not to exceed $400,000 annually for enforcement and protection of Phases I, II, and III exchange water for instream uses.
Not to exceed $6,500,000 for feasibility studies, environmental studies, and construction of the Tribes' portion of an off-stream storage reservoir and associated works, as authorized in section 218 of this title.''.
In relation to the Umatilla Basin Project, nothing in this Act shall-- (1) impair the validity of or preempt any provision of State law with respect to water or water rights, or of any interstate compact governing water or water rights; (2) create a right to the diversion or use of water, other than-- (A) as established pursuant to the substantive and procedural requirements of State law; and (B) as recognized under State law; (3) impair any valid water right; (4) establish or create any water rights for any party; or (5) be construed to create directly or indirectly an express or implied Federal reserved water right for any purpose.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense and expectation of the Congress that construction and operation of Phase III, the perpetual operation of the integrated Umatilla Basin Project, and the construction and operation of the Joint Water Supply System, as authorized in section 218 of the Umatilla Basin Project Act, will fulfill obligations of the Federal Government to provide the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation with water for fishery purposes in the Umatilla River below the mouth of McKay Creek, as recognized by their 1855 treaty with the United States.