This Act may be cited as the ``President Harry S Truman Congressional Gold Medal Act''.
The Congress hereby finds the following: (1) Harry S Truman served as President of the United States from April 12, 1945, to January 20, 1953.
President Truman took important measures to found and support the United Nations.
President Truman made important decisions that brought World War II to a successful conclusion and brought the former Axis countries to a free and democratic condition.
President Truman gave economic and military aid to Greece and Turkey in 1947 and after in order to allow them to avoid a communist overthrow of their governments and to pursue freely their individual destinies, and he further stated it to be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities and to help them freely to pursue their independent destinies.
President Truman had an important part in formulating and realizing the program of economic assistance for Europe that became known as the Marshall Plan and, through his support for the plan, he helped to maintain an area of prosperity and freedom in Western Europe.
President Truman stood by the people of West Berlin when they were threatened by a blockade by the Soviet Union of all land and water routes to the city, and the airlift that grew out of Truman's desire to maintain West Berlin as an area of freedom succeeded in supplying the city until the Soviet Union gave up its blockade.
President Truman helped to establish the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and his administration was strongly supportive of measures to strengthen the Atlantic Alliance and to achieve the integration of the countries of Western Europe.
President Truman fought throughout his Presidency for domestic programs that would improve the lives of the American people and reinforce their country's commitment to social justice.
President Truman desegregated the Armed Forces and took other actions to fight racism, and his actions helped to provide the foundation of the modern civil rights movement.
President Truman oversaw the reorganization of the United States Government in order that it might be capable of meeting the demands of the postwar world, and during his administration were created the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, the Department of the Air Force, the Council of Economic Advisers, and other important new agencies and offices.
President Truman, through his Point Four Program, stated the goal for American policy of fostering economic growth and human uplift in underdeveloped countries.
President Truman led his country to resist aggression in Korea, and his goals in making war against the aggressors were to avoid a world war, to support the United Nations, and to maintain freedom in the world.
President Truman in retirement founded the Harry S Truman Library and devoted his library and himself to teaching the American people, and especially young people, about their history and their government.
Presentation Authorized.--The President is authorized to present, on behalf of the Congress, to Margaret Truman Daniel a gold medal of appropriate design, in recognition of the many accomplishments of President Harry S Truman on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of his 1st inauguration as President of the United States of America.
Design and Striking.--For purposes of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions to be determined by the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriation.--There are authorized to be appropriated not to exceed $20,000 to carry out this section.
Striking and Sale.--The Secretary of the Treasury may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck pursuant to section 3 under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, at a price sufficient to cover the cost thereof, including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses, and the cost of the gold medal.
Reimbursement of Appropriation.--The appropriation used to carry out section 3 shall be reimbursed out of the proceeds of sales under subsection (a).
The medals struck pursuant to this Act are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.