This Act may be cited as the ``Brownfields Remediation and Economic Development Act of 1996''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that: (1) The General Accounting Office has estimated that between 130,000 and 425,000 abandoned industrial sites will need cleanup action to become economically viable once again.
The cleanup costs to remediate these ``brownfield'' sites to productive use could reach hundreds of billions of dollars.
``Brownfields'' remediation is the number one economic priority in many American cities.
Encouraging private investment for these remediation efforts presents an opportunity to create jobs and promote economic development in localities and the States.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish a program under which the Federal Government, in cooperation with appropriate State and local entities, shall remediate ``brownfields'' in order to return them to productive use while conserving prime open space, or ``greenfields''.
FOR EPA CERTIFICATION OF STATE BROWNFIELD PROGRAMS.
Certification.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Administrator'') shall certify any State brownfield program submitted to the Administrator under this Act that satisfies the criteria of section 4.
Certification of State programs shall be granted only for programs which have jurisdiction over brownfield sites which have been contaminated prior to enactment of this Act.
Review.--The Administrator shall review certified State brownfield programs every 2 years after certification to assure compliance with certification criteria, and to provide to the States, where appropriate, technical assistance and expertise.
EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR STATE BROWNFIELDS PROGRAMS.
A State brownfields program may be certified under this Act if the program-- (1) covers only contaminated sites that are not listed on the National Priorities List; (2) provides for public participation, in good faith prior to the granting of a release from liability under sections 4 and 5; (3) provides for the reopening of a brownfields cleanup proposal: (A) if any person has undertaken any aspect of the site assessment or remediation in a fraudulent manner, including misrepresentation of such person's relationship to the site; (B) if a State changes remediation standards by an order of magnitude; (C) if a landowner or prospective purchaser of a brownfield site wishes to change the proposed use of a site to one that demands a higher cleanup standard; or (D) if the proposed remediation fails or the remedy is not properly maintained or operated; and (4) contains cleanup standards for brownfield sites that are protective of public health and the environment; and (5) includes coordination among State agencies for environmental protection and business/economic development.
In the case of any brownfield site remediation carried out pursuant to a State program certified under this Act, upon completion of remediation pursuant to such program and release from State liability under any applicable State provisions regarding liability for contaminated sites, the Administrator shall release the owner of the brownfield site or the facility operator at such site, or both, from liability under sections 106 and 107 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 for the contamination described in the site assessment and evaluation carried out under the State program at the site concerned.
In the case of any brownfield site remediation carried out pursuant to a State program certified under this Act, upon completion of remediation pursuant to such program and release from State liability under any applicable State provisions regarding liability for contaminated sites, the Administrator shall release the following persons from liability under sections 106 and 107 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 for the contamination described in the site assessment and evaluation carried out under the State program at the site concerned: (1) Lenders and developers.--Lenders and economic developers, except that no lender or developer shall be released from liability under sections 106 and 107 for pollution directly caused by their actions.
Prospective purchasers.--Prospective purchasers of a brownfields site.
Local governments.--Local governments who have not been involved with the management of a brownfields site.
If the State brownfield cleanup program includes a waiver from State permitting requirements, the Administrator may waive relevant Federal permit requirements to facilitate the site cleanup.
In General.--Subpart C of part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after section 468B the following new section: ``SEC.
SPECIAL RULES FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE REMEDIATION RESERVES.
In General.--There shall be allowed as a deduction for any taxable year the amount of payments made by the taxpayer to a Hazardous Waste Remediation Reserve (hereinafter referred to as the `Reserve') during such taxable year.
Limitation on Amounts Paid Into Reserve.--The amount which a taxpayer may pay into the Reserve for any taxable year shall not exceed the lesser of-- ``(1) $5,000,000, or ``(2) the excess (if any) of $5,000,000 over the amount paid into the Reserve for all prior taxable years.
Income and Deductions of the Taxpayer.-- ``(1) Inclusion of amounts distributed.--There shall be includible in the gross income of the taxpayer for any taxable year-- ``(A) any amount distributed from the Reserve during such taxable year, and ``(B) any deemed distribution under subsection (e).
Deduction when economic performance occurs.--In addition to any deduction under subsection (a), there shall be allowable as a deduction for any taxable year the amount of the qualified hazardous waste costs with respect to which economic performance (within the meaning of section 461(h)(2)) occurs during such taxable year.
Hazardous Waste Remediation Reserve.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `Hazardous Waste Remediation Reserve' means a reserve established by the taxpayer for purposes of this section.
Reserve exempt from taxation.--Any Hazardous Waste Remediation Reserve is exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such Reserve has ceased to be a Hazardous Waste Remediation Reserve by reason of subsection (e).
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such Reserve shall be subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc.
Contributions to reserve.--The Reserve shall not accept any payments (or other amounts) other than payments with respect to which a deduction is allowable under subsection (a).
Use of reserve.--The Reserve shall be used exclusively to pay the qualified hazardous waste costs of the taxpayer.
Prohibitions against self-dealing.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, for purposes of section 4951 (and so much of this title as relates to such section), the Reserve shall be treated in the same manner as a trust described in section 501(c)(21).
Deemed Distributions.-- ``(1) Disqualification of reserve for self-dealing.--In any case in which a Reserve violates any provision of this section or section 4951, the Secretary may disqualify such Reserve from the application of this section.
In any case to which this paragraph applies, the Reserve shall be treated as having distributed all of its funds on the date such determination takes effect.
Failure to spend funds.--A Reserve shall be treated as having distributed all of its funds-- ``(A) on the date which is 10 years after the date such Reserve was established unless, as of such date-- ``(i) it has been determined that some property of the taxpayer is contaminated with hazardous waste, and ``(ii) a remediation plan has been prepared for such site, and ``(B) except as otherwise provided by the Secretary, on the date which is 10 years after the date such Reserve was established unless, as of such date, it is reasonably anticipated that the remaining funds in the Reserve will be distributed before the date which is 15 years after the date such Reserve was established.
Penalty for Distributions Not Used For Qualified Hazardous Waste Costs.--The tax imposed by this chapter for any taxable year in which any amount distributed from a Reserve is not used exclusively to pay qualified hazardous waste costs shall be increased by 10 percent of such amount.
Qualified Hazardous Waste Costs.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified hazardous waste costs' means-- ``(1) the costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer in connection with the assessment of-- ``(A) the extent of the environmental contamination of a site which is owned by the taxpayer, and ``(B) the expected cost of environmental remediation required for such site, and ``(2) the costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer to remediate such contamination.
Controlled Groups.--All persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 shall be treated as one person for purposes of subsection (b), and the dollar amount contained in such subsection shall be allocated among such persons in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Time When Payments Deemed Made.--For purposes of this section, a taxpayer shall be deemed to have made a payment to the Reserve on the last day of a taxable year if such payment is made on account of such taxable year and is made within 2\1/2\ months after the close of such taxable year.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart C of part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 468B the following new item: ``Sec.
Special rules for hazardous waste remediation reserves.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.