REQUIREMENT TO DISCLOSE SOURCES AND AMOUNTS OF FUNDS RAISED FOR PRESIDENTIAL ARCHIVAL DEPOSITORY.
In General.--Section 2112 of title 44, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h)(1) Any organization that is established for the purpose of raising funds for creating, maintaining, expanding, or conducting activities at a Presidential archival depository or any facilities relating to a Presidential archival depository, shall submit to the Administration, the Committee on Government Reform of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate on an annual basis, by not later than the applicable date specified in paragraph (2), information with respect to every contributor who, during the year-- ``(A) with respect to a Presidential archival depository of a President who currently holds the Office of President or for which the Archivist has not accepted, taken title to, or entered into an agreement to use any land or facility, gave the organization a contribution or contributions (whether monetary or in-kind) totaling $200 or more for the year; or ``(B) with respect to a Presidential archival depository of a President who no longer holds the Office of President and for which the Archivist has accepted, taken title to, or entered into an agreement to use any land or facility, gave the organization a contribution or contributions (whether monetary or in-kind) totaling $5000 or more for the year.
For purposes of paragraph (1), the applicable date-- ``(A) with respect to information required under paragraph (1)(A), shall be January 31 of each year; and ``(B) with respect to information required under paragraph (1)(B), shall be May 31 of each year.
As used in this subsection, the term `information' means the following: ``(A) The amount or value of each contribution made by a contributor referred to in paragraph (1) in the year covered by the submission.
The source of each such contribution, and the address of the entity or individual that is the source of the contribution.
If the source of such a contribution is an individual, the occupation of the individual.
The date of each such contribution.
The Archivist shall make available to the public through the Internet (or a successor technology readily available to the public) any information that is submitted in accordance with paragraph (1).
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person who makes a contribution described in paragraph (1) to knowingly and willfully submit false material information or omit material information with respect to the contribution to an organization described in such paragraph.
The penalties described in section 1001 of title 18, United States Code, shall apply with respect to a violation of subparagraph (A) in the same manner as a violation described in such section.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any organization described in paragraph (1) to knowingly and willfully submit false material information or omit material information under such paragraph.
The penalties described in section 1001 of title 18, United States Code, shall apply with respect to a violation of subparagraph (A) in the same manner as a violation described in such section.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and willfully-- ``(i) make a contribution described in paragraph (1) in the name of another person; ``(ii) permit his or her name to be used to effect a contribution described in paragraph (1); or ``(iii) accept a contribution described in paragraph (1) that is made by one person in the name of another person.
The penalties set forth in section 309(d) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(d)) shall apply to a violation of subparagraph (A) in the same manner as if such violation were a violation of section 316(b)(3) of such Act.
The Archivist shall promulgate regulations for the purpose of carrying out this subsection.''.
Applicability.--Section 2112(h) of title 44, United States Code (as added by subsection (a))-- (1) shall apply to an organization established for the purpose of raising funds for creating, maintaining, expanding, or conducting activities at a Presidential archival depository or any facilities relating to a Presidential archival depository before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) shall only apply with respect to contributions (whether monetary or in-kind) made after the date of the enactment of this Act.