This Act may be cited as the ``Saving Humanities, Arts, and Resources for Education Networking Act of 2000'' (SHARE Net Act).
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Morrill Acts enacted in 1862 and 1890 brought about a significant change in the system of education in the United States by providing for the sale of public lands in the West and the dedication of the proceeds of those sales to funding the establishment of practical, accessible land grant colleges and universities in States across the Nation.
The land grant colleges and universities have a focus on research, teaching, and outreach, and continue to this day to be leaders in higher education by providing affordable access to high-quality postsecondary education.
The land grant colleges and universities also have emerged as one of the greatest sources of advanced research that leverages the United States economy and powers the United States global competitiveness.
The land grant colleges and universities, in conjunction with the Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service, serve to disseminate information learned from research and link research activities to larger societal needs.
The potential of advanced Internet, digital spectrum, and other telecommunications technologies to increase the quality and reach of educational resources has barely been tapped.
Numerous local and regional educational and community organizations are repositories of knowledge, information, and educational resources and programs that, in terms of accessibility to the potential beneficiaries, are fragmented and uncoordinated.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 established a framework for the transition from analog to digital television and for the auction of publicly-owned analog spectrum.
The auction of the analog spectrum is expected to yield over $6,000,000,000 in revenues for the Treasury of the United States.
The analog spectrum, as a valuable, publicly-owned asset, is today's equivalent of the public lands of the western frontier of a century ago.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that, following the principle of the Morrill Acts that public assets be used for broadening public education, the resources available through the auction of the analog spectrum should be tapped to fund the development of a new educational and cultural infrastructure that utilizes today's technologies to expand the reach and impact of existing high-quality community educational resources.
Authority.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Education may carry out a grant program to support efforts to achieve the goal set forth in subsection (b).
Designation.--A grant awarded under this section shall be known as a ``SHARE Net Grant''.
Goal.--The goal referred to in subsection (a)(1) is to develop a comprehensive, accessible, high-tech infrastructure of educational and cultural resources for non-profit institutions, individuals, and others for educational purposes through a systematic effort to coordinate, link, and enhance existing specialized resources and expertise in public and private cultural and educational institutions.
Eligible Recipients.--Under the grant program the Secretary may award a grant to any consortium (hereafter in this section referred to as a ``partnership'') consisting of not less than 3 organizations from not less than 3 of the following categories of organizations: (1) Institutions of a higher education.
Public radio and television stations.
Arts and cultural institutions.
Public interest, not-for-profit organizations.
Use of Grant Funds.-- (1) Mandatory.--A partnership awarded a grant under this section shall use the grant funds for the following purposes: (A) Efforts to achieve goal.--To support the efforts of the partnership to achieve the goal described in subsection (b).
Survey of available resources.--To survey and catalogue the educational resources of participants in the partnership and other institutions in the community to determine the breadth, quality, and accessibility of the resources.
Technological linkage.--To link the resources of the participants and others to each other and to the larger community through technology.
Strengthening of resources.--To improve the quality of and develop new educational programming to address deficiencies in the available resources.
Increased access to resources.--To broaden access to the available resources.
Permissive.--A partnership awarded a grant under this section may use the grant funds to provide for cooperative programs with educational institutions to offer-- (A) high-quality professional development and training in elementary and secondary education; or (B) courses leading to a postsecondary degree.
Application for Grant.--Each partnership desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary of Education in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Each such application shall include the following: (1) Survey of available resources.--A description of how the partnership will survey the educational resources of the participants in the partnership and others in relation to the goal described in subsection (b).
Technological linkage.--A description of how the partnership will link the resources of the participants and others to each other and to the larger community through technology.
Enhancement of resources.--A description of how the efforts of the partnership will enhance the quality and interactivity of the resources.
Additional educational programming.--A description of how the partnership will develop any additional educational programming determined to be necessary.
Outreach.--A description of how the partnership will reach out to the larger community, other cultural institutions, elementary schools, secondary schools, postsecondary educational institutions, and the public to recruit their participation and active involvement in the system developed in order to coordinate, link, and enhance, through technology, existing specialized resources and expertise in public and private cultural and educational institutions.
Matching Requirement.--Each partnership receiving a grant under this section shall provide matching funds, in an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount received under the grant, to support the costs of activities assisted under the grant.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this section the Secretary of Education shall give priority to a partnership-- (1) that serves a low-income community; or (2) with a membership that is broadly representative of the region or State to be served under the grant.
Geographic Diversity.--To the extent practicable, the Secretary of Education shall ensure that grants under this section are awarded to partnerships serving different geographic areas of the United States.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Education to carry out this section $1,200,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.