This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Water for the Americas Partnership Act of 2001''.
Congress finds that-- (1) it is in United States national interests to foster public and environmental health among neighboring countries; (2) neither disease nor pollution respects international borders; (3) improving the lives of people abroad is an essential element in curbing illegal immigration into the United States; (4) the health and productivity of the world's natural resources affects all the world's people, including the American people; (5) maintaining good relations with nations of Latin America and the Caribbean region promotes United States national security interests in many ways; and (6) the United States environmental technology industry is a world leader, and offers great potential economic growth here in the United States, while at the same time fostering improved environmental protection abroad.
APPROPRIATE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES DEFINED.
In this Act, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives.
AMENDMENT OF THE FOREIGN ASSISTANCE ACT OF 1961.
In General.--Part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 13--CLEAN WATER FOR THE AMERICAS PARTNERSHIP ``SEC.
``In this chapter: ``(1) Joint project.--The term `joint project' means a project between a United States association or nonprofit entity and a Latin American or Caribbean association or nonprofit entity.
Latin american or caribbean association.--The term `Latin American or Caribbean association' means an organization other than a United States association-- ``(A) that would be exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 510(a)) as a business league described in section 501(c)(6) of such Code (26 United States Code 501(c)(6)) if the association were subject to that Code; and ``(B) a majority of the members of which are nationals of any country in the region.
Latin american or caribbean nonprofit entity.--The term `Latin American or Caribbean nonprofit entity' includes any institution of higher education, any private nonprofit entity involved in international education activities, or any research institute or other research organization, based in the region.
President.--The term `President' means the President, acting through the Administrator of the agency primarily responsible for carrying out this part.
Region.--The term `region' refers to the region comprised of the member countries of the Organization of American States (other than the United States and Canada).
United states association.--The term `United States association' means a business league described in section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 501(c)(6)), and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code (26 United States Code 501(a)).
United states nonprofit entity.--The term `United States nonprofit entity' includes any institution of higher education (as defined in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)), any private nonprofit entity involved in international education activities, or any research institute or other research organization, based in the United States.
``The President is authorized to establish a program within the agency primarily responsible for carrying out this part which shall be known as the `Clean Water for the Americas Partnership'.
In carrying out the program established under this section, the President may utilize personnel of the Department of State, the Department of Commerce, and the Environmental Protection Agency as well as personnel employed by the agency primarily responsible for administering this part.
``The President is authorized to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the environmental problems in the region to determine-- ``(1) which environmental problems threaten human health the most, particularly the health of the urban poor, which environmental problems are most threatening, in the long-term, to the region's natural resources, and which countries have the most pressing environmental problems; and ``(2) whether and to what extent there is a market for United States environmental technology, practices, knowledge, and innovations in the region.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TECHNOLOGY AMERICA CENTERS.
Authority to Establish.--The President, in consultation with the Director General of the United States and Foreign Commercial Service of the Department of Commerce, is authorized to establish Technology America Centers (TEAMs) in the region to serve the entire region and, where appropriate, to establish TEAMs in urban areas of the region to focus on urban environmental problems.
Functions.--The TEAMs would link United States private sector environmental technology firms with local partners, both public and private, by providing logistic and information support to United States firms seeking to find local partners and opportunities for environmental projects.
TEAMs should emphasize assisting small businesses.
Location.--In determining whether to locate a TEAM in a country, the President, in consultation with the Director General of the United States and Foreign Commercial Service of the Department of Commerce, shall take into account the country's need for logistic and informational support and the opportunities presented for United States firms in the country.
A TEAM may be located in a country without regard to whether a mission of the United States Agency for International Development is established in that country.
PROMOTION OF WATER QUALITY, WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS, AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY.
``Subject to the availability of appropriations, the President is authorized to provide matching grants to United States associations and United States nonprofit entities for the purpose of promoting water quality, water treatment systems, and energy efficiency in the region.
The grants shall be used to support joint projects, including professional exchanges, academic fellowships, training programs in the United States or in the region, cooperation in regulatory review, development of training materials, the establishment and development in the region of local chapters of the associations or nonprofit entities, and the development of online exchanges.
GRANTS FOR PREFEASIBILITY STUDIES WITHIN A DESIGNATED SUBREGION.
Grant Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the President is authorized to make grants through the agency primarily responsible for carrying out this part for prefeasibility studies for water projects in any country within a single subregion or in a single country designated under paragraph (2).
Designation of subregion.--The President shall designate in advance a single subregion or a single country for purposes of paragraph (1).
Matching Requirement.--The President may not make any grant under this section unless there are made available non-Federal contributions in an amount equal to not less than $20 for every $80 of Federal funds provided under the grant.
Limitation Per Single Project.--With respect to any single project, grant funds under this section shall be available only for the prefeasibility portion of that project.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Prefeasibility.--The term `prefeasibility' means, with respect to a project, not more than 25 percent of the design phase of the project.
Subregion.--The term `subregion' means an area within the region and includes areas such as Central America, the Andean region, and the Southern cone.
CLEAN WATER TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE COMMITTEE.
In General.--The President is authorized to establish a Clean Water Technical Assistance Committee (in this section referred to as the `Committee') to provide technical support and training services for individual water projects.
Composition.--The Committee shall consist of international investors, lenders, water service providers, suppliers, advisers, and others with a direct interest in accelerating development of water projects in the region.
Functions.--Members of the Committee shall act as field advisers and may form specialized working groups to provide in-country training and technical assistance, and shall serve as a source of technical support to resolve barriers to project development.
Nonapplicability of Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Committee.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the President $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004 to carry out this chapter.
Availability of Funds.--Funds appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect October 1, 2001.
Two years after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees containing-- (1) an assessment of the progress made in carrying out the program established under chapter 13 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as added by section 4 of this Act; and (2) any recommendations for the enactment of legislation to make changes in the program established under chapter 13 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as added by section 4 of this Act, for fiscal year 2004.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), chapter 13 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as added by section 4, is repealed on the date that is 3 years after the date of establishment of the program described in section 500A of that Act, as so added.
Exception.--In lieu of the date of repeal specified in subsection (a), the repeal required by that subsection shall take effect five years after the date of establishment of the program described in section 500A of that Act, as so added, if, prior to the date of repeal specified in subsection (a), the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that it would be in the national interest of the United States to continue the program described in such section 500A for an additional 2-year period.