This Act may be cited as the ``National Wildlife Refuge System Centennial Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) President Theodore Roosevelt began the National Wildlife Refuge System by establishing the first refuge at Pelican Island, Florida, on March 14, 1903.
The National Wildlife Refuge System is comprised of more than 93,000,000 acres of Federal lands managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service in more than 520 individual refuges and thousands of waterfowl production areas located in all 50 States and the territories of the United States.
The System is the only network of Federal lands dedicated singularly to wildlife conservation and where wildlife dependent recreation and environmental education are priority public uses.
The System serves a vital role in the conservation of millions of migratory birds, endangered species and threatened species, fish, marine mammals, and the habitats on which these species depend.
Each year the System provides millions of Americans with opportunities to participate in wildlife-dependent recreation, including hunting, fishing, and wildlife observation.
Public visitation to National Wildlife Refuges is growing, with more than 35,000,000 visitors annually.
It is essential that visitor centers and public use facilities be properly constructed, operated, and maintained.
The National Wildlife Refuge System Volunteer and Community Partnership Enhancement Act of 1998 (Public Law 105- 242) significantly enhances the ability to incorporate volunteers and partnerships in refuge management.
The System currently has an unacceptable backlog in critical operations and maintenance needs.
The centennial anniversary of the System in 2003 offers an historic opportunity to appreciate these natural resources and expand public enjoyment of these lands.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To establish a commission to promote awareness of the National Wildlife Refuge System among the American public as the System celebrates its centennial anniversary in 2003.
To develop a long-term plan to meet the priority operations, maintenance, and construction needs of the System.
To require each fiscal year an annual report prepared in the context of-- (A) the budget submission of the Department of the Interior to the President; and (B) the President's budget request to the Congress.
To improve public use programs and facilities of the System to meet the increasing needs of the public for wildlife- dependent recreation in the 21st century.
NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM CENTENNIAL COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is hereby established the National Wildlife Refuge System Centennial Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Members.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of the following members: (A) The Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Up to 10 persons recommended by the Secretary of the Interior and appointed by the President.
The chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and of the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate, the congressional representatives of the Migratory Bird Conservation Commission, and the Secretary of the Interior, who shall be ex-officio members.
Appointments.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed no later than 90 days after the effective date of this Act.
Persons appointed by the President as members of the Commission may not otherwise be officers or employees of the Federal Government and shall, in the judgment of the President, represent the diverse beneficiaries of the System and have outstanding knowledge or appreciation of wildlife, natural resource management, or wildlife-dependent recreation.
In making such appointments, the President shall make every effort to ensure that the views of the hunting, fishing, and wildlife observation communities are represented on the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission-- (A) shall not affect its power or functions; and (B) shall be expeditiously filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Chairperson.--The President shall appoint one of the members as the Chairperson of the Commission.
Basic Pay.--The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.-- (1) Legislative branch members.--Members of the Commission from the legislative branch of the Government shall be allowed necessary travel expenses otherwise authorized by law for official travel.
Executive branch members.--Members of the Commission from the executive branch of the Government shall be allowed necessary travel expenses in accordance with section 5702 of title 5, United States Code.
Other members and staff.--Members of the Commission appointed by the President and staff of the Commission may be allowed necessary travel or transportation expenses as authorized by section 5702 of title 5, United States Code.
Functions.--The Commission shall-- (1) prepare, in cooperation with Federal, State, local, and nongovernmental partners, a plan to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the beginning of the National Wildlife Refuge System on March 14, 2003; (2) coordinate the activities of such partners undertaken pursuant to such plan; and (3) plan and host, in cooperation with such partners, a conference on the National Wildlife Refuge System, and assist in the activities of such a conference.
Staff.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Commission may employ staff as necessary to carry out its functions.
Donations.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may, in accordance with criteria established under paragraph (2), accept and use donations of money, personal property, or personal services.
Criteria.--The Commission shall establish written criteria to be used in determining whether the acceptance of gifts or donations under paragraph (1) would-- (A) reflect unfavorably upon the ability of the Commission or any employee of the Commission to carry out its responsibilities or official duties in a fair and objective manner; or (B) compromise the integrity or the appearance of the integrity of any person involved in those programs.
Administrative Support.--Upon the request of the Commission-- (1) the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, may provide to the Commission the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act, including services related to budgeting, accounting, financial reporting, personnel, and procurement; and (2) the head of any other appropriate Federal department or agency may furnish to the Commission such advice and assistance, with or without reimbursement, to assist the Commission in carrying out its functions.
Reports.-- (1) Annual reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Commission shall submit to the Congress an annual report of its activities and plans to Congress.
Final report.--Not later than September 30, 2004, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a final report of its activities, including an accounting of all funds received and expended by the Commission.
Termination.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall terminate upon the submission of its final report under subsection (j).
Disposition of materials.--Upon termination of the Commission and after consultation with the Archivist of the United States and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, the Secretary of the Interior-- (A) may deposit all books, manuscripts, miscellaneous printed matter, memorabilia, relics, and other similar materials of the Commission relating to the 100th anniversary of the National Wildlife Refuge System in Federal, State, or local libraries or museums or otherwise dispose of such materials; and (B) may use other property acquired by the Commission for the purposes of the National Wildlife Refuge System, or treat such property as excess property.
FULFILLING THE PROMISE OF AMERICA'S NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM: LONG-TERM PLANNING AND ANNUAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS REGARDING THE OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE BACKLOG.
Unified Long-Term Plan.--No later than March 1, 2002, the Secretary of the Interior shall prepare and submit to the Congress and the President a unified long-term plan to address priority operations, maintenance, and construction needs of the National Wildlife Refuge System, including-- (1) priority staffing needs of the System; and (2) operations, maintenance, and construction needs as identified in the Refuge Operating Needs System, the Maintenance Management System, the 5-year deferred maintenance list, the 5-year construction list, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service report entitled ``Fulfilling the Promise of America's National Wildlife Refuge System'', and individual refuge comprehensive conservation plans.
Annual Submission.--Beginning with the budget request for fiscal year 2003, the Secretary of the Interior shall prepare and submit in the context of each annual budget submission, a report that contains-- (1) an assessment of expenditures in the prior, current, and upcoming fiscal years to meet the operations and maintenance backlog as identified in the long-term plan under subsection (a); and (2) transition costs in the prior, current, and upcoming fiscal years, as identified in the Department of the Interior analysis of newly acquired refuge lands, and a description of the method used to determine the priority status of these needs.
This Act shall become effective on January 20, 2001.
Passed the House of Representatives July 11, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.