REPEAL OF SPECIAL TAX ON RETAIL DEALERS IN LIQUOR AND BEER, AND ON RECTIFIERS, BREWERS, AND MANUFACTURERS OF STILLS.
In General.--Part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to occupational tax) is amended by striking the following subparts: (1) Subpart A (relating to rectifier).
Subpart B (relating to brewer).
Subpart C (relating to manufacturers of stills).
Subpart D (relating to wholesale dealers).
Subpart E (relating to retail dealers).
Clerical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) The table of subparts for part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of such Code is amended by striking items relating to subparts A, B, C, D, and E. (2) Subchapter B of chapter 51 of such Code is amended by striking section 5182 (relating to cross references).
The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 51 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 5182.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
PROHIBITION OF ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF OUTSTANDING TAXES.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- (1) no assessment of any tax imposed by subpart A, B, C, D, or E of part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 may be made after the date of the enactment of this Act, and (2) if such tax was assessed (but not collected) on or before such date, such assessment shall be abated.
SIMPLIFICATION OF TAX ON CERTAIN DISTILLED SPIRITS USED IN NONBEVERAGE PRODUCTS.
In General.--Subpart F of part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonbeverage domestic drawback claimants) is amended to read as follows: ``Subpart F--Special Rules for Nonbeverage Domestic Products ``Sec.
Eligibility and rate of tax.
ELIGIBILITY AND RATE OF TAX.
In General.--In the case of distilled spirits on which a tax would be determined under this subchapter (other than this subpart) but for this section, used in the manufacture or production of medicines, medicinal preparations, food products, flavors, flavoring extracts, or perfume, which are unfit for beverage purposes, in lieu of the tax so determined there is hereby imposed a tax at the rate of $1 on each proof gallon of distilled spirits, or a proportionate tax at the like rate on all fractional parts of a proof gallon of distilled spirits withdrawn for the manufacture of such nonbeverage products.
Bond or Other Security.--The Secretary may require persons eligible for the application of this subpart to file with him a bond or other security in such amount such conditions as he shall by regulations prescribe.
Allowance of Special Tax Rate Even Where Certain Requirements Not Met.--Application of this shall not be denied in the case of a failure to comply with any requirement imposed under this subpart, or any rule or regulation issued thereunder, upon the person manufacturing or producing the nonbeverage product set forth in subsection (a) that distilled spirits on which the tax has been paid or determined were in fact used in the manufacture or production of medicines, medicinal preparations, food products, flavors, flavoring extracts, or perfume which were unfit for beverage purposes.
``Every person subject to the application of this subpart shall register annually with the Secretary; keep such books and records as may be necessary to establish the fact that distilled spirits received by him and on which the tax has been determined were used in the manufacture or production of medicines, medicinal preparations, food products, flavors, flavoring extracts, or perfume which were unfit for beverage purposes and be subject to such rules and regulations in relations to such books and records as the Secretary shall prescribe to secure the Treasury against frauds.
``For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of the application of this subpart, the Secretary is authorized to examine any books, papers, records, or memoranda as may be necessary to establish the fact that distilled spirits received were used in the manufacture or production of medicines, medicinal preparations, food products, flavors, flavoring extracts, or perfume which were unfit for beverage purposes, to require the attendance of the person or of any officer or employee of such person or the attendance of any other person having knowledge in the premises, to take testimony with reference to any matter covered by the claim, and to administer oaths to any person giving such testimony.
In General.--In the case of a failure to comply with any requirement imposed under this subpart or any rule or regulation issued thereunder, the taxpayer shall be liable for a penalty of $1,000 for each failure to comply unless it is shown that the failure to comply was due to reasonable cause.
Penalty May Not Exceed Amount of Tax Reduction.--The aggregate amount of the penalties imposed under subsection (a) for failures described in section 5131(c) shall not exceed the difference between the amount of tax which would be determined under section 5131 and the amount of tax which would be determined under this subchapter without regard to section 5131 (determined without regard to subsection (a)).
Penalty Treated as Tax.--The penalty imposed by subsection (b) shall be assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner as taxes, as provided in section 6665(a).''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (A) of section 5010(c)(2) is amended by striking ``type for which'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``type with respect to which section 5131 applies.''
Subsections (a) and (b) of section 5142 of such Code are each amended by striking ``(except the tax imposed by section 5131)''.
Subsection (g) of section 7652 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(g) Treatment of Medicinal Alcohol, Etc.--In the case of medicines, medicinal preparations, food products, flavors, flavoring extracts, or perfume which were unfit for beverage purposes and which are brought into the United States from Puerto Rico or the Virgin Islands-- ``(1) subpart F of part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 shall be applied as if-- ``(A) the use and tax determined described in section 5131(a) had occurred in the United States by a United States person at the time the article is brought into the United States, and ``(B) the rate of tax so determined were the rate applicable under subsection (f) of this section, and ``(2) no amount shall be covered into the treasuries of Puerto Rico or the Virgin Islands.''
The table of subparts for part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to subpart F and inserting the following new item: ``Subpart F--Special rules for nonbeverage domestic products.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.