ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL COMMISSION ON FAIRNESS IN MILITARY COMPENSATION.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission on Fairness in Military Compensation'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership of Commission.--The Commission shall consist of 16 members, as follows: (1) The Secretary of Defense.
The Secretary of Agriculture.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Two Members of the Senate, one Member selected by the President pro tempore of the Senate and one Member selected by the minority leader of the Senate.
Two Members of the House of Representatives, one Member selected by the Speaker of the House and one Member selected by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Eight additional members appointed by the President from the general public or as representatives of nonprofit or military advocacy organizations, such as-- (A) the American Legion; (B) the Veterans of Foreign Wars; (C) the USO; (D) the Non-Commissioned Officers Association; (E) the Retired Enlisted Association; (F) the Fleet Reserve Association; (G) the Association of the United States Army; (H) the National Military Family Association; and (I) the Air Force Sergeants Association.
Time for Appointment.--The members of the Commission required to be appointed or selected under subsection (b) shall be appointed or selected not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Chairperson.--The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its membership.
Review of Fairness of Military Compensation.--The Commission shall determine the extent to which members of the Armed Forces or their dependents have come to rely on food stamps, the special supplemental food program under section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1786), and other Federal or local assistance programs as a necessary supplement to their regular military compensation and the circumstances that lead to such dependence.
In the case of members of the Armed Forces stationed outside the United States who are unable to receive such assistance, the Commission shall also determine the general standard of living for these members and their dependents.
Report and Recommendations.--On the basis of the review conducted under subsection (a), the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and Congress a report containing the findings of the Commission and specific recommendations on possible changes in the military pay structure or other methods to ensure that members of the Armed Forces receive adequate compensation so that they are able to provide for themselves and their families without seeking special financial assistance to maintain a decent standard of living.
The report shall be submitted within 180 days after the first meeting of the Commission.
GENERAL POWERS OF COMMISSION.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a group for the transaction of business.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy on the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Prohibition of Additional Pay.--Members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Members appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem, in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the government service to the extent funds are available for such expenses.
Hearings.--For the purpose of carrying out this Act, the Commission may hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places as the Commission may find advisable.
Rules and Regulations.--The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to establish its procedures and to govern the manner of its operations, organization, and personnel.
Assistance From Federal Agencies.--(1) The Commission may request from the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality such information as the Commission may require for the purpose of this Act.
Upon request made by the Chairperson of the Commission, each such agency or instrumentality shall furnish such information to the Commission, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the exceptions set forth in section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Freedom of Information Act).
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality shall, to the extent possible and subject to the discretion of such head-- (A) make any of the facilities and services of such agency or instrumentality available to the Commission; and (B) detail any of the personnel of such agency or instrumentality to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act, except that any expenses of the Commission incurred under this subparagraph shall be subject to the limitation on total expenses set forth in section 4(b).
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Contracting.--The Commission may, to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, enter into contracts with State agencies, private firms, institutions, and individuals for the purpose of conducting research or surveys necessary to enable the Commission to discharge its duties under this Act, subject to the limitation on total expenses set forth in section 4(b).
Staff.--Subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Commission, the Chairperson of the Commission (subject to the limitation on total expenses set forth in section 4(b)) shall have the power to appoint, terminate, and fix the compensation (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of provision of law, relating to the number, classification, and General Schedule rates) of an Executive Director, and of such additional staff as the Chairperson deems advisable to assist the Commission, at rates not to exceed a rate to the maximum rate for GS-15, of the General Schedule under section 5332 of such title.
In General.--Any expenses of the Commission shall be paid from such funds as may be available to the Secretary of Defense.
Limitation.--The total expenses of the Commission shall not exceed $750,000.
GAO Audit.--Prior to the termination of the Commission, the Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an audit of the financial books and records of the Commission to determine that the limitation on expenses has been met, and shall include its determination in an opinion to be included in the report of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits its final report under section 2(b).