This Act may be cited as the ``Steel Industry American Heritage Area Act of 1995''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the industrial and cultural heritage of southwestern Pennsylvania, including the city of Pittsburgh, and the counties of Allegheny, Armstrong, Beaver, Fayette, Greene, Washington, and Westmoreland, related directly to steel and steel-related industries, is nationally significant; (2) these industries include steelmaking, iron making, aluminum, specialty metals, glass, coal mining, coke production, machining and foundries, transportation, and electrical industries; (3) the industrial and cultural heritage of the steel and related industries in this region includes the social history and living cultural traditions of the people of the region; (4) the labor movement of the region played a significant role in the development of the Nation, including the formation of many key unions such as the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and the United Steel Workers of America (USWA), and crucial struggles to improve wages and working conditions, such as the Rail Strike of 1877, the Homestead Strike of 1892, and the Great Steel Strike of 1919; (5) the Department of the Interior is responsible for protecting the Nation's cultural and historic resources, and there are significant examples of these resources, within this seven-county region to merit the involvement of the Federal Government to develop programs and projects, in cooperation with the Steel Industry Heritage Corporation, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and other local and governmental bodies, to adequately conserve, protect, and interpret this heritage for future generations, while providing opportunities for education and revitalization; and (6) the Steel Industry Heritage Corporation would be an appropriate management entity for a Heritage Area established in the region.
Statement of Purpose.--The objectives of the Steel Industry American Heritage Area are-- (1) to foster a close working relationship with all levels of government, the private sector, and the local communities in the steel industry region of southwestern Pennsylvania and empower the communities to conserve their heritage while continuing to pursue economic opportunities; and (2) to conserve, interpret, and develop the historical, cultural, natural, and recreational resources related to the industrial and cultural heritage of the seven-county region of southwestern Pennsylvania.
STEEL INDUSTRY AMERICAN HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a Steel Industry American Heritage Area (in this Act referred to as the ``Heritage Area'').
Boundaries.--The Heritage Area shall be comprised of the counties of Allegheny, Armstrong, Beaver, Fayette, Greene, Washington, and Westmoreland in Pennsylvania.
Management Entity.--The management entity for the Heritage Area shall be the Steel Industry Heritage Corporation.
To carry out the purposes of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall enter into a compact with the management entity.
The compact shall include information relating to the objectives and management of the area, including the following: (1) A delineation of the boundaries of the proposed American Heritage Area.
A discussion of the goals and objectives of the proposed American Heritage Area, including an explanation of the proposed approach to conservation and interpretation and a general outline of the protection measures committed to by the partners referred to in clause (iv).
An identification and description of the management entity that will administer the proposed American Heritage Area.
A list of the initial partners to be involved in developing and implementing the management plan referred to in paragraph (3) for the proposed American Heritage Area, and a statement of the financial commitment of the partners.
A description of the role of the State or States in which the proposed American Heritage Area is located.
The compact shall be prepared with public participation.
Actions called for in the compact shall be likely to be initiated within a reasonable time after designation of the proposed American Heritage Area and shall ensure effective implementation of the State and local aspects of the compact.
The management entity shall develop a management plan for the Heritage Area that presents comprehensive recommendations for the Heritage Area's conservation, funding, management and development.
Such plan shall take into consideration existing State, county, and local plans and involve residents, public agencies, and private organizations working in the Heritage Area.
It shall include actions to be undertaken by units of government and private organizations to protect the resources of the Heritage Area.
It shall specify the existing and potential sources of funding to protect, manage, and develop the Heritage Area.
Such plan shall include specifically as appropriate the following: (1) An inventory of the resources contained in the Heritage Area, including a list of any property in the Heritage Area that is related to the themes of the Heritage Area and that should be preserved, restored, managed, developed, or maintained because of its natural, cultural, historic, recreational, or scenic significance.
A recommendation of policies for resource management which consider and detail application of appropriate land and water management techniques, including but not limited to, the development of intergovernmental cooperative agreements to protect the Heritage Area's historical, cultural, recreational, and natural resources in a manner consistent with supporting appropriate and compatible economic viability.
A program for implementation of the management plan by the management entity, including plans for restoration and construction, and specific commitments of the identified partners for the first 5 years of operation.
An analysis of ways in which local, State, and Federal programs may best be coordinated to promote the purposes of the Act.
An interpretation plan for the Heritage Area.
AUTHORITIES AND DUTIES OF MANAGEMENT ENTITY.
Authorities of the Management Entity.--The management entity may, for purposes of preparing and implementing the management plan under section 5, use Federal funds made available through this Act-- (1) to make loans and grants to, and enter into cooperative agreements with, States and their political subdivisions, private organizations, or any person; and (2) to hire and compensate staff.
Duties of the Management Entity.--The management entity shall-- (1) develop and submit to the Secretary for approval a management plan as described in section 5 within 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act; (2) give priority to implementing actions set forth in the compact and the management plan, including taking steps to-- (A) assist units of government, regional planning organizations, and nonprofit organizations in preserving the Heritage Area; (B) assist units of government, regional planning organizations, and nonprofit organizations in establishing, and maintaining interpretive exhibits in the Heritage Area; (C) assist units of government, regional planning organizations, and nonprofit organizations in developing recreational resources in the Heritage Area; (D) assist units of government, regional planning organizations, and nonprofit organizations in increasing public awareness of and appreciation for the natural, historical and architectural resources and sites in the Heritage Area; (E) assist units of government, regional planning organizations and nonprofit organizations in the restoration of any historic building relating to the themes of the Heritage Area; (F) encourage by appropriate means economic viability in the Heritage Area consistent with the goals of the plan; (G) encourage local governments to adopt land use policies consistent with the management of the Heritage Area and the goals of the plan; and (H) assist units of government, regional planning organizations and nonprofit organizations to ensure that clear, consistent, and environmentally appropriate signs identifying access points and sites of interest are put in place throughout the Heritage Area; (3) consider the interests of diverse governmental, business, and nonprofit groups within the Heritage Area; (4) conduct public meetings at least quarterly regarding the implementation of the management plan; (5) submit substantial changes (including any increase of more than 20 percent in the cost estimates for implementation) to the management plan to the Secretary for the Secretary's approval; (6) for any year in which Federal funds have been received under this Act, submit an annual report to the Secretary setting forth its accomplishments, its expenses and income, and the entity to which any loans and grants were made during the year for which the report is made; and (7) for any year in which Federal funds have been received under this Act, make available for audit all records pertaining to the expenditure of such funds and any matching funds, and require, for all agreements authorizing expenditure of Federal funds by other organizations, that the receiving organizations make available for audit all records pertaining to the expenditure of such funds.
If a management plan is not submitted to the Secretary as required under paragraph (1) within the specified time, the Heritage Area shall no longer qualify for Federal funding.
Prohibition on the Acquisition of Real Property.--The management entity may not use Federal funds received under this Act to acquire real property or an interest in real property.
Nothing in this Act shall preclude any management entity from using Federal funds from other sources for their permitted purposes.
Eligibility for Receiving Financial Assistance.-- (1) Eligibility.--The management entity shall be eligible to receive funds appropriated through this Act for a period of 13 years after the day on which the compact under section 4 is signed by the Secretary and the management entity, except as provided in paragraph (2).
Exception.--The management entity's eligibility for funding under this Act may be extended for a period of not more than 5 additional years, if-- (A) the management entity determine such extension is necessary in order to carry out the purposes of this Act and notify the Secretary not later than 180 days prior to the termination date; (B) the management entity, not later than 180 days prior to the termination date, present to the Secretary a plan of their activities for the period of the extension, including provisions for becoming independent of the funds made available through this Act; and (C) the Secretary, with the advice of the Governor of Pennsylvania approves such extension of funding.
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Duties and Authorities of the Secretary.-- (1) Technical and financial assistance.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may, upon request of the management entity, provide technical and financial assistance to the Heritage Area to develop and implement the management plan.
In assisting the Heritage Area, the Secretary shall give priority to actions that in general assist in-- (i) conserving the significant natural, historic, and cultural resources which support its themes; and (ii) providing educational, interpretive, and recreational opportunities consistent with its resources and associated values.
Spending for nonfederally owned property.--The Secretary may spend Federal funds directly on nonfederally owned property to further the purposes of this Act, especially in assisting units of government in appropriate treatment of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects listed or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
The Historic American Building Survey/Historic American Engineering Record shall conduct those studies necessary to document the industrial, engineering, building, and architectural history of the region.
Approval and disapproval of compacts and management plans.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Governor of Pennsylvania shall approve or disapprove a compact or management plan submitted under this Act not later than 90 days after receiving such compact or management plan.
Action following disapproval.--If the Secretary disapproves a submitted compact or management plan, the Secretary shall advise the management entity in writing of the reasons therefor and shall make recommendations for revisions in the compact or plan.
The Secretary shall approve or disapprove a proposed revision within 90 days after the date it is submitted.
Approving amendments.--The Secretary shall review substantial amendments to the management plan for the Heritage Area.
Funds appropriated pursuant to this Act may not be expended to implement the changes until the Secretary approves the amendments.
Promulgating regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Duties of Federal Entities.--Any Federal entity conducting any activity directly affecting the Heritage Area shall consider the potential effect of the activity on the management plan for the area and shall consult with the Governor of Pennsylvania with respect to the activity to minimize the adverse effects of the activity on the area.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.