This act may be cited as the ``National Coal Heritage Area Act of 1995''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that: (1) Certain events that led to the development of southern West Virginia's coalfields during the latter part of the 19th Century and the early part of the current century are of national historic and cultural significance in terms of their contribution to the industrialization of the United States, the organization of workers into trade unions and the unique culture of the Appalachian Region.
It is in the national interest to preserve and protect physical remnants of this era for the education and benefit of present and future generations.
There is a need to provide assistance for the preservation and promotion of those vestiges of southern West Virginia's coal heritage which have outstanding cultural, historic, and architectural values.
In General.--For the purpose of preserving and interpreting for the educational and inspirational benefit of present and future generations certain lands and structures with unique and significant historic and cultural values associated with the coal mining heritage of the State of West Virginia and the Nation there is hereby established the National Coal Heritage Area (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Area'').
Boundaries.--The Area shall be comprised of the counties in the State of West Virginia that are the subject of the study by the National Park Service, dated 1993, entitled ``A Coal Mining Heritage Study: Southern West Virginia'' conducted pursuant to title VI of Public Law 100-699 (c) Administration.--The Area shall be administered in accordance with this Act.
The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter referred to as the ``Secretary'') is authorized to enter into a contractual agreement with the Governor of the State of West Virginia, acting through the Division of Culture and History and the Division of Tourism and Parks, pursuant to which the Secretary shall assist the State of West Virginia, its units of local government, and non-profit organizations in each of the following: (1) The development and implementation of integrated cultural, historical, and land resource management policies and programs in order to retain, enhance, and interpret the significant values of the lands, waters, and structures of the Area.
The preservation, restoration, maintenance, operation, interpretation, and promotion of buildings, structures, facilities, sites, and points of interest for public use that possess cultural, historical, and architectural values associated with the coal mining heritage of the Area.
The coordination of activities by Federal, State and local governments and private businesses and organizations in order to further historic preservation and compatible economic revitalization.
The development of guidelines and standards for projects, consistent with standards established by the National Park Service, for the preservation and restoration of historic properties, including interpretive methods, that will further history preservation in the region.
The acquisition of real property, or interests in real property, for public use by donation or by purchase, that possess cultural, historical, and architectural values associated with the coal mining heritage of the Area from a willing seller with donated or appropriated funds.
The assistance referred to in section 7(d).
The resources eligible for the assistance under paragraphs (2) and (5) of section 4 shall include those set forth in appendix D of the study by the National Park Service, dated 1993, entitled ``A Coal Mining Heritage Study: Southern West Virginia'' conducted pursuant to title VI of Public Law 100-699.
Priority consideration shall be given to those sites listed as ``Conservation Priorities'' and ``Important Historic Resources'' as depicted on the map entitled ``Study Area: Historic Resources'' in such study.
COAL HERITAGE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
In General.--Pursuant to the contractual agreement referred to in section 4, within two years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Governor of the State of West Virginia, acting through the Division of Culture and History and the Division of Tourism and Parks, shall submit to the Secretary a Coal Heritage Management Plan for the Area.
The plan shall at a minimum-- (1) set forth the integrated cultural, historic, and land resource management policies and programs referred to in section 4; (2) describe the guidelines and standards for projects referred to in section 4; (3) set forth the responsibilities of the State of West Virginia, units of local government, non-profit entities or of the Secretary to administer any properties acquired pursuant to section 4; and (4) provide for the restoration, preservation, interpretation, and administration of the historic, cultural, and architectural resources of the Bramwell National Historic Site.
Plan Approval.--The Secretary shall approve the plan submitted under subsection (a) unless he determines that it would not meet the objectives of this Act.
DESIGNATION OF BRAMWELL NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
In General.--In order to preserve, restore, and interpret the unique historical, cultural, and architectural values of Bramwell, West Virginia, there is hereby established the Bramwell National Historic Site (hereinafter referred to as the ``Site'').
Area Included.--The Site shall consist of the lands and interests therein within the corporate limits of the town of Bramwell.
Administration.--The Site shall be administered by the State of West Virginia, an appropriate unit of local government, or a non-profit organization as determined by the management plan referred to in section 6.
Duties of the Secretary.--To carry out the purposes of this section, the Secretary shall assist in the implementation of the management plan referred to in section 6.
Such assistance shall include, but necessarily be limited to-- (1) faciliting the restoration, preservation, and interpretation of the historic, cultural, and architectural resources of the Site; (2) offsetting the costs of operating and maintaining the Site; and (3) providing for the acquisition of land or interests in land within the boundaries of the Site from willing sellers.
Property Owner Rights.--(1) Nothing in this section may be construed as authorizing access to private residential property within the Site for the purpose of conducting visitors through such property, or for any other purpose, without the advice and consent of the owner of such property.
The entity referred to in subsection (c) may mark, interpret, restore, and provide technical assistance for the preservation and interpretation of properties with historic or cultural significance within the Site only pursuant to cooperative agreements with the owners of such properties.
There is hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act, to remain available until expended.
DESIGNATION OF MINERS' MARCH TRAIL AS A STUDY TRAIL.
Section 5(c) of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1244(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``( ) The route from Lens Creek near Marmet to Blair Mountain in West Virginia traveled by coal miners dramatizing the need for social justice between August 20, 1921, and September 4, 1921, during what is commonly known as the Battle of Blair Mountain.