ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTER FOR COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE.
In General.--Title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 281 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by striking section 404E; and (2) in part E, by adding at the end the following: ``Subpart 5--National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine ``SEC.
In General.--The general purposes of the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (in this subpart referred to as the `Center') are the conduct and support of basic and applied research (including both intramural and extramural research), research training, the dissemination of health information, and other programs with respect to identifying, investigating, and validating complementary and alternative treatment, diagnostic and prevention modalities, disciplines and systems.
The Center shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed by the Secretary.
The Director of the Center shall report directly to the Director of NIH.
Advisory Council.--The Secretary shall establish an advisory council for the Center in accordance with section 406, except that at least half of the members of the advisory council who are not ex officio members shall include practitioners licensed in one or more of the major systems with which the Center is concerned, and at least 3 individuals representing the interests of individual consumers of complementary and alternative medicine.
Complement to Conventional Medicine.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Director of the Center shall, as appropriate, study the integration of alternative treatment, diagnostic and prevention systems, modalities, and disciplines with the practice of conventional medicine as a complement to such medicine and into health care delivery systems in the United States.
Appropriate Scientific Expertise and Coordination With Institutes and Federal Agencies.--The Director of the Center, after consultation with the advisory council for the Center and the division of research grants, shall ensure that scientists with appropriate expertise in research on complementary and alternative medicine are incorporated into the review, oversight, and management processes of all research projects and other activities funded by the Center.
In carrying out this subsection, the Director of the Center, as necessary, may establish review groups with appropriate scientific expertise.
The Director of the Center shall coordinate efforts with other Institutes and Federal agencies to ensure appropriate scientific input and management.
Evaluation of Various Disciplines and Systems.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Director of the Center shall identify and evaluate alternative and complementary medical treatment, diagnostic and prevention modalities in each of the disciplines and systems with which the Center is concerned, including each discipline and system in which accreditation, national certification, or a State license is available.
Ensuring High Quality, Rigorous Scientific Review.--In order to ensure high quality, rigorous scientific review of complementary and alternative, diagnostic and prevention modalities, disciplines and systems, the Director of the Center shall conduct or support the following activities: ``(1) Outcomes research and investigations.
Other appropriate research and investigational activities.
The Director of NIH, in coordination with the Director of the Center, shall designate specific personnel in each Institute to serve as full- time liaisons with the Center in facilitating appropriate coordination and scientific input.
Data System; Information Clearinghouse.-- ``(1) Data system.--The Director of the Center shall establish a bibliographic system for the collection, storage, and retrieval of worldwide research relating to complementary and alternative treatment, diagnostic and prevention modalities, disciplines and systems.
Such a system shall be regularly updated and publicly accessible.
Clearinghouse.--The Director of the Center shall establish an information clearinghouse to facilitate and enhance, through the effective dissemination of information, knowledge and understanding of alternative medical treatment, diagnostic and prevention practices by health professionals, patients, industry, and the public.
Research Centers.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Center, after consultation with the advisory council for the Center, shall provide support for the development and operation of multipurpose centers to conduct research and other activities described in subsection (a) with respect to complementary and alternative treatment, diagnostic and prevention modalities, disciplines and systems.
The provision of support for the development and operation of such centers shall include accredited complementary and alternative medicine research and education facilities.
Requirements.--Each center assisted under paragraph (1) shall use the facilities of a single entity, or be formed from a consortium of cooperating entities, and shall meet such requirements as may be established by the Director of the Center.
Each such center shall-- ``(A) be established as an independent entity; or ``(B) be established within or in affiliation with an entity that conducts research or training described in subsection (a).
Duration of support.--Support of a center under paragraph (1) may be for a period not exceeding 5 years.
Such period may be extended for one or more additional periods not exceeding 5 years if the operations of such center have been reviewed by an appropriate technical and scientific peer review group established by the Director of the Center and if such group has recommended to the Director that such period should be extended.
Biennial Report.--The Director of the Center shall prepare biennial reports on the activities carried out or to be carried out by the Center, and shall submit each such report to the Director of NIH for inclusion in the biennial report under section 403.
Availability of Resources.--After consultation with the Director of the Center, the Director of NIH shall ensure that resources of the National Institutes of Health, including laboratory and clinical facilities, fellowships (including research training fellowship and junior and senior clinical fellowships), and other resources are sufficiently available to enable the Center to appropriately and effectively carry out its duties as described in subsection (a).
The Director of NIH, in coordination with the Director of the Center, shall designate specific personnel in each Institute to serve as full-time liaisons with the Center in facilitating appropriate coordination and scientific input.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this subpart, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2003.
Amounts appropriated under this subsection for fiscal year 1999 are available for obligation through September 30, 2001.
Amounts appropriated under this subsection for fiscal year 2000 are available for obligation through September 30, 2001.''.
Savings Provision.--All officers and employees employed in the Office of Alternative Medicine on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act (pursuant to section 404E of the Public Health Service Act, as in effect on such day) are transferred to the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
Such transfer does not affect the status of any such officer or employee (except to the extent that the amendments made by subsection (a) affect the authority to make appointments to employment positions).
All funds available on such day for such Office are transferred to such Center, and the transfer does not affect the availability of funds for the purposes for which the funds were appropriated (except that such purposes shall apply with respect to the Center to the same extent and in the same manner as the purposes applied with respect to the Office).
All other legal rights and duties with respect to the Office are transferred to the Center, and continue in effect in accordance with their terms.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--Part A of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 281 et sequentes), as amended by subsection (a), is amended-- (1) in section 401(b)(2), by amending subparagraph (E) to read as follows: ``(E) The National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
''; and (2) in section 402, by redesignating subsections (g) through (k) as subsections (f) through (j), respectively.