SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Surface Owner Protection Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--PROTECTION OF WATER RESOURCES Sec.
Mineral Leasing Act requirements.
Relationship to State law.
TITLE II--SURFACE OWNER PROTECTION Sec.
Post-lease surface use agreement.
Authorized exploration and drilling operations.
TITLE III--RECLAMATION AND BONDING Sec.
Reclamation requirements and bond.
TITLE I--PROTECTION OF WATER RESOURCES SEC.
MINERAL LEASING ACT REQUIREMENTS.
Section 17 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 226) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(q) Water Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--An operator producing oil or gas (including coalbed methane) under a lease issued under this Act shall-- ``(A) replace the water supply of a water user who obtains all or part of the supply of the user of water for domestic, agricultural, or other purposes from an underground or surface source that has been affected by contamination, diminution, or interruption proximately resulting from drilling operations for the production; and ``(B) comply with all applicable requirements of Federal and State law for discharge of any water produced under the lease.
Water management plan.--An application for a lease under this subsection shall be accompanied by a proposed water management plan including provisions-- ``(A) to protect the quantity and quality of surface and ground water systems, both on-site and off- site, from adverse effects of the exploration, development, and reclamation processes or to provide alternative sources of water if the protection cannot be ensured; ``(B) to protect the rights of present users of water that would be affected by operations under the lease, including the discharge of any water produced in connection with the operations that is not reinjected; and ``(C) to identify any agreements with other parties for the beneficial use of produced waters and the steps that will be taken to comply with Federal and State laws relating to the use.''.
RELATIONSHIP TO STATE LAW.
Nothing in this Act or an amendment made by this Act-- (1) impairs or affects any right or jurisdiction of any State with respect to the waters of the State; or (2) limits, alters, modifies, or amends any of the interstate compacts or equitable apportionment decrees that apportion water among and between States.
TITLE II--SURFACE OWNER PROTECTION SEC.
In this title: (1) Lease.--The term ``lease'' means a lease issued by the Secretary under the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 181 et sequentes) or any other law, providing for development of oil and gas resources (including coalbed methane) owned by the United States.
Lessee.--The term ``lessee'' means the holder of a lease.
Operator.--The term ``operator'' means any person that is responsible under the terms and conditions of a lease for the operations conducted on leased land or any portion of the land.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
POST-LEASE SURFACE USE AGREEMENT.
In General.--Except as provided in section 203, the Secretary may not authorize any operator to conduct exploration and drilling operations on land with respect to which title to oil and gas resources is held by the United States but title to the surface estate is not held by the United States, until the operator has filed with the Secretary a document, signed by the operator and the 1 or more surface owners, indicating that the operator has secured a written surface use agreement between the operator and the 1 or more surface owners that meets the requirements of subsection (b).
Contents.--A surface use agreement shall provide for-- (1) the use of only the portion of the surface estate that is reasonably necessary for exploration and drilling operations based on site-specific conditions, as determined by the Secretary; (2) the accommodation of the surface estate owner, to the maximum extent practicable, including the location, use, timing, and type of exploration and drilling operations, consistent with the right of the operator to develop the oil and gas estate; (3) the reclamation of the site to a condition capable of supporting the uses which the land was capable of supporting prior to exploration and drilling operations; and (4) compensation for damages as a result of exploration and drilling operations, including-- (A) loss of income and increased costs incurred; (B) damage to or destruction of personal property, including crops, forage, and livestock; and (C) failure to reclaim the site in accordance with paragraph (3).
Procedure.-- (1) Notice.--An operator shall notify each surface estate owner of the desire of the operator to conclude an agreement under this section.
Arbitration.-- (A) In general.--If the surface estate owner and the operator do not reach an agreement within 90 days after the date on which the operator provided the notice, the matter shall be referred to third party arbitration for resolution within a period of 90 days.
Cost.--The cost of the arbitration shall be the responsibility of the operator.
Arbitrators.--The Secretary shall-- (i) identify persons with experience in conducting arbitrations; and (ii) make the information available to operators.
Referrals.--Referral of a matter for arbitration by a person identified by the Secretary pursuant to subparagraph (C) shall constitute compliance with paragraph (1).
Attorneys Fees.--If action is taken to enforce or interpret any of the terms and conditions contained in a surface use agreement, the prevailing party shall be reimbursed by the other party for reasonable attorneys fees and actual costs incurred, in addition to any other relief that a court or arbitration panel may grant.
AUTHORIZED EXPLORATION AND DRILLING OPERATIONS.
In General.--The Secretary may authorize an operator to conduct exploration and drilling operations on land covered by section 202 in the absence of an agreement with each surface estate owner, if-- (1) the Secretary makes a determination, in writing, that the operator made a good faith attempt to conclude such an agreement, including referral of the matter to arbitration pursuant to section 202(c)(2), but that no agreement was concluded within 90 days after the referral to arbitration; (2) the operator submits a plan of operations that covers the matters specified in section 202(b) and for compliance with all other applicable requirements of Federal and State law; and (3) the operator posts a bond or other financial assurance in an amount the Secretary determines to be adequate to ensure compensation to the surface estate owner for any damage to the site, in the form of a surety bond, trust fund, letter of credit, government security, certificate of deposit, cash, or equivalent.
Surface Owner Participation.--The Secretary shall provide surface estate owners with an opportunity-- (1) to comment on plans of operations in advance of a determination of compliance with this title; (2) to participate in bond level determinations and bond release proceedings under this section; (3) to attend an on-site inspection during the determinations and proceedings; (4) to file written objections to a proposed bond release; and (5) to request and participate in an on-site inspection if the owners have reason to believe there is a violation of the terms and conditions of a plan of operations.
Payment of Financial Guarantee.-- (1) In general.--A surface estate owner, with respect to any land subject to a lease, may petition the Secretary for payment of all or part of a bond or other financial assurance required under this section as compensation for any damage as a result of exploration and drilling operations.
Compensation.--Pursuant to the petition, the Secretary may use the bond or other guarantee to provide compensation to the surface estate owner for the damage.
Bond Release.--On request and after inspection and opportunity for surface estate owner review, the Secretary may release the financial assurance required under this section if the Secretary determines that-- (1) exploration and drilling operations have ended; and (2) all damage has been fully compensated.
The Secretary shall-- (1) notify surface estate owners of lease sales in writing at least 45 days in advance; (2) not later than 10 working days after the date on which a lease is issued, notify surface estate owners regarding the identity of the lessee; (3) notify surface estate owners in writing concerning any subsequent decisions regarding a lease, such as modifying or waiving stipulations and approving rights of way; and (4) notify surface estate owners not later than 5 business days after the date of issuance of a drilling permit under a lease.
TITLE III--RECLAMATION AND BONDING SEC.
RECLAMATION REQUIREMENTS AND BOND.
In General.--Section 17 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 226) (as amended by section 101) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(r) Reclamation Requirements and Bond.-- ``(1) Requirements.--An operator producing oil or gas (including coalbed methane) under a lease issued pursuant to this Act shall-- ``(A) at a minimum, restore the land affected to a condition capable of supporting the uses that the land was capable of supporting prior to any drilling, or higher or better uses if there is reasonable likelihood that-- ``(i) the 1 or more uses do not-- ``(I) present any actual or probable hazard to public health or safety; or ``(II) pose any actual or probable threat of water diminution or pollution; and ``(ii) the declared proposed land use of the permit applicant following reclamation-- ``(I) is not impractical or unreasonable, inconsistent with applicable land use policies and plans, or involve unreasonable delay in implementation; and ``(II) does not violate Federal, State, or local law; ``(B) ensure that all reclamation efforts proceed in an environmentally sound manner and as contemporaneously as practicable with the oil and gas drilling operations; and ``(C) submit, with the plan of operations, a reclamation plan that describes in detail the methods and practices that will be used to ensure complete and timely restoration of all land affected by oil and gas operations.
Reclamation bond.-- ``(A) In general.--An operator producing oil or gas (including coalbed methane) under a lease issued under this Act shall post a bond that covers the area of land within the permit area on which the operator will initiate and conduct oil and gas drilling and reclamation operations within the initial term of the permit.
Additional bonds.--As succeeding increments of oil and gas drilling and reclamation operations are initiated and conducted within the permit area, the lessee shall file with the regulatory authority 1 or more additional bonds to cover the increments in accordance with this section.
Amount.--The amount of the bond required for each bonded area shall-- ``(i) meet the reclamation requirements of the approved permit; ``(ii) reflect the probable difficulty of reclamation considering factors such as topography, the geology of the site, hydrology, and revegetation potential; ``(iii) be determined by the Secretary; and ``(iv) be sufficient to ensure the completion of the reclamation plan if the work had to be performed by the Secretary in the event of forfeiture.
Regulations.--No later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to implement the requirements of this subsection.''.
Review and Report.-- (1) Review.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a review of the adequacy of the regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to subsection (r)(3) of section 17 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 226) (as added by subsection (a)) to ensure that operators will meet the requirements of subsection (r) of that section.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date on which the Secretary promulgates regulations pursuant to subsection (r)(3) of section 17 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 226) (as added by subsection (a)), the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report that describes the results of the review conducted under paragraph (1), including-- (A) any findings and conclusions of the Comptroller General of the United States; and (B) any recommendations the Comptroller General may make with respect to any legislation or administrative actions the Comptroller General of the United States determines would be appropriate to ensure compliance with the requirements of subsection (r) of that section.