TREATMENT OF INTEREST EXPENSE OF QUALIFIED INFRASTRUCTURE INDEBTEDNESS.
In General.--Section 864(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rules for allocating interest, etc.)
is amended by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs (7) and (8), respectively, and inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph: ``(6) Treatment of certain interest expense relating to qualified infrastructure indebtedness.-- ``(A) In general.--Interest expense attributable to qualified infrastructure indebtedness of a taxpayer shall be allocated and apportioned solely to sources within the United States and the taxpayer's assets (whether or not held in the United States) shall be reduced by the amount of qualified infrastructure indebtedness.
Qualified infrastructure indebtedness.-- ``(i) In general.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified infrastructure indebtedness' means debt incurred to carry on, or to acquire, build, or finance property used predominantly in, the trade or business of the furnishing or sale of electrical energy or natural gas in the United States.
The determination of whether debt constitutes qualified infrastructure indebtedness under the previous sentence shall be made at the time the debt is incurred.
Required rate regulation.--The rates for the furnishing or sale of electrical energy or natural gas by a trade or business under clause (i) must be established or approved by-- ``(I) the District of Columbia or a State or political subdivision thereof, ``(II) any agency or instrumentality of the United States, or ``(III) a public service or public utility commission or other similar body of the District of Columbia or of any State or political subdivision thereof.
Limitation.--If the rate regulation under clause (ii) applies only to a portion of the trade or business of the furnishing or sale of electrical energy or natural gas, the debt incurred to carry on, or to acquire, build, or finance property used in, such trade or business shall constitute qualified infrastructure indebtedness only to the extent that the ratio of the total outstanding qualified infrastructure indebtedness with respect to such trade or business (including such debt) to the total outstanding indebtedness with respect to such trade or business does not exceed the ratio of the assets used in the portion of the trade or business that is subject to such rate regulation to the total assets used in such trade or business.
For purposes of the determination under the preceding sentence, assets shall be measured using book value for taxation purposes unless the taxpayer makes an election to use fair market value.
Such election shall apply to the taxable year for which the election is made and all subsequent taxable years unless revoked with the consent of the Secretary.''
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to debt incurred in taxable years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
Outstanding debt.--In the case of debt outstanding as of the date of enactment of this Act, the determination of whether such debt constitutes ``qualified infrastructure indebtedness'' shall be made by applying the rules of section 864(e)(6)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section, on the date such debt was incurred.