This Act may be cited as the ``Commission to Universally Reduce and Eradicate Disease Act of 2001''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) During the 20th century the United States led the world in defeating totalitarianism and communism.
The United States also led the world in spreading and establishing democracy in every region.
The United States remains the only global ``superpower'', a historic position of leadership which allows the Nation to establish new goals to benefit humanity in the 21st century.
The United States, the world leader in the research, development, and production of technologies, medicines, and methodologies utilized to prevent and cure disease, has established a Center for Vaccine Development at the National Institutes of Health that could assist in the global control of infectious diseases.
Infectious disease is the number one global health challenge, annually killing 11 million people globally and 180,000 people in the United States, and is the third leading cause of death in the United States.
The United States has the resources, through the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation, to expand health research information globally through the use of Internet conferencing and dissemination of data.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission for the New National Goal: The Advancement of Global Health'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall recommend to the Congress a national strategy for coordinating governmental, academic, and public and private health care entities for the purpose of the global eradication of disease.
The Commission shall address how the United States may assist in the global control of infectious diseases through the development of vaccines and the sharing of health research information on the Internet.
Membership of the Commission.--The Commission shall consist of individuals who are of recognized standing and distinction and who possess the demonstrated capacity to discharge the duties imposed on the Commission, and shall include representatives of the public, private, and academic areas whose capacity is based on a special knowledge, such as computer sciences or the use of the Internet for medical conferencing, or expertise in medical research or related areas.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members as follows: (1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services (or the Secretary's delegate).
The Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission.
The Director of the National Institutes of Health.
The Director of the National Science Foundation.
The Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.
2 members of the Senate, one from the majority party and one from the minority party, appointed jointly by the President of the Senate and the President pro tempore.
2 Members of the House of Representatives, one from the majority party and one from the minority party, appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
2 individuals appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from among individuals who are not officers or employees of any government and who are specially qualified to serve on the Commission by virtue of their education, training, or experience.
3 individuals appointed by the President from among individuals who will represent the views of recipients of health services.
Not more than 1 member appointed under this paragraph may be an officer or employee of the Federal Government.
Continuation of Membership.--If a member was appointed to the Commission as a Member of Congress and the member ceases to be a Member of Congress, that member may continue as a member for not longer than the 30-day period beginning on the date that member ceases to be a Member of Congress.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Basic Pay.--Members shall serve without pay.
Quorum.--Nine members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; Vice Chairperson.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Commission shall be designated by the President at the time of the appointment.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet monthly or at the call of a majority of its members.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Chairperson or Commission.
For purposes of Federal income, estate, and gift taxes, property accepted under this subsection shall be considered as a gift, bequest, or devise to the United States.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for administrative and other services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Interim Reports.--The Commission may submit to the President and the Congress interim reports as the Commission considers appropriate.
Final Report.--The Commission shall transmit a final report to the President and the Congress not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
The final report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for legislative, administrative, or other actions, as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final report pursuant to section 7.
This Act shall take effect 60 days after the date of its enactment.
There are authorized to be appropriated not to exceed $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 for the National Institutes of Health to carry out coordination activities under this Act with the Commission, the National Science Foundation, and other appropriate groups to make available on the Internet information concerning benefits of the infectious disease vaccine development program and health research information.
Any spending authority (as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 401(c)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 651(c)(2)(A) and (C))) authorized by this Act shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.