EXPENSING OF CAPITAL COSTS INCURRED IN COMPLYING WITH ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY SULFUR REGULATIONS.
In General.--Section 179(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to election to expense certain depreciable business assets) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Limitation for small business refiners.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of a small business refiner electing to expense qualified costs, in lieu of the dollar limitations in paragraph (1), the limitation on the aggregate costs which may be taken into account under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed 75 percent of the qualified costs.
Qualified costs.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified costs' means costs paid or incurred by a small business refiner for the purpose of complying with the Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Small business refiner.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `small business refiner' means, with respect to any taxable year, a refiner which, within the refining operations of the business, employs not more than 1,500 employees on business days during such taxable year and has less than 155,000 barrels per day total capacity.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business-related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--For purposes of section 38, the amount of the environmental tax credit determined under this section with respect to any small business refiner for any taxable year is an amount equal to 5 cents for every gallon of 15 parts per million or less sulfur diesel produced at a facility by such small business refiner.
Maximum Credit.--For any small business refiner, the aggregate amount allowable as a credit under subsection (a) for any taxable year with respect to any facility shall not exceed 25 percent of the qualified capital costs incurred by such small business refiner with respect to such facility not taken into account in determining the credit under subsection (a) for any preceding taxable year.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Small business refiner.--The term `small business refiner' means, with respect to any taxable year, a refiner which, within the refining operations of the business, employs not more than 1,500 employees on business days during such taxable year and has less than 155,000 barrels per day total capacity.
Qualified capital costs.--The term `qualified capital costs' means, with respect to any facility, those costs paid or incurred during the applicable period for compliance with the applicable EPA regulations with respect to such facility, including expenditures for the construction of new process operation units or the dismantling and reconstruction of existing process units to be used in the production of 15 parts per million or less sulfur diesel fuel, associated adjacent or offsite equipment (including tankage, catalyst, and power supply), engineering, construction period interest, and sitework.
Applicable epa regulations.--The term `applicable EPA regulations' means the Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Applicable period.--The term `applicable period' means, with respect to any facility, the period beginning with the date of the enactment of this section and ending with the date which is one year after the date on which the taxpayer must comply with the applicable EPA regulations with respect to such facility.
Reduction in Basis.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit is determined under this section with respect to any property by reason of qualified capital costs, the basis of such property shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so determined.
Certification.-- ``(1) Required.--Not later than the date which is 30 months after the first day of the first taxable year in which the environmental tax credit is allowed with respect to a facility, the small business refiner must obtain certification from the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, that the taxpayer's qualified capital costs with respect to such facility will result in compliance with the applicable EPA regulations.
Contents of application.--An application for certification shall include relevant information regarding unit capacities and operating characteristics sufficient for the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, to determine that such qualified capital costs are necessary for compliance with the applicable EPA regulations.
Review period.--Any application shall be reviewed and notice of certification, if applicable, shall be made within 60 days of receipt of such application.
Recapture.--Notwithstanding subsection (f), failure to obtain certification under paragraph (1) constitutes a recapture event under subsection (f) with an applicable percentage of 100 percent.
Recapture of Environmental Tax Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (e), if, as of the close of any taxable year, there is a recapture event with respect to any facility of the small business refiner, then the tax of such refiner under this chapter for such taxable year shall be increased by an amount equal to the product of-- ``(A) the applicable recapture percentage, and ``(B) the aggregate decrease in the credits allowed under section 38 for all prior taxable years which would have resulted if the qualified capital costs of the taxpayer described in subsection (c)(2) with respect to such facility had been zero.
Applicable recapture percentage.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, the applicable recapture percentage shall be determined from the following table: The applicable recapture ``If the recapture event occurs in: percentage is: Year 1............................... 100 Year 2............................... 80 Year 3............................... 60 Year 4............................... 40 Year 5............................... 20 Years 6 and thereafter............... 0.
Years.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), year 1 shall begin on the first day of the taxable year in which the qualified capital costs with respect to a facility described in subsection (c)(2) are paid or incurred by the taxpayer.
Recapture event defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `recapture event' means-- ``(A) Failure to comply.--The failure by the small business refiner to meet the applicable EPA regulations within the applicable period with respect to the facility.
Cessation of operation.--The cessation of the operation of the facility as a facility which produces 15 parts per million or less sulfur diesel after the applicable period.
Change in ownership.-- ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in clause (ii), the disposition of a small business refiner's interest in the facility with respect to which the credit described in subsection (a) was allowable.
Agreement to assume recapture liability.--Clause (i) shall not apply if the person acquiring such interest in the facility agrees in writing to assume the recapture liability of the person disposing of such interest in effect immediately before such disposition.
In the event of such an assumption, the person acquiring the interest in the facility shall be treated as the taxpayer for purposes of assessing any recapture liability (computed as if there had been no change in ownership).
Special rules.-- ``(A) Tax benefit rule.--The tax for the taxable year shall be increased under paragraph (1) only with respect to credits allowed by reason of this section which were used to reduce tax liability.
In the case of credits not so used to reduce tax liability, the carryforwards and carrybacks under section 39 shall be appropriately adjusted.
No credits against tax.--Any increase in tax under this subsection shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any credit under subpart A, B, or D of this part.
No recapture by reason of casualty loss.--The increase in tax under this subsection shall not apply to a cessation of operation of the facility by reason of a casualty loss to the extent such loss is restored by reconstruction or replacement within a reasonable period established by the Secretary.
Controlled Groups.--For purposes of this section, all persons treated as a single employer under subsection (b), (c), (m), or (o) of section 414 shall be treated as a single employer.''.
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to general business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (14), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(16) in the case of a small business refiner, the environmental tax credit determined under section 45G(a).''.
Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 280C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to certain expenses for which credits are allowable) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Environmental Tax Credit.--No deduction shall be allowed for that portion of the expenses otherwise allowable as a deduction for the taxable year which is equal to the amount of the credit determined for the taxable year under section 45G(a).''.
Credit Allowed Against Regular and Minimum Tax.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (c) of section 38 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to limitation based on amount of tax) is amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) Special rules for environmental tax credit.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of the environmental tax credit-- ``(i) this section and section 39 shall be applied separately with respect to the credit, and ``(ii) in applying paragraph (1) to the credit-- ``(I) subparagraphs (A) and (B) thereof shall not apply, and ``(II) the limitation under paragraph (1) (as modified by subclause (I)) shall be reduced by the credit allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year (other than the environmental tax credit).
Environmental tax credit.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `environmental tax credit means the credit allowable under subsection (a) by reason of section 45G.''.
Conforming amendment.--Subclause (II) of section 38(c)(2)(A)(ii) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or the environmental tax credit'' after ``employment credit''.
Basis Adjustment.--Section 1016(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to adjustments to basis) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (27), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (28) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(29) in the case of a facility with respect to which a credit was allowed under section 45G, to the extent provided in section 45G(d).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to expenses paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act.