This Act may be cited as the ``Airline Predatory Pricing Prevention Act of 1993''.
AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
In General.--Section 411 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 App.
United States Code 1381) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Predatory Pricing.-- ``(1) Preliminary investigation and cease and desist order.-- ``(A) Investigation.--Within seven days after receiving a written complaint of sufficient particularity by any person that any air carrier has been engaging in predatory pricing in the provision of air transportation in a city-pair market, the Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a preliminary investigation into the allegations made in the complaint.
Cease and desist order.--If as a result of the preliminary investigation the Secretary finds that there is a significant likelihood that one of the two indicators of predatory pricing specified in paragraph (4) exists, the Secretary shall order such air carrier to cease and desist from engaging in the alleged predatory pricing until the conclusion of a full investigation under paragraph (2) or the elapse of ninety days following the date of such order, whichever occurs first.
Negative finding.--If as a result of the preliminary investigation the Secretary finds that there is not such a significant likelihood, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register an explanation of the reasons for that finding.
Full investigation and permanent cease and desist order.-- ``(A) Investigation.--If the Secretary of Transportation makes the finding described in paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary shall conduct a full investigation into the alleged predatory pricing.
The Secretary shall, in the course of such full investigation, provide interested parties with an opportunity to furnish information that the Secretary considers important.
Permanent cease and desist order.--If after conducting a full investigation under subparagraph (A) the Secretary finds that an air carrier has been engaging in predatory pricing, the Secretary shall order such air carrier to cease and desist from engaging in such predatory pricing.
Rebuttable presumption.--In a full investigation under this paragraph, an air carrier is presumed to be engaging in predatory pricing in a city- pair market if any of the two indicators of predatory pricing specified in paragraph (4) is shown to exist.
This presumption may be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.
Penalties.--Any person who knowingly fails to obey a cease and desist order under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be subject to a civil penalty of $10,000 for each offense, and each day during which such offense continues is deemed a separate offense.
Indicators of predatory pricing.--The two indicators of predatory pricing referred to in paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(C) are as follows: ``(A) The pricing by the air carrier for air transportation in the city-pair market at issue is below the direct operating costs of the air carrier in providing such transportation.
Decreases in the pricing by the air carrier for such air transportation are occurring when market forces have led to sustained downward development of air fares deviating significantly from ordinary seasonal pricing movements and resulting in widespread losses among all air carriers for providing such air transportation, taking into account-- ``(i) the level of pricing for air transportation in comparable city-pair markets; ``(ii) the revenue levels that were at the time of the transportation adequate under honest, economical, and efficient management to cover total operating expenses and to provide each such carrier with a flow of net income, plus depreciation, adequate to support prudent capital outlays, assure the repayment of a reasonable level of debt, permit the raising of needed equity capital, and take into account reasonable estimated or foreseeable future costs.
Direct operating costs defined.--In this subsection, the term `direct operating costs' means the costs sustained by an air carrier in the preparation and execution of a single flight of an aircraft in a city-pair market, including-- ``(A) expenses related to the aircraft, including flight crew compensation, landing fees, fuel and oil, hull insurance, all direct and overhead costs of maintenance, and the prorated amount of the rental charge or purchase amount of the aircraft; and ``(B) expenses related to passengers and freight, including sales or travel agents' compensation, in- flight food and beverage expenses, and liability insurance.''.
Conforming Amendment.--In the table of contents of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, the item relating to section 411 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Predatory pricing.