This Act may be cited as the ``Bank Efficiency Act''.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to facilitate the efficient operation of banks that are subsidiaries of multistate bank holding companies; (2) to enhance the interstate delivery of banking services to both consumers and businesses; and (3) to strengthen generally the operation of the banking system.
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANK HOLDING COMPANY ACT.
Definitions.--Section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 United States Code 1841) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(n) Appropriate Federal Banking Agency.--For purposes of this Act, the term `appropriate Federal banking agency' shall have the same meaning as such term is given in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.''.
Interstate Banking.--Section 3(d) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 United States Code 1842(d)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(d)'' and inserting the following: ``(d) Limitation by State Boundaries.-- ``(1) In general.--''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Interstate combination.-- ``(A) A bank holding company having subsidiary banks located in more than one State may combine two or more of such banks into a single bank by means of merger, consolidation, or other transaction.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to authorize-- ``(i) a national bank to operate branches at locations in a State unless a national bank having offices only in such State could operate branches at such locations; ``(ii) a State-chartered bank to operate branches at locations in a State unless a State-chartered bank having branches only in such State could operate branches at such locations; or ``(iii) a State-chartered bank to operate branches at locations outside its chartering State in contravention of such chartering State's laws.
This paragraph does not affect any other requirement for regulatory approval or any other procedures that are applicable under Federal or State law to a combination authorized by subparagraph (A).
A bank resulting from a combination authorized by subparagraph (A) may retain and operate all existing main offices and branches in each bank involved in such combination and in existence at the time of such combination.
A national bank resulting from a combination authorized under subparagraph (A) may establish additional branches in any State in which it has branches to the same extent and same manner that a national bank having branches only in such State, may establish branches in such State.
A national bank resulting from a combination authorized by subparagraph (A) shall be entitled to exercise at each of its branches, all powers and privileges conferred by Federal law.
To the extent that Federal law references State law, the applicable State law for each branch shall be the law of the State in which the branch is located, except that for purposes of section 5197 of the Revised Statutes, the appropriate State law shall be the law of the State in which the main office named in the bank's organization certificate is located.
A State-chartered bank resulting from a combination authorized under subparagraph (A) may, subject to the approval of the appropriate State regulatory authority, establish additional branches in any State in which it has branches, to the extent and in the same manner as a State bank chartered in such State and having branches only in such State.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the appropriate State regulatory authority is solely the State bank supervisor for the State in which the branch is proposed to be established.
A State-chartered bank resulting from a combination authorized by subparagraph (A) shall be entitled to exercise at each of its branches, all powers and privileges conferred by the law of its chartering State and Federal law.
However, a branch of such bank located in a State other than the chartering State of the bank, may not exercise any power or privilege that is not permitted under the laws of the State in which the branch is located, for a branch located within such State of a bank chartered by such State.
The State bank supervisor of the State in which the bank is chartered shall have authority to determine whether an activity of a branch is permissible as a matter of State law.
If a branch is located in a State other than the chartering State, the State bank regulator for the State in which the branch is located may independently determine whether an activity of the branch is permissible under the law of such State.
A State-chartered bank resulting from a combination authorized by subparagraph (A) shall be subject to State supervision only by the State bank supervisor for the State in which the bank is chartered.
The State bank supervisor for the State in which a branch is located may enter into a cooperative agreement with the supervisor for the chartering State to facilitate supervision of the bank and its branches.
Nothing in this subparagraph shall affect the jurisdiction or authority of the appropriate Federal banking agency to supervise or examine a State chartered bank and all of its branches.
A bank may not participate in a combination otherwise authorized by subparagraph (A) if, as of the date of the filing with the appropriate Federal banking agency of an application for approval of such combination, the State in which such bank is located has a statute, enacted within 2 years following the effective date of this paragraph, that provides by express language and not merely by implication that no bank located in such State may combine with any other bank pursuant to the authority conferred by subparagraph (A).
If a bank resulting from a combination authorized by subparagraph (A) ceases to be a subsidiary of a bank holding company, it shall, within 2 years after the date on which it is no longer a subsidiary of a bank holding company, no longer be entitled to the benefits of this paragraph, and shall comply with all provisions of Federal or State law restricting the geographic location of its branches.
The appropriate Federal banking agency may, upon application by a bank, extend the 2-year period described in this subparagraph, for not more than one year at a time, if such extension would not be detrimental to the public interest.
No such extensions shall, in the aggregate, exceed 3 years.
If a bank that is combined with another bank pursuant to subparagraph (A) is subject to conditions imposed by State law pursuant to paragraph (1), the resulting bank shall comply with such conditions to the same extent that the bank originally subject to such conditions was obligated to do so.
For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) a national bank is located in the State named in its organization certificate, and a State-chartered bank is located in the State in which it is chartered; and ``(ii) when a bank seeks pursuant to this paragraph to operate branches in a State other than the State in which the bank is located, the first location in such other State at which the bank seeks to operate a branch shall be considered to be the main office of the bank located in such other State.''.
NATIONAL BANK ACT AMENDMENTS.
Conversions to National Banks.--Section 5154 of the Revised Statutes (12 United States Code 35) is amended in the first sentence by inserting before the period ``unless said conversion is undertaken in connection with a combination authorized by section 3(d)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956''.
Director Qualifications.--Section 5146 of the Revised Statutes (12 United States Code 72) is amended in the first sentence by striking ``and at least two-thirds'' and all that follows through ``continuance in office,''.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act-- (1) the amendments made by this Act shall not be construed to limit or otherwise impair the authority of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to authorize extraordinary or emergency acquisitions under section 11(n)(8)(B) or subsections (f) or (k) of section 13 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and (2) no bank holding company that has acquired a bank in accordance with section 11(n)(8)(B) or section 13(f) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall, by reason of the combination of such bank with any other bank in accordance with section 3(d)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended by this Act, lose or otherwise be deprived of any rights or privileges provided to the bank holding company under Federal law by virtue of the acquisition, including rights or privileges provided under section 13(f) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.