This Act may be cited as the ``National Lighthouse Museum Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Lighthouse Museum Commission'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) develop a fundraising plan, acquire a site, and draft an operational proposal for establishing a National Lighthouse Museum at a lighthouse-related site that is within the United States and listed on the National Register of Historic Places; and (2) establish the National Lighthouse Museum Corporation in accordance with this Act.
Reports.--The Commission shall submit an annual report to the Congress describing the activities of the Commission during the preceding year.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 19 members appointed as follows: (1) 1 by the National Conference of State Historic Preservation Officers.
13 by the National Lighthouse Museum Feasibility Steering Committee.
1 by the Coast Guard.
1 by the Secretary of the Interior.
1 by the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.
1 by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
1 by the American Association of Museums.
Terms; Vacancies.-- (1) In general.--Members of the Commission shall serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Rates of Pay.--Members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel Expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Bylaws.--The Commission shall adopt bylaws to carry out its functions under this Act.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the Commission from among its members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
The Chairperson shall convene the first meeting for not later than January 1, 1999.
One-third of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers to function.
The Commission may adopt rules to govern its proceedings.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the earlier of-- (1) 5 years after the date of completion of appointment of the members of the Commission; or (2) the completion of appointment of the initial board of directors of the National Lighthouse Corporation under section 6(d).
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT FOR COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission may accept from the National Lighthouse Museum Feasibility Steering Committee such administrative support as may be necessary to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Administrator of General Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL LIGHTHOUSE MUSEUM CORPORATION.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall establish, under the laws of the State in which is located the site acquired under section 3(a)(1) for the National Lighthouse Museum and in accordance with this section, the National Lighthouse Museum Corporation (in this Act referred to as the ``Corporation'').
Subject to paragraph (2), the Corporation is a federally chartered corporation.
Expiration of charter.--If the Corporation does not comply with any provision of this section, the charter granted by this section expires.
Purposes.--The purpose of the Corporation is to establish the National Lighthouse Museum as provided for by the Commission under section 3(a)(1).
Board of Directors and Officers.-- (1) Board of directors.--The board of directors of the Corporation and the responsibilities of the board shall be as provided in its articles of incorporation.
The Commission shall appoint the initial members of the board of directors by not later than 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Officers.--The officers of the Corporation and the election of its officers shall be as provided in the articles of incorporation.
Powers.--The Corporation shall have only the powers provided in its bylaws and articles of incorporation filed in each State in which it is incorporated.
Restrictions.-- (1) Stock and dividends.--The Corporation may not issue stock or declare or pay a dividend.
Political activities.--The Corporation or a director or officer as such may not contribute to, support, or participate in any political activity or in any manner attempt to influence legislation.
Distribution of income or assets.--The income or assets of the Corporation may not inure to the benefit of, or be distributed to, a director, officer, or member during the life of the charter granted by this section.
This paragraph does not prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to an officer or reimbursement for actual necessary expenses in amounts approved by the board of directors.
Loans.--The Corporation may not make a loan to a director, officer, or employee.
Claim of governmental approval or authorization.--The Corporation may not claim congressional approval or the authority of the United States Government for any of its activities.
Duty To Maintain Corporate and Tax-Exempt Status.-- (1) Corporate status.--The Corporation shall maintain its status as a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State referred to in subsection (a)(1).
Tax-exempt status.--The Corporation shall maintain its status as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of that Code.
Records and Inspection.-- (1) Records.--The Corporation shall keep-- (A) correct and complete records of account; (B) minutes of the proceedings of its members, board of directors, and committees; and (C) at its principal office, a record of the names and addresses of its members entitled to vote.
Inspection.--A member entitled to vote, or an agent or attorney of the member, may inspect the records of the Corporation for any proper purpose, at any reasonable time.
Service of Process.--The Corporation shall comply with the law on services of process of each State in which it is incorporated and each State in which it carries on activities.
Liability for Acts of Officers and Agents.--The Corporation is liable for the acts of its officers and agents acting within the scope of their authority.
Annual Report.--The Corporation shall submit an annual report to the Congress on the activities of the Corporation during the prior fiscal year.
The report may not be printed as a public document.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia and the territories and possessions of the United States.
OPERATION OF NATIONAL LIGHTHOUSE MUSEUM.
In General.--The National Lighthouse Museum established under this Act shall operate under the direction and control of the Corporation.
Facilities.--In addition to the site at which the National Lighthouse Museum is established under section 3, the museum shall have a storage facility located near the site for the care, conservation, and maintenance of artifacts in the collection of the museum.
Support to Other Museums.--The National Lighthouse Museum shall provide support to other museums that interpret the history of aids to navigation in the United States.
Designation of Collection.--The collection of artifacts of the National Lighthouse Museum shall be known as the National Lighthouse Collection.