This Act may be cited as the ``High Plains Aquifer Hydrogeologic Characterization, Mapping, and Modeling Act''.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Association.--The term ``Association'' means the Association of American State Geologists.
Council.--The term ``Council'' means the Western States Water Council.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the United States Geological Survey.
High plains aquifer.--The term ``High Plains Aquifer'' is the groundwater reserve depicted as Figure 1 in the United States Geological Survey Professional Paper 1400-B, titled ``Geohydrology of the High Plains Aquifer in Parts of Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming.''
High plains aquifer states.--The term ``High Plains Aquifer States'' means the States of Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming.
Review panel.--The term ``Review Panel'' means the panel provided for by section 3(d).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Program.--The Secretary, through the United States Geological Survey, and in cooperation with the High Plains Aquifer States, shall establish and carry out the High Plains Aquifer Comprehensive Hydrogeologic Program, to characterize, map, and model the High Plains Aquifer.
The Program shall undertake at the most detailed levels determined to be appropriate on a state-by-state basis, characterization, mapping and modeling of the hydrogeological configuration of the High Plains Aquifer.
Objectives.--The objectives of the Program are to: (1) provide for the hydrogeologic characterization, mapping and modeling of the High Plains Aquifer through a cooperative partnership effort between the United States Reports Geological Survey and the High Plains Aquifer States; (2) coordinate Federal, State, and local data, maps, and models into an integrated physical characterization of the High Plains Aquifer; (3) support State and local activities with scientific and technical specialists; and (4) undertake activities and provide technical capabilities not available at the State and local levels as may be requested by a Governor of a High Plains Aquifer State within such state.
Requests From Governors.--The Governor of a High Plains Aquifer State may submit a proposal to the Secretary requesting the Secretary to undertake activities and provide financial and technical capabilities not available at the State and local levels to carry out the purposes of the Program.
Review Panel.--Not later than six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a Review Panel to: (1) evaluate the proposals submitted for funding under subsection (f); and (2) review and coordinate Program priorities.
In performing its functions, the Review Panel shall consult with the Association and the Council.
Composition and Support.--The Review Panel shall be comprised of: (1) five representatives of the United States Geological Survey, at least two of which shall be hydrologists or hydrogeologists; and (2) one representative who is knowledgeable regarding hydrogeologic data and information from each of the High Plains Aquifer States that elects to participate in the Program.
Each representative of a High Plains Aquifer State shall be recommended by the Governor of such State.
The Secretary shall provide technical and administrative support to the Review Panel.
Expenses for the Review Panel shall be paid from Program funds other than those referred to in subsection (f).
Funding.--Fifty percent of the funds appropriated to carry out this Program shall be allocated equally by the Secretary for the participation of State and local agencies and institutions of higher education within each of the High Plains Aquifer States that elects to participate in the Program.
Grants may be made by the Secretary from the funds described in this subsection based on proposals that have been recommended by the Governor and reviewed by the Review Panel.
Proposals for multistate activities must be recommended by the Governors of all the affected States.
Report on Program Implementation.--One year after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 3 years thereafter through fiscal year 2011, the Secretary shall include a report on the Program in the annual budget documents for the Department of the Interior.
The initial report submitted by the Secretary shall contain a Program plan developed with the concurrence of the Review Panel.
Report on High Plains Aquifer.--No later than four years after the date of enactment of this Act and upon completion of the Program in fiscal year 2011, the Secretary shall submit an interim and final report, respectively, to the Governors of the High Plains Aquifer States on the status of the High Plains Aquifer.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2011 to carry out this Act.
Passed the Senate April 7, 2003.
Attest: EMILY J. REYNOLDS, Secretary.