This Act may be cited as the ``Hydrographic Services Improvement Act of 1998''.
In this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Administration.--The term ``Administration'' means the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Hydrographic data.--The term ``hydrographic data'' means information acquired through hydrographic or bathymetric surveying, photogrammetry, geodetic measurements, tide and current observations, or other methods, that is used in providing hydrographic services.
Hydrographic services.--The term ``hydrographic services'' means-- (A) the management, maintenance, interpretation, certification, and dissemination of bathymetric, hydrographic, geodetic, and tide and current information, including the production of nautical charts, nautical information databases, and other products derived from hydrographic data; (B) the development of nautical information systems; and (C) related activities.
Act of 1947.--The term ``Act of 1947'' means the Act entitled ``An Act to define the functions and duties of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and for other purposes'', approved August 6, 1947 (33 United States Code 883a et sequentes).
FUNCTIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.
Responsibilities.--To fulfill the data gathering and dissemination duties of the Administration under the Act of 1947, the Administrator shall-- (1) acquire hydrographic data; (2) promulgate standards for hydrographic data used by the Administration in providing hydrographic services; (3) promulgate standards for hydrographic services provided by the Administration; (4) ensure comprehensive geographic coverage of hydrographic services, in cooperation with other appropriate Federal agencies; (5) maintain a national database of hydrographic data, in cooperation with other appropriate Federal agencies; (6) provide hydrographic services in uniform, easily accessible formats; (7) participate in the development of, and implement for the United States in cooperation with other appropriate Federal agencies, international standards for hydrographic data and hydrographic services; and (8) to the greatest extent practicable and cost-effective, fulfill the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (6) through contracts or other agreements with private sector entities.
Authorities.--To fulfill the data gathering and dissemination duties of the Administration under the Act of 1947, and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Administrator-- (1) may procure, lease, evaluate, test, develop, and operate vessels, equipment, and technologies necessary to ensure safe navigation and maintain operational expertise in hydrographic data acquisition and hydrographic services; (2) may enter into contracts and other agreements with qualified entities, consistent with subsection (a)(8), for the acquisition of hydrographic data and the provision of hydrographic services; (3) shall award contracts for the acquisition of hydrographic data in accordance with title IX of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 541 et sequentes); and (4) may, subject to section 5, design and install where appropriate Physical Oceanographic Real-Time Systems to enhance navigation safety and efficiency.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``hydrographic product'' means any publicly or commercially available product produced by a non-Federal entity that includes or displays hydrographic data.
Program.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator may-- (A) develop and implement a quality assurance program, under which the Administrator may certify hydrographic products that satisfy the standards promulgated by the Administrator under section 3(a)(3); (B) authorize the use of the emblem or any trademark of the Administration on a hydrographic product certified under subparagraph (A); and (C) charge a fee for such certification and use.
Limitation on fee amount.--Any fee under paragraph (1)(C) shall not exceed the costs of conducting the quality assurance testing, evaluation, or studies necessary to determine whether the hydrographic product satisfies the standards adopted under section 3(a)(3), including the cost of administering such a program.
Limitation on Liability.--The Government of the United States shall not be liable for any negligence by a person that produces hydrographic products certified under this section.
Hydrographic Services Account.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury a separate account, which shall be known as the Hydrographic Services Account.
Content.--The account shall consist of-- (A) amounts received by the United States as fees charged under subsection (b)(1)(C); and (B) such other amounts as may be provided by law.
Limitation; deposit.--Fees deposited in this account during any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be deposited and credited as offsetting collections to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Operations, Research, and Facilities account.
No amounts collected pursuant to this section for any fiscal year may be spent except to the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitation on New Fees and Increases in Existing Fees for Hydrographic Services.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator may not-- (1) establish any fee or other charge for the provision of any hydrographic service except as authorized by this section; or (2) increase the amount of any fee or other charge for the provision of any hydrographic service except as authorized by this section and section 1307 of title 44, United States Code.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHIC REAL-TIME SYSTEMS.
New Systems.--After the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator may not design or install any Physical Oceanographic Real-Time System, unless the local sponsor of the system or another Federal agency has agreed to assume the cost of operating and maintaining the system within 90 days after the date the system becomes operational.
Existing Systems.--After October 1, 1999, the Administration shall cease to operate Physical Oceanographic Real-Time Systems, other than any system for which the local sponsor or another Federal agency has agreed to assume the cost of operating and maintaining the system by January 1, 1999.
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall report to the Congress on a plan to increase, consistent with this Act, contracting with the private sector for photogrammetric and remote sensing services related to hydrographic data acquisition or hydrographic services.
In preparing the report, the Administrator shall consult with private sector entities knowledgeable in photogrammetry and remote sensing.
Contents.--The report shall include the following: (A) An assessment of which of the photogrammetric and remote sensing services related to hydrographic data acquisition or hydrographic services performed by the National Ocean Service can be performed adequately by private-sector entities.
An evaluation of the relative cost- effectiveness of the Federal Government and private- sector entities in performing those services.
A plan for increasing the use of contracts with private-sector entities in performing those services, with the goal of obtaining performance of 50 percent of those services through contracts with private-sector entities by fiscal year 2003.
Ports.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall report to the Congress on-- (1) the status of implementation of real-time tide and current data systems in United States ports; (2) existing safety and efficiency needs in United States ports that could be met by increased use of those systems; and (3) a plan for expanding those systems to meet those needs, including an estimate of the cost of implementing those systems in priority locations.
Maintaining Federal Expertise in Hydrographic Services.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall report to the Congress on a plan to ensure that Federal competence and expertise in hydrographic surveying will be maintained after the decommissioning of the 3 existing National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration hydrographic survey vessels.
Contents.--The report shall include-- (A) an evaluation of the seagoing capacity, personnel, and equipment necessary to maintain Federal expertise in hydrographic services; (B) an estimated schedule for decommissioning the 3 existing survey vessels; (C) a plan to maintain Federal expertise in hydrographic services after the decommissioning of these vessels; and (D) an estimate of the cost of carrying out this plan.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator the following: (1) To carry out nautical mapping and charting functions under the Act of 1947 and sections 3 and 4, except for conducting hydrographic surveys, $33,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $34,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, $35,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, $36,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and $37,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.
To conduct hydrographic surveys under section 3(a)(1), including leasing of ships, $33,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $35,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, $37,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, $39,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and $41,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.
Of these amounts, no more than $14,000,000 is authorized for any one fiscal year to operate hydrographic survey vessels owned and operated by the Administration.
To carry out geodetic functions under the Act of 1947, $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and $22,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003.
To carry out tide and current measurement functions under the Act of 1947, $22,500,000 for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2003.
Of these amounts, $2,500,000 is authorized for each fiscal year to implement and operate a national quality control system for real-time tide and current data, and $7,500,000 is authorized for each fiscal year to design and install real-time tide and current data measurement systems under section 3(b)(4) (subject to section 5).
COMPLIANCE WITH BUY AMERICAN ACT.
No funds authorized pursuant to this Act may be expended by an entity unless the entity agrees that in expending the assistance the entity will comply with sections 2 through 4 of the Act of March 3, 1933 (41 United States Code 10a-10c, popularly known as the ``Buy American Act'').
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS; REQUIREMENT REGARDING NOTICE.
Purchase of American-Made Equipment and Products.--In the case of any equipment or products that may be authorized to be purchased with financial assistance provided under this Act, it is the sense of the Congress that entities receiving such assistance should, in expending the assistance, purchase only American-made equipment and products.
Notice to Recipients of Assistance.--In providing financial assistance under this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall provide to each recipient of the assistance a notice describing the statement made in subsection (a) by the Congress.
If it is has been finally determined by a court or Federal agency that any person intentionally affixed a label bearing a ``Made in America'' inscription, or any inscription with the same meaning, to any product sold in or shipped to the United States that is not made in the United States, such person shall be ineligible to receive any contract or subcontract made with funds provided pursuant to this Act, pursuant to the debarment, suspension, and ineligibility procedures described in section 9.400 through 9.409 of title 48, Code of Federal Regulations.
Passed the House of Representatives April 22, 1998.
Attest: Robin H. Carle, Clerk.