This Act may be cited as the ``Work and Family Integration Act''.
FLEXIBLE AND COMPRESSED SCHEDULES AND REHIRING PREFERENCE.
The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 is amended by inserting after section 13 (29 United States Code 213) the following new sections: ``SEC.
FLEXIBLE AND COMPRESSED SCHEDULES.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to balance the demands of workplaces with the needs of families in the United States.
Compressed Schedules.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an employer may establish programs that allow the use of a compressed schedule that consists of-- ``(A) in the case of a schedule of a full-time employee, a 160-hour basic work requirement, over a 4- week period, that is scheduled for less than 20 workdays; and ``(B) in the case of a schedule of a part-time employee, a basic work requirement of less than 160 hours, over a 4-week period, that is scheduled for less than 20 workdays.
Overtime compensation provisions.--Section 7 and any other provision of law that relates to premium pay for overtime work shall not apply to the hours that constitute such a compressed schedule.
Computation of overtime.--In the case of any full- time employee, hours worked in excess of such a compressed schedule shall be overtime hours and shall be paid for as provided by the applicable provisions referred to in paragraph (2).
In the case of any part-time employee on such a compressed schedule, overtime pay shall begin to be paid after the same number of hours of work after which a full-time employee on a similar schedule would begin to receive overtime pay.
Flexible Schedules.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an employer may establish programs that allow the use of flexible schedules that include-- ``(A) designated hours and days during which an employee on such a schedule must be present for work; and ``(B) designated hours during which an employee on such a schedule may elect the time of the arrival of such employee at and departure of such employee from work, solely for such purpose or, if and to the extent permitted, for the purpose of accumulating credit hours to reduce the length of the workweek or another workday.
Overtime compensation provisions.--For purposes of determining compensation for overtime hours in the case of an employee participating in a program under this subsection-- ``(A) the employer may, on request of the employee, grant the employee compensatory time off in lieu of payment for such overtime hours, whether or not irregular or occasional in nature and notwithstanding section 7 or any other provision of law; or ``(B) the employee shall be compensated for such overtime hours in accordance with such provisions, as applicable.
Computation of overtime.--Notwithstanding the provisions of law referred to in paragraph (2)(A), an employee shall not be entitled to be compensated for credit hours worked except to the extent such employee is allowed to have such hours taken into account with respect to the basic work requirement of the employee.
Accumulation and compensation.-- ``(A) Accumulation.--A full-time employee on a flexible schedule under this subsection can accumulate not more than 48 credit hours, and a part-time employee can accumulate not more than \1/4\ of the hours in the basic work requirement, over a 4-week period, of the employee, for carryover from a 4-week period to a succeeding 4-week period for credit to the basic work requirement for such period.
Compensation.--Any employee who is on a flexible schedule program under this subsection and who is no longer subject to such a program shall be paid at the then current rate of basic pay of the employee for-- ``(i) in the case of a full-time employee, not more than 48 credit hours accumulated by such employee; or ``(ii) in the case of a part-time employee, the number of credit hours (not in excess of \1/4\ of the hours in the basic work requirement, over a 4-week period, of the employee) accumulated by such employee.
Participation.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), no employee may be required to participate in a program described in this section.
Prohibition of coercion.-- ``(A) An employer may not directly or indirectly intimidate, threaten, or coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, or coerce, any employee for the purpose of interfering with such employee's rights under this section to elect a time of arrival or departure, to elect or not to elect to work a compressed work schedule, to work or not to work credit hours, or to request or not to request compensatory time off in lieu of payment for overtime hours.
For the purpose of subsection (A), the term `intimidate, threaten, or coerce' includes, but is not limited to, promising to confer or conferring any benefit (such as appointment, promotion, or compensation), or effecting or threatening to effect any reprisal (such as deprivation of appointment, promotion, or compensation).''
Collective bargaining agreement.--In a case in which a valid collective bargaining agreement exists, an employee may only be required to participate in such a program in accordance with the agreement.
Application of Programs in the Case of Collective Bargaining Agreements.-- ``(1) Applicable requirements.--In the case of employees in a unit represented by an exclusive representative, any flexible or compressed schedule described in subsection (b) or (c), respectively, and the establishment and termination of any such schedule, shall be subject to the provisions of this section and the terms of a collective bargaining agreement between the employer and the exclusive representative.
Inclusion of employees.--Employees within a unit represented by an exclusive representative shall not be included within any program under this section except to the extent expressly provided under a collective bargaining agreement between the employer and the exclusive representative.
Collective bargaining agreements.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to diminish the obligation of an employer to comply with any collective bargaining agreement or any employment benefits program or plan that provides lesser or greater rights to employees than the benefits established under this section.
Definitions.-- ``(1) Basic work requirement.--The term `basic work requirement' means the number of hours, excluding overtime hours, that an employee is required to work or is required to account for by leave or otherwise.
Collective bargaining.--The term `collective bargaining' means the performance of the mutual obligation of the representative of an employer and the exclusive representative of employees in an appropriate unit to meet at reasonable times and to consult and bargain in a good-faith effort to reach agreement with respect to the conditions of employment affecting such employees and to execute, if requested by either party, a written document incorporating any collective bargaining agreement reached, but the obligation referred to in this paragraph does not compel either party to agree to a proposal or to make a concession.
Collective bargaining agreement.--The term `collective bargaining agreement' means an agreement entered into as a result of collective bargaining.
Credit hours.--The term `credit hours' means any hours, within a flexible schedule established under subsection (c), that are in excess of the basic work requirement of an employee and that the employee elects to work so as to vary the length of a workweek or a workday.
Employee.--The term `employee' means an employee, as defined in section 3, except that the term shall not include an employee, as defined in section 6121(2) of title 5, United States Code.
Employer.--The term `employer' means an employer, as defined in section 3, except that the term shall not include any person acting in relation to an employee, as defined in section 6121(2) of title 5, United States Code.
Exclusive representative.--The term `exclusive representative' means any labor organization that-- ``(A) is certified as the exclusive representative of employees in an appropriate unit pursuant to Federal law; or ``(B) was recognized by an employer immediately before the date of enactment of this section as the exclusive representative of employees in an appropriate unit-- ``(i) on the basis of an election; or ``(ii) on any basis other than an election; and continues to be so recognized.
Overtime hours.--The term `overtime hours'-- ``(A) when used with respect to flexible schedule programs under subsection (c), means all hours in excess of 8 hours in a day or 40 hours in a week that are officially ordered in advance, but does not include credit hours; and ``(B) when used with respect to compressed schedule programs under subsection (b), means any hours in excess of the specified hours that constitute the compressed schedule.
Priority.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e et sequentes), the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 United States Code 621 et sequentes), or any other provision of law, if an employee of an employer takes a period of not more than 5 years to care for a son, daughter or parent of the employee, the employer may give priority treatment to the former employee in a hiring decision after the family care period.
No basis for violation or action.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, priority treatment to a former employee as described in paragraph (1)(B) that is provided by an employer in a manner consistent with this section shall not constitute a violation by the employer of, or serve as a basis for an action against an employer by another individual under, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, or any other provision of law.
Relationship to Leave.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any leave benefit available under other law.
Effect on Benefits.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to entitle any rehired employee to-- ``(1) the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any family care period; or ``(2) any right, benefit, or position of employment other than any right, benefit, or position to which the employee was entitled prior to taking the family care period.
Periodic Reports.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an employer from requiring a former employee to report periodically to the employer on the status and intention of the former employee to apply for reemployment with the employer.
Collective Bargaining Agreements.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to diminish the obligation of an employer to comply with any collective bargaining agreement or any employment benefits program or plan that provides lesser or greater rights to employees than the benefits established under this section.
Definitions.--As used in this section: ``(1) Employment benefits.--The term `employment benefits' means all benefits provided or made available to employees by an employer, including group life insurance, health insurance, disability insurance, sick leave, annual leave, educational benefits, and pensions, regardless of whether such benefits are provided by a practice or written policy of an employer or through an `employee benefit plan', as defined in section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002(3)).
Family care period.--The term `family care period' means a period of not more than 5 years during which an individual who was an employee cares for a son, daughter, or parent of the employee, as described in subsection (a)(1).
Former employee.--The term `former employee' means an individual who-- ``(A) was an employee; and ``(B) is taking a family care period.
Parent.--The term `parent' means the biological parent of an employee or an individual who stood in loco parentis to an employee when the employee was under 18 years of age.
Rehired employee.--The term `rehired employee' means an individual who-- ``(A) was the employee of an employer; and ``(B) has been rehired by the employer after taking a family care period.
Son or daughter.--The term `son or daughter' means a biological, adopted, or foster child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a person standing in loco parentis, who is-- ``(A) under 6 years of age; or ``(B) 6 years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability.
Effective Dates.--This section shall take effect 6 months after the date of enactment of this section.''.
FAIR LABOR STANDARDS EXEMPTIONS.
Employees Subject to Certain Leave Policies.--Section 13(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 213(a)(1)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end thereof the following: ``, regardless of whether or not such executive, administrative, professional, or outside sales employee-- ``(A) is subject to reductions-- ``(i) in accrued leave of any type; or ``(ii) in pay because of an absence of the employee and because-- ``(I) the accrued leave of the employee was exhausted, or ``(II) the employee chose to be absent without charging the accrued leave of the employee, regardless of the length of the leave or absence for which the reductions are to be made, or ``(B) is subject to employer management policies or practices with respect to-- ``(i) the recording of hours worked, ``(ii) the establishment of regular working hours, ``(iii) compensation of any type (irrespective of the amount or method of determination) that is above the salaried level for a work week or work period, and ``(iv) suspension from work without pay for disciplinary purposes''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to an employee (described in such amendment) before, on, and after the date of enactment of this Act unless-- (1) an action was brought in a court involving the application of section 13(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 213(a)(1)) to the employee; and (2) a final judgment has been entered in the action on or before the date of enactment of this Act.
CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO TITLE 5, UNITED STATES CODE.
Section 6121(5) of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(5) `compressed schedule' means-- ``(A) in the case of a schedule of a full-time employee, a 160-hour basic work requirement, over a 4- week period, that is scheduled for less than 20 workdays, and ``(B) in the case of a schedule of a part-time employee, a basic work requirement, over a 4-week period, of less than 160 hours, that is scheduled for less than 20 workdays;''.