This Act may be cited as the ``Christopher Reeve Paralysis Act''.
TITLE I--PARALYSIS RESEARCH Sec.
Expansion and coordination of activities of National Institutes of Health with respect to research on paralysis.
TITLE II-- PARALYSIS REHABILITATION RESEARCH AND CARE Sec.
Expansion and coordination of activities of National Institutes of Health with respect to research with implications for enhancing daily function for persons with paralysis.
TITLE III--IMPROVING QUALITY OF LIFE FOR PERSONS WITH PARALYSIS AND OTHER PHYSICAL DISABILITIES Sec.
Programs to improve quality of life for persons with paralysis and other physical disabilities.
TITLE IV--COORDINATION OF PARALYSIS RESEARCH AND PROGRAMS Sec.
TITLE I--PARALYSIS RESEARCH SEC.
EXPANSION AND COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH WITH RESPECT TO RESEARCH ON PARALYSIS.
In General.-- (1) Enhanced coordination of activities.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health (in this section referred to as the ``Director'') may expand and coordinate the activities of such Institutes with respect to research on paralysis.
Administration of program; collaboration among agencies.--The Director shall carry out this section acting through the Director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (in this section referred to as the ``Institute'') and in collaboration with any other agencies that the Director determines appropriate.
Coordination.-- (1) In general.--The Director may develop mechanisms to coordinate the paralysis research and rehabilitation activities of the agencies of the National Institutes of Health in order to further advance such activities and avoid duplication of activities.
Report.--Not later than December 1, 2003, the Director shall prepare a report to Congress that provides a description of the paralysis activities of the Institute and strategies for future activities.
Christopher Reeve Paralysis Research Consortia.-- (1) In general.--The Director may under subsection (a)(1) make awards of grants to public or nonprofit private entities to pay all or part of the cost of planning, establishing, improving, and providing basic operating support for consortia in paralysis research.
The Director shall designate each consortium funded under grants as a Christopher Reeve Paralysis Research Consortium.
Research.--Each consortium under paragraph (1)-- (A) may conduct basic and clinical paralysis research; (B) may focus on advancing treatments and developing therapies in paralysis research; (C) may focus on one or more forms of paralysis that result from central nervous system trauma or stroke; (D) may facilitate and enhance the dissemination of clinical and scientific findings; and (E ) may replicate the findings of consortia members for scientific and translational purposes.
Coordination of consortia; reports.--The Director may, as appropriate, provide for the coordination of information among consortia under paragraph (1) and ensure regular communication between members of the consortia, and may require the periodic preparation of reports on the activities of the consortia and the submission of the reports to the Director.
Organization of consortia.--Each consortium under paragraph (1) may use the facilities of a single lead institution, or be formed from several cooperating institutions, meeting such requirements as may be prescribed by the Director.
Public Input.--The Director may under subsection (a)(1) provide for a mechanism to educate and disseminate information on the existing and planned programs and research activities of the National Institutes of Health with respect to paralysis and through which the Director can receive comments from the public regarding such programs and activities.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.
Amounts appropriated under this subsection are in addition to any other amounts appropriated for such purpose.
TITLE II-- PARALYSIS REHABILITATION RESEARCH AND CARE SEC.
EXPANSION AND COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH WITH RESPECT TO RESEARCH WITH IMPLICATIONS FOR ENHANCING DAILY FUNCTION FOR PERSONS WITH PARALYSIS.
In General.-- (1) Expansion of activities.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health (in this section referred to as the ``Director'') may expand and coordinate the activities of such Institutes with respect to research with implications for enhancing daily function for people with paralysis .
Administration of program; collaboration among agencies.--The Director shall carry out this section acting through the Director of the National Institute on Child Health and Human Development and the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research and in collaboration with the National Institute on Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and any other agencies that the Director determines appropriate.
Paralysis Clinical Trials Networks.-- (1) In general.--The Director may make awards of grants to public or nonprofit private entities to pay all or part of the costs of planning, establishing, improving, and providing basic operating support to multicenter networks of clinical sites that will collaborate to design clinical rehabilitation intervention protocols and measures of outcomes on one or more forms of paralysis that result from central nervous system trauma, disorders, or stroke, or any combination of such conditions.
Research.--Each multicenter clinical trial network may-- (A) focus on areas of key scientific concern, including-- (i) improving functional mobility; (ii) promoting behavioral adaptation to functional losses, especially to prevent secondary complications; (iii) assessing the efficacy and outcomes of medical rehabilitation therapies and practices and assistive technologies; (iv) developing improved assistive technology to improve function and independence; and (v) understanding whole body system responses to physical impairments, disabilities, and societal and functional limitations; and (B) replicate the findings of network members for scientific and translation purposes.
Coordination of clinical trials networks.--The Director may, as appropriate, provide for the coordination of information among networks and ensure regular communication between members of the networks and may require the periodic preparation of reports on the activities of the networks and submission of reports to the Director.
Report.--Not later than December 1, 2003, the Director shall submit to the Congress a report that provides a description of research activities with implications for enhancing daily function for persons with paralysis.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.
Amounts appropriated under this subsection are in addition to any other amounts appropriated for such purpose.
TITLE III--IMPROVING QUALITY OF LIFE FOR PERSONS WITH PARALYSIS AND OTHER PHYSICAL DISABILITIES SEC.
PROGRAMS TO IMPROVE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR PERSONS WITH PARALYSIS AND OTHER PHYSICAL DISABILITIES.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may study the unique health challenges associated with paralysis and other physical disabilities and carry out projects and interventions to improve the quality of life and long-term health status of persons with paralysis and other physical disabilities.
The Secretary may carry out such projects directly and through awards of grants or contracts.
Certain Activities.--Activities under subsection (a) include-- (1) the development of a national paralysis and physical disability quality of life action plan, to promote full participation, independent living, self-sufficiency and equality of opportunity in partnership with voluntary health agencies focused on paralysis and other physical disabilities, to be carried out in coordination with the State-based Comprehensive Paralysis and Other Physical Disability Quality of Life Program of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; (2) support for programs to disseminate information involving care and rehabilitation options and quality of life grant programs supportive of community based programs and support systems for persons with paralysis and other physical disabilities; (3) in collaboration with other centers and national voluntary health agencies, establish a hospital-based paralysis registry and conduct relevant population-based research; and (4) the development of a Comprehensive Paralysis and Other Physical Disability Quality of Life Program to develop State- based, unique and innovative programs, services and demonstrations designed to support and advance quality of life programs for persons living with paralysis and other physical disabilities focusing on-- (A) caregiver education; (B) physical activity; (C) prevention of secondary complications; (D) home and community-based interventions; (E) education and awareness programs for health care providers; (F) coordinating services and removing barriers that prevent full participation and integration into the community; and (G) recognizing the unique needs of underserved populations.
Grants.--The Secretary may award grants to nonprofit private health and disability organizations for the purpose of-- (1) coordinating existing services with State-based paralysis and physical disability programs; (2) disseminating information to the public; (3) improving access to services for persons living with paralysis and other physical disabilities and their caregivers; and (4) testing model intervention programs to improve health and quality of life.
Coordination of Activities.--The Secretary shall assure that activities under this section are coordinated as appropriate with other agencies of the Public Health Service.
Report to Congress.-- Not later than December 1, 2003, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report describing the results of the evaluation under subsection (a), and as applicable, the strategies developed under such subsection.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.
TITLE IV--COORDINATION OF PARALYSIS RESEARCH AND PROGRAMS SEC.
Establishment of Working Group.--The Secretary may convene a working group for the purpose of coordinating paralysis research, public health, and rehabilitation training at the Federal level.
Composition.--The working group may include representatives of-- (1) the National Institutes of Health; (2) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; (3) the Health Resources and Services Administration; (4) the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; (5) the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; (6) the Department of Veterans Affairs; (7) the Department of Education; (8) the Rehabilitation Services Administration; (9) the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; (10) the National Institute on Standards and Technology (Department of Commerce); (11) the Department of Defense; (12) the Department of Labor; (13) the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research; (14) the Social Security Administration; and (15) private entities determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Dissemination.--The working group may annually prepare and submit to the Secretary a report concerning the status of successful and emerging opportunities in Federal paralysis research, education and training, quality of life, or surveillance efforts.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.