INDEMNITY COMPENSATION FOR DEPENDENTS OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES DISCHARGED FOR DEPENDENT ABUSE.
In General.--(1) Chapter 53 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Abused dependents: payment of transitional and indemnity compensation ``(a) Authority To Pay Compensation.--If a member of the armed forces is separated from the armed forces as described in subsection (b), the Secretary of the military department concerned may pay monthly transitional and indemnity compensation in accordance with this section to dependents or former dependents of the member as specified in subsection (d).
Separations Covered.--(1) This section applies in the case of a member of the armed forces on active duty for a period of more than 30 days-- ``(A) who is convicted of a dependent-abuse offense (as defined in subsection (c)) and whose conviction results in the member being-- ``(i) administratively discharged with a general discharge or under other than honorable conditions; or ``(ii) discharged or dismissed from the armed forces by sentence of a court-martial; or ``(B) against whom court-martial charges were preferred for a dependent-abuse offense and who is discharged in lieu of trial by court-martial in that case upon approval of the member's request or application for discharge or, in the case of an officer, for resignation.
For purposes of this section, a member of the armed forces who is incarcerated by sentence of a court-martial with total forfeiture of pay and allowances shall be treated as a former member dismissed or discharged by sentence of a court-martial.
Dependent-Abuse Offenses.--(1) For purposes of this section, a dependent-abuse offense is conduct by an individual while a member of the armed forces on active duty for a period of more than 30 days-- ``(A) that involves abuse of the spouse or a dependent child of the member; and ``(B) that is a criminal offense specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense under paragraph (2).
The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe by regulation the criminal offenses, or categories of offenses, under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (chapter 47 of this title), Federal criminal law, the criminal laws of the States and other jurisdictions of the United States, and the laws of other nations that are to be considered to be dependent-abuse offenses for the purposes of this section.
Recipients of Payments.--In any case of a separation from active duty as described in subsection (b) in which the Secretary of the military department concerned determines that transitional and indemnity compensation should be paid under this section, the Secretary shall pay such compensation to dependents or former dependents of the former member as follows: ``(1) If the former member was married at the time of the commission of the dependent-abuse offense resulting in the separation, such compensation shall (except as otherwise provided in this subsection) be paid to the spouse or former spouse to whom the member was married at that time.
If there is a spouse or former spouse who (but for subsection (g)) would be eligible for compensation under this section and if there is a dependent child of the former member who does not reside in the same household as that spouse or former spouse, such compensation shall be paid to each such dependent child of the former member who does not reside in that household.
If there is no spouse or former spouse who is (or but for subsection (g) would be) eligible under paragraph (1), such compensation shall be paid to the dependent children of the former member.
For purposes of paragraphs (2) and (3), an individual's status as a `dependent child' shall be determined as of the date on which the member is convicted of the dependent-abuse offense or, in a case described in subsection (b)(1)(B), as of the date on which the member is discharged.
Commencement and Duration of Payment.--(1) Payment of transitional and indemnity compensation under this section shall commence as of the date of the discontinuance of the member's pay and allowances pursuant to the separation or sentencing of the member.
Payment of such compensation shall terminate at the end of the dependents' transitional period.
The dependents' transitional period is the period (A) beginning on the date on which the member is convicted of the dependent-abuse offense or, in a case described in subsection (b)(1)(B), on the date on which the member is discharged, and (B) ending at the end of the transitional period determined by the Secretary concerned.
Such transitional period may not exceed 36 months, except that if the length of the member's service on active duty was less than 36 months, the transitional period may not exceed the length of such service.
Amount of Payment.--(1) Payment to a spouse or former spouse under this section for any month shall be at the rate in effect for that month for the payment of dependency and indemnity compensation under section 1311(a)(1) of title 38.
If a spouse or former spouse to whom compensation is paid under this section has custody of a dependent child or children of the member, the amount of such compensation paid for any month shall be increased for each such dependent child by the amount in effect for that month under section 1311(b) of title 38.
If compensation is paid under this section to a child or children pursuant to subsection (d)(2) or (d)(3), such compensation shall be paid in equal shares, with the amount of such compensation for any month determined in accordance with the rates in effect for that month under section 1313 of title 38.
Forfeiture Provisions.--(1) If a former spouse receiving compensation under this section remarries, the Secretary shall terminate payment of such compensation, effective as of the date of such marriage.
The Secretary may not renew payment of compensation under this section to such former spouse in the event of the termination of such subsequent marriage.
If after the separation of the former member as described in subsection (b) the former member resides in the same household as the spouse or former spouse, or dependent child, to whom compensation is otherwise payable under this section, the Secretary shall terminate payment of such compensation, effective as of the time the former member begins residing in such household.
Compensation paid for a period after the former member's separation, but before the former member resides in the household, shall not be recouped.
If the former member subsequently ceases to reside in such household before the end of the period of eligibility for such payments, the Secretary may not resume such payments.
In a case in which the victim of the dependent-abuse offense resulting in the separation of the former member was a dependent child, the Secretary concerned may not pay compensation under this section to a spouse or former spouse who would otherwise be eligible to receive such compensation if the Secretary determines (under regulations prescribed under subsection (i)) that the spouse or former spouse was an active participant in the conduct constituting the dependent-abuse offense.
Coordination of Benefits.--The Secretary concerned may not make payments to a spouse or former spouse under both this section and section 1408(h)(1) of this title.
In the case of a spouse or former spouse for whom a court order provides for payments by the Secretary pursuant to section 1408(h)(1) of this title and to whom the Secretary offers payments under this section, the spouse or former spouse shall elect which to receive.
Regulations.--The Secretary of each military department shall prescribe regulations to carry out this section with respect to members of the armed forces under the jurisdiction of that Secretary.
Such regulations shall be as uniform as practicable and shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of Defense.
Dependent Child Defined.--In this section, the term `dependent child', with respect to a member or former member of the armed forces separated as described in subsection (b), means an unmarried child, including an adopted child or a stepchild, who was residing with the member at the time of the dependent-abuse offense resulting in the separation of the former member and-- ``(1) who is under 18 years of age; ``(2) who is 18 years of age or older and is incapable of self-support because of a mental or physical incapacity that existed before the age of 18 and who is (or was at the time of the former member's separation) dependent on the former member for over one-half of the child's support; or ``(3) who is 18 years of age or older but less than 23 years of age, is enrolled in a full-time course of study in an institution of higher learning approved by the Secretary of Defense and who is (or was at the time of the former member's separation) dependent on the former member for over one-half of the child's support.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1056 the following new item: ``1058.
Abused dependents: payment of transitional and indemnity compensation.''.
Effective Date.--(1) Section 1058 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall apply with respect to former members of the Armed Forces discharged or dismissed as described in subsection (b) of such section after the date that is three years before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Notwithstanding paragraph (1), no payment may be made under such section 1058 with respect to any period before the date of the enactment of this Act.