This Act may be cited as the ``Pension Restoration Act of 1993''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) State; united states.--The terms ``State'' and ``United States'' have the meanings set forth in paragraph (10) of section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002).
Employer; participant; beneficiary; nonforfeitable; defined benefit plan.--The terms ``employer'', ``participant'', ``beneficiary'', ``nonforfeitable'', and ``defined benefit plan'' have the meanings set forth in paragraphs (5), (7), (8), (19), and (35), respectively, of section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002).
Early terminated plan.--The term ``early terminated plan'' means a defined benefit plan-- (A) which is described in subsection (a) of section 4 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1003) and is not described in subsection (b) of that section, and (B) the termination date of which (as determined by the Corporation) was before September 1, 1974.
Qualified participant.--The term ``qualified participant'' means an individual who-- (A) was a participant in an early terminated plan maintained by an employer of such individual, and (B) as of immediately before the termination of the plan had a nonforfeitable right to benefits under the plan.
Qualified spouse.--The term ``qualified spouse'' means an individual who is the widow (within the meaning of section 216(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 416(c)) or the widower (within the meaning of section 216(g) of such Act (42 United States Code 416(g)) of a qualified participant.
Corporation.--The term ``Corporation'' means the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
Entitlement of Qualified Participant.-- (1) In general.--A qualified participant is entitled, upon approval by the Corporation under this Act of an application therefor, to an annuity payable by the Corporation and computed under section 4(a).
Commencement.--The annuity of a qualified participant commences on the day after the later of-- (A) the effective date set forth in section 12, or (B) the date on which the qualified participant attains 65 years of age.
Termination.--The annuity of a qualified participant and the right thereto terminate at the end of the last calendar month preceding the date of the qualified participant's death.
Entitlement of Qualified Spouse.-- (1) In general.--A qualified spouse is entitled, upon approval by the Corporation under this Act of an application therefor, to an annuity payable by the Corporation and computed under section 4(b).
Commencement.--The annuity of a qualified spouse of a qualified participant commences on the latest of-- (A) the effective date set forth in section 12, (B) the first day of the month in which the qualified participant dies, or (C) if the qualified participant dies before attaining 65 years of age, the first day of the month in which the qualified participant would have attained such age but for the qualified participant's death.
Termination.--The annuity of a qualified spouse and the right thereto terminate at the end of the last calendar month preceding the date of the qualified spouse's death.
Qualified Participant's Annuity.--The annuity computed under this subsection (relating to a qualified participant) in connection with any early terminated plan is equal to the excess (if any) of-- (1) the product derived by multiplying $75 by the number of years of service of the qualified participant under the plan, over (2) the annual amount which would be necessary to amortize in level amounts over 10 years the sum of-- (A) any lump sums paid to the qualified participant from the plan in connection with the termination, and (B) the actuarial present value (determined, as of the effective date set forth in section 12, under the assumptions used by the Corporation for purposes of section 4044 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1344)) of pension benefits under the plan (if any) to which the qualified participant retains a nonforfeitable right under the plan.
Qualified Spouse's Annuity.--The annuity computed under this subsection (relating to the qualified spouse of a qualified participant) in connection with an early terminated plan is equal to the excess (if any) of-- (1) 50 percent of the amount determined under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) in connection with such qualified participant, over (2) the annual amount which would be necessary to amortize in level amounts over 10 years the sum of-- (A) any lump sums paid to the qualified spouse from the plan in connection with the termination, and (B) the actuarial present value (determined, as of the effective date set forth in section 12, under the assumptions used by the Corporation for purposes of section 4044 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1344)) of pension benefits under the plan (if any) to which the qualified spouse retains a nonforfeitable right under the plan.
Requirements.--An application for an annuity under this Act in connection with an early terminated plan shall be approved if-- (1) the application includes evidence sufficient to establish that the applicant is a qualified participant or qualified spouse in connection with such plan, or (2) the evidence included in the application, together with such evidence as the applicant may request the Corporation to consider pursuant to subsection (c), establishes that the applicant is a qualified participant or a qualified spouse in connection with such plan.
Application Forms.--The Corporation may by regulation prescribe application forms which may be used by applicants for purposes of subsection (a).
Any such forms prescribed by the Corporation shall be made available to the public by the Corporation.
Specific Matters.--In considering applications for annuities under this Act, the Corporation shall consider, on the request of an applicant or the applicant's representative, in addition to any other relevant evidence-- (1) a comparison of employment and payroll records which were maintained under chapter 21 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Federal Insurance Contributions Act) or under title II of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401 et seq.)
with records maintained by the Internal Revenue Service relating to the qualification status of trusts forming part of a stock bonus, pension, or profit-sharing plan under part I of subchapter D of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to pension, profit sharing, stock bonus plans, etc.
), and (2) records maintained under the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act of 1958.
Procedures for Initial Determinations.-- (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, in making initial determinations regarding applications for annuities under this Act, the Corporation shall follow the procedures prescribed by the Corporation for-- (A) initial determinations of benefit entitlement of participants and beneficiaries under plans to which section 4021 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1321) applies, and (B) determinations of the amount of guaranteed benefits of such participants and beneficiaries under title IV of such Act (29 United States Code 1301 et sequentes).
Notices of denial.--The Corporation shall send any individual whose application under this Act is denied by the Corporation pursuant to an initial determination a written notice of the denial.
Such notice shall include the reason for the denial and shall set forth the procedures required to be followed in order to obtain review under this Act.
In General.--Any individual whose application for an annuity under this Act is denied pursuant to an initial determination by the Corporation is entitled to-- (1) a reasonable time, but not less than 60 days after receipt of the written notice of denial described in section 5(d)(2), to request a review by the Corporation and to furnish affidavits and other documentary evidence in support of the request, and (2) a written decision and the specific reasons therefor at the earliest practicable date.
Procedures.--Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a), in reviewing initial determinations regarding applications for annuities under this Act, the Corporation shall follow the procedures prescribed by the Corporation for requesting and obtaining administrative review by the Corporation of determinations described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 5(d)(1).
In General.--Any individual, after any final decision made under section 6, irrespective of the amount in controversy, may obtain judicial review of the decision by a civil action commenced under this section within 180 days after the mailing to the individual of notice of such decision or within such further time as the Corporation may allow.
Venue.--Any action commenced under this section shall be brought in the district court of the United States for the judicial district in which the plaintiff resides or in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia.
Record.--As part of any answer by the Corporation, the Corporation shall file a certified copy of the transcript of the record, including the evidence upon which the findings and decision complained of are based.
Judgment.--The court shall enter, upon the pleadings and transcript of the record a judgment affirming, modifying, or reversing the decision, with or without remanding the case for a rehearing.
Remanded Cases.-- (1) Authority to remand to the corporation.--The court shall, on the motion of the Corporation made before the Corporation files its answer, remand the case to the Corporation for further action by the Corporation.
The court may, at any time, on good cause shown, order additional evidence to be taken before the Corporation.
Reconsideration on remand.--The Corporation shall, after the case is remanded, and after hearing such additional evidence if so ordered-- (A) modify or affirm the earlier findings of fact or decision, or both, under section 6, and (B) file with the court any such additional and modified findings of fact and decision, and a transcript of the additional record and testimony upon which the Corporation's action in modifying or affirming was based.
Final Judgment.--The judgment of the court shall be final except that it shall be subject to review in the same manner as a judgment in other civil actions.
Forms of Payment.-- (1) Yearly payments.--Each annuity payable under this Act shall be payable as an annual amount.
Retroactive lump-sum payments.--Any individual whose claim for an annuity under this Act is approved after the date on which the annuity commences under subsection (a)(2) or (b)(2) of section 3 shall be paid the total amount of the annuity payments for periods before the date on which the claim is approved in the form of a lump-sum payment.
Cases of Incompetency.--Payment due an individual mentally incompetent or under other legal disability may be made to the person who is constituted guardian or other fiduciary by the law of the State of residence of the claimant or is otherwise legally vested with the care of the claimant or the claimant's estate.
If a guardian or other fiduciary of the individual under legal disability has not been appointed under the law of the State of residence of the claimant, payment may be made to any person who is responsible for the care of the claimant, and the payment bars recovery by any other person.
Divorces, Etc.-- (1) Alternative payees.--Payments under this Act which would otherwise be made to a person under this Act shall be made (in whole or in part) to another person if and to the extent expressly provided for in the terms of any court decree of divorce, annulment, or legal separation, or the terms of any court order or court-approved property settlement agreement incident to any court decree of divorce, annulment, or legal separation.
Any payment under this paragraph to a person bars recovery by any other person.
Notification requirements.--Paragraph (1) shall only apply to payments made by the Corporation under this Act after the date of receipt by the Corporation of written notification of such decree, order, or agreement, and such additional information and documentation as the Corporation may prescribe.
Court.--As used in this subsection, the term ``court'' means any court of any State.
Inalienability.--Amounts payable under this Act are not assignable, either in law or equity, or subject to execution, levy, attachment, garnishment, or other legal process, except as otherwise may be provided by Federal law.
Forgiveness.--Recovery of payments under this Act may not be made from an individual in any case in which the Corporation determines that the individual is without fault and recovery would be against equity and good conscience.
INTERAGENCY COORDINATION AND COOPERATION.
In General.--The Corporation may make such arrangements or agreements with other departments, agencies, or establishments of the United States for cooperation or mutual assistance in the performance of their respective functions under this Act as are necessary and appropriate to avoid unnecessary expense and duplication of functions.
Use of Facilities.--The Corporation may use, as appropriate, on a reimbursable or other basis, the facilities or services of any department, agency, or establishment of the United States or of any State or political subdivision thereof, including the services of any of its employees, with the lawful consent of such department, agency, or establishment.
Cooperation.-- (1) In general.--Each department, agency, or establishment of the United States shall cooperate with the Corporation and, to the extent necessary and appropriate, provide such information and facilities as the Corporation may request for its assistance in the performance of the Corporation's functions under this Act.
Availability of records from the secretary of health and human services.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide the Corporation with such records, determined by the Corporation to be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act, as the Corporation may request.
Availability of confidential tax returns and return information.--Section 6103(l) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to use of returns and return information for purposes other than tax administration) is amended by adding at the end of paragraph (2) the following new sentence: ``Returns and return information shall be open to inspection by or disclosure to officers and employees of the Corporation whose official duties require such inspection or disclosure for the purpose of, but only to the extent necessary in, considering such returns and return information pursuant to section 5(c)(1) of the Pension Restoration Act of 1993, except that such inspection or disclosure shall be permitted only upon written request which sets forth the specific reason or reasons why such inspection or disclosure is necessary and which is signed by the head of the bureau or office of the Corporation requesting the inspection or disclosure.''.
The Corporation shall, before the effective date set forth in section 12, prescribe the initial regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Regulations under this Act shall be prescribed by the Corporation in consultation, as appropriate, with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Payment.--The Corporation shall use moneys from the appropriate revolving funds established under section 4005 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1305) to carry out its functions under this Act.
Transfers From Trust Funds.--The Corporation shall transfer to the revolving funds described in subsection (a) from the trust funds consisting of assets of terminated plans and employer liability payments amounts equal to the amounts needed to carry out its functions under this Act.
General Rule.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the provisions of this Act shall take effect 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Special Rule.--The provisions of sections 10 and 11 shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.