This Act may be cited as the ``Immigration Protection Act of 2000''.
Congress finds the following: (1) There is an epidemic of fraud directed against aliens engaged in dealings with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Fraudulent immigration consultants target aliens working their way through the maze of immigration law and extract hundreds of thousands of dollars in exchange for promises of help in dealing with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
For example, phony immigration consultants--who lure clients by approaching aliens in line at Immigration and Naturalization Service buildings or by advertising in foreign- language newspapers--promise, for a fee, to help immigrants obtain residency or green cards by using personal back-channel connections at the Immigration and Naturalization Service or by filing a supposedly necessary application.
Rather than legitimately assist aliens with the Immigration and Naturalization Service, fraudulent consultants then take one or a succession of fees and either do nothing, or worse, file meritless asylum petitions designed to result in rejection and deportation.
Fraudulent immigration consultants often pose as immigration lawyers.
In particular, some who target Spanish- speaking immigrants become notaries public in order to advertise as ``notarios,'' who are attorneys in Latin America.
Aliens victimized by fraudulent consultants are usually too fearful of deportation, or unsure where to turn, to report the fraud to Government officials.
Consequently, fraudulent consultants operate with near-impunity.
Because fraudulent immigration consultants work in the shadows and provide services that are unregulated in many States, it is impossible to determine how many such illegitimate businesses exist.
State officials and immigrants' advocacy groups estimate, however, that the problem of aliens exploited by bogus consultants has grown in recent years, and that thousands of fraudulent consultants are at work across the country.
Federal and State efforts to rein in fraudulent immigration consultants have not succeeded in ending the abuse.
At the Federal level, there is no jurisdiction to prosecute fraudulent consultants unless they participate in the submission of false documents to the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Since many phony consultants scam aliens without filing paperwork with the Immigration and Naturalization Service, they cannot be reached by Federal law enforcement.
The Department of Justice intended to establish five Federal-State task forces to combat fraud by immigration consultants in major cities with large immigrant populations.
Only one such task force has been established, however--in Los Angeles.
Enforcement by State authorities is sporadic.
Many make no effort to pursue and prosecute bogus consultants.
And even when con artists are convicted, most jurisdictions punish fraud against aliens as misdemeanors.
In this Act: (1) Attorney.--The term ``attorney'' means any person who is a member in good standing of the bar of the highest court of any State, possession, territory, Commonwealth, or the District of Columbia, and is not under any order of any court suspending, enjoining, restraining, disbarring, or otherwise restricting such person in the practice of law.
Accredited representative.--The term ``accredited representative'' means any organization or individual that has been accredited by the Board of Immigration Appeals pursuant to section 292 of title 8, Code of Federal Regulations.
Compensation.--The term ``compensation'' means money, property, promise of payment, or any other consideration, provided directly or indirectly.
Immigration consultant.--The term ``immigration consultant''-- (A) means any individual, organization, or entity who in exchange for compensation or the expectation of compensation, promises to provide or provides assistance or advice on an immigration matter; and (B) does not include any attorney, person employed by and working under the direct supervision of one or more attorneys, or any accredited representative.
Immigration matter.--The term ``immigration matter'' means any proceeding, filing, or action affecting the immigration or citizenship status of any person which arises under any immigration or naturalization law, Executive order, Presidential proclamation, or action of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, other component of the Department of Justice, the Department of State, or the Department of Labor.
PROHIBITED ACTS AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
Prohibited Acts.--It shall be unlawful for any immigration consultant intentionally, or with reckless disregard for the truth to-- (1) make any false or misleading statement to any client, prospective client, or the public while providing, offering, or advertising services; (2) make any statement indicating or implying that the immigration consultant can or will obtain special favors from, or has special influence with, any government agency; (3) retain any compensation for any service not performed; (4) refuse to return any document supplied by, prepared on behalf of, or paid for by, any client or prospective client, even in the event of a fee dispute; (5) select forms to be filed with any government agency in connection with an immigration matter; (6) provide information to any government agency without the client's knowledge and consent; (7) engage in the unauthorized practice of law in connection with an immigration matter, as such is defined by applicable State statutes, regulations, rules or municipal ordinances, in conjunction with an immigration matter; and (8) hold himself or herself out to any client, prospective client, or to the public as engaging in or entitled to engage in the practice of law, or uses any title in any language, such as ``notario'' or ``notary public'', to convey attorney status.
Criminal Penalties.--Any immigration consultant who commits any act set forth in subsection (a) shall be fined under title 18 of the United States Code, imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
ADVERTISEMENT DISCLAIMER, NOTICE AND WRITTEN CONTRACT.
Advertisement Disclaimer.--It shall be unlawful for an immigration consultant to make any advertisement unless the advertisement includes a statement that the immigration consultant is not an attorney, that the consultant cannot provide legal advice or select forms for use by clients or prospective clients and that he or she cannot obtain special favors from and has no special influence with, the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Notice.--It shall be unlawful for an immigration consultant to perform immigration consulting services unless, in any office in which an immigration consultant meets with clients or prospective clients, the immigration consultant has conspicuously displayed a notice, not smaller than 12 inches by 20 inches and in boldface print no smaller than one inch in height, that includes-- (1) a statement that the immigration consultant is not an attorney, cannot select forms for use by the client, and cannot provide legal services in any immigration matter; and (2) a statement that the immigration consultant cannot obtain special favors from, and has no special influence with, the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Written Contract.--It shall be unlawful for an immigration consultant knowingly to act in an immigration matter unless the person has entered into a written contract (in both English and the other principal language of the client, if not English) with the client that includes-- (1) a description of all services to be performed by the person under the agreement; (2) the amount to be paid by the client; (3) a statement, printed on the face of the contract in boldface type no smaller than 10 point, that the person is not licensed and authorized to practice law in the State in which the immigration consultant services are to be performed and is unable to perform legal services; (4) a statement, printed on the face of the contract in boldface type no smaller than 10 point, that any document provided to the immigration consultant in connection with the immigration matter may not be retained by the immigration consultant and must be returned to the client at any time requested by the client; (5) a statement that the client may rescind the contract within 72 hours of the time it is executed and receive a full refund of all monies paid to the immigration consultant; and (6) a statement certifying that a copy of the contract has been provided to the client upon execution of the contract.
Criminal Penalties.--Any immigration consultant who knowingly fails to perform any requirement set forth in this section shall be fined under title 18 of the United States Code, imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
Aggrieved Parties.--Any person aggrieved by reason of any violation of section 4 or 5 may commence a civil action in any appropriate United States district court for the relief set forth in subsection (d).
Civil Actions by the Attorney General.--If the Attorney General of the United States has reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons is being, has been, or may be injured by reason of any violation of section 4 or 5, the Attorney General may commence a civil action in any appropriate United States district court for the relief set forth in subsections (d) and (e).
Civil Actions by State Attorneys General.--If the Attorney General of a State has reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons is being, has been, or may be injured by reason of any violation of section 4 or 5, such Attorney General may commence a civil action in the name of such State, as parens patriae on behalf of persons residing in such State, in any appropriate United States district court for the relief set forth in subsections (d) and (e).
Relief.--In any civil action brought under this section, the court may award appropriate relief, including temporary, preliminary, or permanent injunctive relief and compensatory and punitive damages, as well as the costs of suit and reasonable fees for attorneys and expert witnesses.
Injunctive relief may include, where appropriate, an order temporarily or permanently enjoining the defendant from serving as an immigration consultant in any immigration matter.
Civil Penalties.--In addition to the relief provided for in subsection (d), which the Attorney General or any State Attorney General may seek on behalf of aggrieved parties, the court may also assess a civil penalty not exceeding $50,000 for first violations, and $100,000 for subsequent violations, when sought by the Attorney General of the United States or any State Attorney General.
Establishment of Task Forces.--The Attorney General shall establish task forces composed of Federal investigatory and prosecutorial personnel, and any State or local personnel who may be assigned by States to serve, in the eight districts determined by the Attorney General to contain the largest numbers of aliens subject to violations of sections 4 and 5.
Such task forces shall investigate, criminally prosecute, and bring civil suits based on violations of sections 4 and 5, section 274C of the Immigration and Nationality Act, section 1546 of title 18, United States Code, and any other applicable Federal or State laws.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Justice $7,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001, 2002, and 2003 to carry out this section.
Availability of funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1) are authorized to remain available until expended.
OUTREACH BY IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE.
Outreach Program.--The Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization shall establish a program to inform aliens about-- (1) the obligations of immigration consultants under this Act; (2) methods of law enforcement, redress, and assistance under this Act and any other related law, regulation, or program established by the Immigration and Naturalization Service or other Federal, State, or local agency; and (3) the hotline to be established under subsection (b).
Hotline.--The Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization shall establish a toll-free hotline to be used by aliens and others with knowledge or information of violations of sections 4 and 5, section 274C of the Immigration and Nationality Act, section 1546 of title 18, United States Code, or any related State or local laws.
Callers shall be permitted to provide information anonymously.
In situations deemed appropriate by the Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, callers or information provided by callers shall be forwarded to appropriate Federal or State law enforcement authorities.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Justice $7,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001, 2002, and 2003 in order to carry out this section.
Availability of funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1) are authorized to remain available until expended.
In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, neither the Attorney General nor any other official or employee of the Department of Justice or any bureau or agency thereof may use the information provided by any person (including an alien not lawfully present in the United States) in relation to a violation of sections 4 and 5 for any purpose other than to carry out this Act.
If such information is provided by an alien not lawfully present in the United States, such information shall not be used for the purpose of identifying or removing the person from the United States or imposing other sanctions against the person.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply if the Attorney General or other official or employee of the Department of Justice, or bureau or agency thereof, determines that the information was not provided in good faith in conjunction with a credible report relating to a violation of this Act, but was provided in order to evade the application of Federal immigration law.
Criminal Penalty.--Whoever knowingly uses information in violation of this section shall be fined not more than $10,000.
NONPREEMPTION OF MORE PROTECTIVE STATE AND LOCAL LAWS.
The provisions of this Act supersede State laws, regulations, and municipal ordinances only to the extent such State and local laws impede the application of any provision of this Act.
States and municipalities may impose requirements supplementing those imposed by this Act.