TITLE I--CONGRESSIONAL ADVISORY COMMISSION ON AMATEUR BOXING SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Congressional Advisory Commission on Amateur Boxing Act of 1993''.
There is established a Commission to be known as the Congressional Advisory Commission on Amateur Boxing (in this title referred to as the ``Commission'').
The purpose of the Commission is to conduct studies and make legislative recommendations to the Congress based on the studies regarding the establishment of Federal standards for amateur boxing matches held in the United States.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of ten members as follows: (1) Health officials.--Two members, one appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and one appointed by the majority leader of the Senate, from a list of six individuals nominated for appointment jointly by the American Medical Association and the Association of Ringside Physicians.
State athletic commissioner.--One member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among individuals who are or have been employed as State athletic commissioners.
Amateur boxing federation.--One member appointed by the majority leader of the Senate from among individuals who are members of the United States of America Amateur Boxing Federation, Incorporated.
Media.--One member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among individuals who are employed in the media and are knowledgeable about boxing.
Amateur boxer.--One member appointed by the majority leader of the Senate from among individuals with special interests or experience in amateur boxing.
Professional boxers.--Four members, two appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and two appointed by the majority leader of the Senate, from among individuals with special interests or experience in professional boxing.
Chairman and Vice Chairman.--The Chairman of the Commission shall be designated by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be designated by the majority leader of the Senate.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Members.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall each be paid at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay in effect for grade GS-13 of the General Schedule for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Chairman and vice chairman.--The Chairman and the Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay in effect for grades GS-15 and GS-14 of the General Schedule, respectively, for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Organizational Meeting.-- (1) Time and purpose.--Not later than thirty days after all members have been appointed to the Commission, the Commission shall hold an organizational meeting to establish the rules and procedures necessary to carry out its responsibilities under this title subject to paragraph (2).
Rules and procedures.--The rules and procedures shall provide that-- (A) all Commission meetings shall be open to the public; (B) one-half of the total Commission membership shall constitute a quorum; and (C) a majority of members voting shall be required to authorize any recommendation or other official action of the Commission.
Appointment and Compensation of Staff.-- (1) In general.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairman may appoint and fix the pay of staff as the Chairman considers appropriate.
Applicability of certain civil service laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and Consultants.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairman may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this title.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Administrative Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, administrative support services requested by the Commission.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this title, hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as the Commission considers appropriate.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this title.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of the agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) Issuance.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence that relates to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within a judicial district at any designated place of hearing within the judicial district.
Enforcement.--If a person issued a subpoena under paragraph (1) refuses to obey the subpoena or is guilty of contumacy, any court of the United States within the judicial district within which the hearing is conducted or within the judicial district within which the person is found or resides or transacts business may (upon application by the Commission) order the person to appear before the Commission to produce evidence or to give testimony relating to the matter under investigation.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt of the court.
Manner of service.--A subpoena of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Place of service.--All process of any court to which application may be made under this section may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
Not later than nine months after the organizational meeting of the Commission is held under section 104(d), the Commission shall submit to the Congress a report that contains a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for legislation it considers appropriate with respect to the following: (1) Licensing requirements.--Licensing requirements, including proficiency standards and evaluation for boxers, promoters, referees, judges, ringside physicians, timekeepers, and all other ring officials.
Health and medical requirements.--Health and medical requirements, including provision for prefight testing and examination of referees by physicians and for prefight and postfight testing and examination of boxers by physicians specializing in cardiological, neurological, and ophthalmological treatment.
Safety and performance standards.--Safety requirements and performance standards for equipment and facilities used in boxing matches.
Bonding requirements.--Requirements for bonding of promoters of boxing matches.
Insurance requirements.--Health, life, and accident insurance requirements for boxers.
Training programs.--Training programs and standards for referees, judges, and other appropriate ring officials.
Classification and ranking guidelines.--Guidelines and standards governing the classification and ranking of boxers and the establishment of a national authority to maintain an accurate and current account of the classifications and rankings.
National data base.--Establishment of a national data base of information on the health and medical condition, background, and ring record of boxers.
Reporting requirements.--Requirements governing the reporting of information needed to fulfill the requirements of paragraphs (7) and (8).
Fines and penalties.--Fines and penalties for violations of the national standards established under Federal law.
The Commission shall cease to exist sixty days after submitting its report pursuant to section 107.
There is authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 to carry out this title.
TITLE II--PROHIBITION OF PROFESSIONAL BOXING SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Federal Professional Boxing Prohibition Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) although many sports may have higher death and injury rates, the injuries are coincidental to the purpose of the sport; the object of professional boxing is to inflict pain and physical damage to the extent of rendering the opponent senseless, defenseless, and unconscious; (2) head blows and knockouts, which eventually result in brain damage, are the most prevalent and direct means for a professional boxer to attain victory; (3) existing medical and safety controls are inadequate to prevent chronic brain damage in professional boxers; (4) the longer the boxing career of an individual, the greater the likelihood of brain damage to the individual; and (5) cumulative brain damage in professional boxers is not usually identified until its later stages, when it is generally considered irreversible.
Purpose.--The purpose of this title is to make unlawful the participation in or promotion of professional boxing in order to save lives, protect the health of prospective professional boxers, and prevent exploitation of prospective participants in professional boxing.
PROHIBITION OF PARTICIPATION IN OR PROMOTION OF PROFESSIONAL BOXING.
In General.--Chapter 89 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1821 the following new section: ``Sec.
Participation in or promotion of professional boxing ``(a) Offense.--Whoever participates in a professional boxing match in any capacity (including participation as a coach, fighter, judge, physician, referee, or timekeeper) or promotes a professional boxing match-- ``(1) shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both; and ``(2) shall be required to forfeit any financial gain realized or to be realized as a direct result of the professional boxing match.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Boxing.--The term `boxing' means the sport of fighting with fists (with or without boxing gloves).
Professional boxing match.--The term `professional boxing match' means a boxing match for which any financial gain (including any salary, gift, prize, or paid expenses) is received for participation in the boxing match.
The term does not include an amateur boxing match.
Promotes.--The term `promotes' means initiates, directs, aids, or participates in organizing or financially supporting.
Nonapplicability of Standard Fines.--Section 3571 shall not apply to an offense under this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 89 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1821 the following: ``1822.
Participation in or promotion of professional boxing.