This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Safety and Law Enforcement Improvement Act''.
TITLE I--SMALL COMMUNITY LAW ENFORCEMENT IMPROVEMENT GRANTS SEC.
SMALL COMMUNITY GRANT PROGRAM.
Section 1703 of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796dd-2) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Retention Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--The Attorney General may make grants to units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, which grants shall be targeted specifically for the retention for 1 additional year of police officers funded through the COPS Universal Hiring Program, the COPS FAST Program, the Tribal Resources Grant Program-Hiring, or the COPS in Schools Program.
Preference.--In making grants under this subsection, the Attorney General shall give preference to grantees that demonstrate financial hardship or severe budget constraint that impacts the entire local budget and may result in the termination of employment for police officers described in paragraph (1).
Limit on grant amounts.--The total amount of a grant made under this subsection shall not exceed 20 percent of the original grant to the grantee.
Authorization of appropriations.-- ``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Set-aside.--Of the amount made available for grants under this subsection for each fiscal year, 10 percent shall be awarded to tribal governments.''.
SMALL COMMUNITY TECHNOLOGY GRANT PROGRAM.
Section 1701 of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796dd) is amended by striking subsection (k) and inserting the following: ``(k) Law Enforcement Technology Program.-- ``(1) In general.--Grants under subsection (a)(1)(C) may be made and used in accordance with this subsection to assist the police departments of units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area in employing professional, scientific, and technological advancements that will help those police departments to-- ``(A) improve police communications through the use of wireless communications, computers, software, videocams, databases and other hardware and software that allow law enforcement agencies to communicate and operate more effectively; and ``(B) develop and improve access to crime solving technologies, including DNA analysis, photo enhancement, voice recognition, and other forensic capabilities.
Cost share requirement.--A recipient of a grant made and used in accordance with this subsection shall provide matching funds from non-Federal sources in an amount equal to not less than 10 percent of the total amount of the grant made under this subsection, subject to a waiver by the Attorney General for extreme hardship.
Administration.--The office of the Department of Justice responsible for administering subsection (a)(1)(C) shall administer the grant program under this subsection.
No supplanting.--Federal funds provided under this subsection shall be used to supplement and not to supplant local funds allocated to technology.
Authorization of appropriations.-- ``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated $40,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006 to carry out this subsection.
Set-aside.--Of the amount made available for grants under this subsection for each fiscal year, 10 percent shall be awarded to tribal governments.''.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to provide access to, and improve a communications infrastructure that will ensure a reliable and seamless communication between, law enforcement, fire, and emergency medical service providers in units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area and in States.
Authority To Make Grants.--The Office of Justice Programs of the Department of Justice shall make grants, in accordance with such regulations as the Attorney General may prescribe, to units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area for the purpose of establishing or improving 9-1-1 service in those communities.
Priority in making grants under this section shall be given to communities that do not have 9-1-1 service.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``9-1-1 service'' refers to telephone service that has designated 9-1-1 as a universal emergency telephone number in the community served for reporting an emergency to appropriate authorities and requesting assistance.
Limit on Grant Amount.--The total amount of a grant made under this section shall not exceed $250,000.
Funding.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, to remain available until expended.
Set-aside.--Of the amount made available for grants under this section, 10 percent shall be awarded to tribal governments.
TITLE II--CRACKING DOWN ON METHAMPHETAMINE SEC.
METHAMPHETAMINE TREATMENT PROGRAMS IN RURAL AREAS.
Subpart I of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290bb et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 509 the following: ``SEC.
METHAMPHETAMINE TREATMENT PROGRAMS IN RURAL AREAS.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, shall make grants to community-based public and nonprofit private entities for the establishment of substance abuse (particularly methamphetamine) prevention and treatment pilot programs in units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area.
Administration.--Grants made in accordance with this section shall be administered by a single State agency designated by a State to ensure a coordinated effort within that State.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), a public or nonprofit private entity shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.--A recipient of a grant under this section shall use amounts received under the grant to establish a methamphetamine abuse prevention and treatment pilot program that serves one or more rural areas.
Such a pilot program shall-- ``(1) have the ability to care for individuals on an in- patient basis; ``(2) have a social detoxification capability, with direct access to medical services within 50 miles; ``(3) provide neuro-cognitive skill development services to address brain damage caused by methamphetamine use; ``(4) provide after-care services, whether as a single- source provider or in conjunction with community-based services designed to continue neuro-cognitive skill development to address brain damage caused by methamphetamine use; ``(5) provide appropriate training for the staff employed in the program; and ``(6) use scientifically-based best practices in substance abuse treatment, particularly in methamphetamine treatment.
Amount of Grants.--The amount of a grant under this section shall be at least $19,000 but not greater than $100,000.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 to carry out this section.
Set-aside.--Of the amount made available for grants under this section, 10 percent shall be awarded to tribal governments to ensure the provision of services under this section.''.
Section 519E of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290bb-25e) is amended-- (1) in subsection (c)(1)-- (A) in subparagraph (F), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (G), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(H) to fund programs that educate rural communities, particularly parents, teachers, and others who work with youth, concerning the early signs and effects of methamphetamine use, however, as a prerequisite to receiving funding, these programs shall-- ``(i) prioritize methamphetamine prevention and education; ``(ii) have past experience in community coalition building and be part of an existing coalition that includes medical and public health officials, educators, youth-serving community organizations, and members of law enforcement; ``(iii) utilize professional prevention staff to develop research and science based prevention strategies for the community to be served; ``(iv) demonstrate the ability to operate a community-based methamphetamine prevention and education program; ``(v) establish prevalence of use through a community needs assessment; ``(vi) establish goals and objectives based on a needs assessment; and ``(vii) demonstrate measurable outcomes on a yearly basis.
''; (2) in subsection (e)-- (A) by striking ``subsection (a), $10,000,000'' and inserting ``subsection (a)-- ``(1) $10,000,000''; (B) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006 to carry out the programs referred to in subsection (c)(1)(H).
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Set-Aside.--Of the amount made available for grants under this section, 10 percent shall be used to assist tribal governments.
Amount of Grants.--The amount of a grant under this section, with respect to each rural community involved, shall be at least $19,000 but not greater than $100,000.''.
In General.--The Attorney General shall, through the Department of Justice or through grants to States or units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, in accordance with such regulations as the Attorney General may prescribe, provide for-- (1) the cleanup of methamphetamine laboratories and related hazardous waste in units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area; and (2) the improvement of contract-related response time for cleanup of methamphetamine laboratories and related hazardous waste in units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area by providing additional contract personnel, equipment, and facilities.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 to carry out this section.
Funding additional.--Amounts authorized by this section are in addition to amounts otherwise authorized by law.
Set-aside.--Of the amount made available for grants under this section, 10 percent shall be awarded to tribal governments.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS RELATING TO COPS GRANTS.
In General.--In addition to any other funds authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2003 for grants under part Q of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796dd et sequentes), known as the COPS program, there is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for such purpose to provide training to State and local prosecutors and law enforcement agents for prosecution of methamphetamine offenses.
Rural Set-Aside.--Of amounts made available pursuant to subsection (a), $5,000,000 shall be available only for prosecutors and law enforcement agents for rural communities.
DEA Reimbursement.--Of amounts made available pursuant to subsection (a), $2,000,000 shall be available only to reimburse the Drug Enforcement Administration for existing training expenses.
EXPANSION OF METHAMPHETAMINE HOT SPOTS PROGRAM TO INCLUDE PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT FOR ENFORCEMENT, PROSECUTION, AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP.
Section 1701(d) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796dd(d)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (10) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (11) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12) hire personnel and purchase equipment for areas located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area to assist in the enforcement and prosecution of methamphetamine offenses and the environmental cleanup of methamphetamine- affected areas.''.
TITLE III--LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING SEC.
SMALL TOWN AND RURAL TRAINING PROGRAM.
In General.--There is established a Rural Policing Institute, which shall be administered by the National Center for State and Local Law Enforcement Training of the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC) as part of the Small Town and Rural Training (STAR) Program to-- (1) assess the needs of law enforcement in units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area; (2) develop and deliver export training programs regarding topics such as drug enforcement, airborne counterdrug operations, domestic violence, hate and bias crimes, computer crimes, law enforcement critical incident planning related to school shootings, and other topics identified in the training needs assessment to law enforcement officers in units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area; and (3) conduct outreach efforts to ensure that training programs under the Rural Policing Institute reach law enforcement officers in units of local government and tribal governments located outside a Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2006, to carry out this section, including contracts, staff, and equipment.
Set-aside.--Of the amount made available for grants under this section for each fiscal year, 10 percent shall be awarded to tribal governments.