The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
TITLE I--GILA RIVER JUDGMENT FUND DISTRIBUTION Sec.
Distribution of judgment funds.
TITLE II--AMENDMENT TO COMMUNITY'S PRIOR JUDGMENT FUND PLANS Sec.
Amendment to plan for use and distribution of funds awarded in Docket No.
Amendment to plan for use and distribution of funds awarded in Docket No.
TITLE III--EXPERT ASSISTANCE LOANS Sec.
Waiver of repayment of expert assistance loans to Community, Oglala Sioux tribe, Pueblo of Santo Domingo, and Seminole Nation of Oklahoma.
TITLE I--GILA RIVER JUDGMENT FUND DISTRIBUTION SEC.
SHORT TITLE This title may be cited as the ``Gila River Indian Community Judgment Fund Distribution Act of 2002''.
Congress finds the following: (1) On August 8, 1951, the Gila River Indian Community filed a complaint before the Indian Claims Commission in Gila River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community v. United States, Docket No.
236, for the failure of the United States to carry out its obligation to protect the Community's use of water from the Gila River and the Salt River.
All original 14 dockets under Docket No.
236 have been resolved and funds distributed, except for Docket Nos.
236-C and 236-D, which remain undistributed.
In Gila River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community v. United States, 29 Ind.
144 (1972), the Indian Claims Commission held that the United States, as trustee, was liable to the Community as to the claims made in Docket 236-C. (4) In Gila River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community v. United States, 684 Federal Reporter, Second Series 852 (1982), the United States Court of Claims held that the United States, as trustee, was liable to the Community as to the claims made in Docket 236-D. (5) With the approval of the Community under Community Resolution GR-98-98, the Community entered into a settlement with the United States for claims made under Dockets 236-C and 236-D on April 27, 1999, for an aggregate total of $7,000,000.
On May 3, 1999, the United States Court of Federal Claims ordered that a final judgment be entered in consolidated Dockets 236-C and 236-D for $7,000,000 in favor of the Community and against the United States.
On October 6, 1999, the Department of the Treasury certified the payment of $7,000,000, less attorney fees, to be deposited into a trust account on behalf of the Community, and to which such payment was made into a trust account managed by the Office of Trust Funds Management of the Department of the Interior.
Pursuant to the Indian Tribal Judgment Funds Use or Distribution Act (25 United States Code 1401, et sequentes) as amended and implemented by 25 CFR Part 87, the Secretary is required to submit an Indian judgment fund use or distribution plan to Congress for approval.
DISTRIBUTION OF JUDGMENT FUNDS.
Per Capita Payments.--Notwithstanding any provision of the Indian Tribal Judgment Funds Use or Distribution Act, or any other law, regulation, or plan promulgated pursuant thereto, the funds appropriated on October 6, 1999, in satisfaction of an award granted to the Gila River Indian Community in Dockets 236-C and 236-D before the United States Court of Federal Claims, less attorney fees and litigation expenses, and including all accrued interest shall be distributed in the form of per capita payments (in sums as equal as possible) to all eligible enrolled members of the Community.
Preparation of Payment Roll.--The Community shall prepare the payment roll in accordance with the following criteria: (1) Subject to eligibility requirements under paragraph (2), the following individuals shall be eligible to be listed on the payment roll and eligible to receive a per capita payment from the Judgment Fund: (A) All enrolled Community members who are eligible to be listed on the per capita payment roll that was approved by the Secretary for the distribution of the funds awarded to the Community in Docket No.
236-N, including those who were inadvertently omitted from such roll.
All enrolled Community members who are living on the date of enactment of this Act.
All enrolled Community members who have died after the effective date of the payment plan for Docket No.
236-N and on or prior to the date of enactment of this Act.
The following individuals shall be ineligible to be listed on the payment roll prepared under this Act and ineligible to receive a per capita payment from the Judgment Fund: (A) Any individual who has relinquished membership with the Community prior to the date the Community certifies their payment roll for the eligible adult members under this section.
Any minor who has relinquished membership with the Community, or whose parent or legal guardian has relinquished membership on their behalf, prior to the date that the minor is 18 years of age.
Any individual who has been disenrolled by the Community for just cause, such as dual enrollment or failure to meet the eligibility requirements for enrollment.
Any individual who has been determined or certified as eligible by the Secretary to receive per capita payment from any judgment fund that was awarded to another community, tribe or tribal entity if that the judgment fund was appropriated on or before the date of enactment of this Act.
Any individual who has not enrolled as a member of the Community on or before the 90th day after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Notice to Secretary.--When the Community has prepared and approved its payment roll, the Community shall notify the Secretary of the total number of individuals eligible to share in the per capita distribution.
The total number shall be subdivided into the number of shares that belong to eligible living adult tribal members, and the number of shares that belong to deceased individuals, legally incompetent individuals, and minors.
Information Provided to Secretary.--The Community shall provide the Secretary with the enrollment information necessary to allow the Secretary to establish estate accounts for the deceased individuals, and IIM accounts for legally incompetent individuals and minors.
Disbursement of Funds.--Not later than 30 days after the payment roll has been approved by the Community and the Community has reconciled the number of shares that belong in each payment category, the Secretary shall disburse to the Community the funds necessary to make the per capita distribution to the eligible living adult tribal members.
Once the funds are disbursed to the Community, the Community shall be responsible for administering and distributing the funds.
Shares of Deceased Individuals.--The Secretary shall distribute the per capita shares of deceased individuals to their heirs and legatees in accordance with existing regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
If a final determination is made that the decedent has no heirs, the per capita share and the interest earned on that share shall revert to the Community and be deposited into the Community's general fund.
Shares of Legally Incompetent Individuals.--The Secretary shall deposit the shares of legally incompetent individuals into supervised IIM accounts.
These IIM accounts shall be administered pursuant to existing regulations and procedures established by the Secretary.
Shares of Minors.--The Secretary shall deposit the shares of minors into supervised IIM accounts.
The provisions contained in section 3(b)(3) of the Indian Tribal Judgment Funds Use and Distribution Act (25 United States Code 1403(b)(3)) shall not apply to the minor's per capita shares held by the Secretary under this Act.
The Secretary shall hold the minor's per capita shares in trust until the minor is 18 years of age.
None of the Judgment Funds or the interest earned on those funds shall be disbursed from the minor's account until the minor is 18 years of age.
Payment of Eligible Individuals Not Listed on Payment Roll.--An individual who is not listed on the payment roll, but is eligible to receive payment, may be paid from any residual principal and interest funds remaining after the Community has made its per capita distribution and the IIM accounts have been established.
If the residual Judgment Funds are insufficient to cover the cost of such payment, the Community may pay the individual from its Community-owned Funds.
The Secretary is authorized to accept and deposit such funds into an IIM or estate account established for a minor, legal incompetent, or deceased beneficiary that the Community has identified as being eligible to receive payment under this section, but who was not paid from the Judgment Fund.
The Secretary shall invest these funds pursuant to existing statutory authority.
Use of Residual Funds.--Upon request by the Community, any residual principal and interest funds remaining after the Community has declared per capita distribution complete shall be disbursed to the Community and deposited into the Community's general fund.
Nonapplicability of Certain Law.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 United States Code 2701, et seq.
), shall not apply to Community-owned Funds used by the Community to cover shortfalls in funding necessary to make payments to individuals not listed on the payment roll, but eligible to receive payment as described under subsection (i) of this section.
As used in this title: (1) Adult.--The term ``adult'' means an individual who-- (A) is 18 years of age or older on the date the payment roll is approved by the Community; or (B) will reach 18 years of age not later than 30 days after the date that the payment roll is approved by the Community.
Community.--The term ``Community'' means the Gila River Indian Community.
Community-owned funds.--The term ``Community-owned Funds'' means funds currently held in trust by the Secretary that can be made available to make payments under section 103, or revenues held by the Community that are derived from community-owned enterprises.
IIM.--The term ``IIM'' means individual Indian money account.
Judgment fund.--The term ``Judgment Fund'' means the funds awarded to the Community by the Court of Federal Claims in Dockets 236-C and 236-D. (6) Legal incompetent.--The term ``legal incompetent'' means an individual who has been determined incapable of managing their own affairs by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Minor.--The term ``minor'' means an individual who is less than 18 years of age on the date the payment roll is approved by the Community, or who will not reach 18 years of age by the date that is 30 days after the date that the payment roll is approved by the Community.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Responsibility for Funds--After the funds are disbursed to the Community as provided under section 103(e), the United States and the Secretary shall no longer have any trust responsibility for the investment, supervision, administration, or expenditure of that portion of the Judgment Funds.
The funds subject to subsections (f) and (g) of section 103 shall continue to be held in trust by the Secretary until disbursed under this Act.
Applicability of Other Law.--All funds distributed under this Act are subject to the provisions of sections 7 and 8 of Public Law 93- 134 (25 United States Code 1407 and 1408, respectively).
TITLE II--AMENDMENT TO COMMUNITY'S PRIOR JUDGMENT FUND PLANS SEC.
AMENDMENT TO PLAN FOR USE AND DISTRIBUTION OF JUDGMENT FUNDS AWARDED IN DOCKET 228.
A judgment fund plan for the funds awarded to the Community in Docket No.
228 was submitted to Congress under the provisions of the Act of October 19, 1973 (25 United States Code 1401, et sequentes).
The plan became effective on August 10, 1986, and was published in the Federal Register on March 5, 1987 (52 FR 6887).
The plan was amended by the Act of October 16, 1986, Public Law 99-493 (100 United States Statutes at Large 1241).
The plan is further amended to include the following paragraphs: ``(1) The provisions contained in section 3(b)(3) of the Indian Tribal Judgment Funds Use and Distribution Act (25 United States Code 1403(b)(3)) shall not apply to minors' remaining per capita shares held by the Secretary under this plan, as of the date of the enactment of the Gila River Indian Community Judgment Fund Distribution Act of 2002.
The Secretary shall hold the minors' per capita shares in trust until the minors reach 18 years of age.
None of the judgment funds or the interest earned on those funds shall be disbursed from the minors' accounts until the minors reach 18 years of age.
Upon the request of the Community, any residual principal and interest funds remaining after the Community has declared the per capita distribution complete shall be disbursed to the Community and deposited into the Community's general fund.''.
AMENDMENT TO PLAN FOR USE AND DISTRIBUTION OF JUDGMENT FUNDS AWARDED IN DOCKET 236-N. A judgment fund plan for the funds awarded to the Community in Docket 236-N was submitted to Congress under the provisions of the Act of October 19, 1973 (25 United States Code 1401 et sequentes).
The plan became effective on May 9, 1994, and was published in the Federal Register on June 16, 1994 (59 FR 31092).
The ``Per Capita Aspect'' and the ``General Provisions'' portions of the plan are amended as follows: (1) Per capita aspect amendments.--The last sentence of the paragraph that relates to the use of remaining amounts shall be amended to read as follows: ``Upon request from the Community, any residual principal and interest funds remaining after the Community has declared the per capita distribution complete shall be disbursed to the Community and deposited into the Community's general fund.''.
General provisions amendments.--The word ``minors'' shall be deleted from the third sentence of the first paragraph and the following paragraph shall be inserted between the first and second paragraph: ``The provisions contained in section 3(b)(3) of the Indian Tribal Judgment Funds Use and Distribution Act (25 United States Code 1403(b)(3)) shall not apply to the remaining minors' per capita shares held by the Secretary under this plan, as of the date of the enactment of the Gila River Indian Community Judgment Fund Distribution Act of 2002.
The Secretary shall hold the minors' per capita shares in trust until the minor is 18 years of age.
None of the judgment funds or the interest earned on those funds shall be disbursed from the minors' account until the minor is 18 years of age.''.
TITLE III--EXPERT ASSISTANCE LOANS SEC.
WAIVER OF REPAYMENT OF EXPERT ASSISTANCE LOANS TO COMMUNITY; OGLALA SIOUX TRIBE; PUEBLO OF SANTO DOMINGO; AND SEMINOLE NATION OF OKLAHOMA.
Gila River Indian Community.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the balance of all outstanding expert assistance loans made to the Gila River Indian Community under the authority of Public Law 88-168 (77 United States Statutes at Large 301), and relating to Gila River Indian Community v. United States (United States Court of Federal Claims Docket Nos.
228, 236, and its associated subdockets), are canceled and the Secretary of the Interior shall take such action as may be necessary to document such cancellation and to release the Gila River Indian Community from any liability associated with such loans.
Oglala Sioux Tribe.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the balances of all outstanding expert assistance loans made to the Oglala Sioux Tribe under the authority of Public Law 88-168 (77 United States Statutes at Large 301) and relating to Oglala Sioux Tribe v. United States (United States Court of Federal Claims Docket No.
117 and its associated subdockets) are canceled and the Secretary of the Interior shall take such action as may be necessary to document the cancellation and to release the Oglala Sioux Tribe from any liability associated with those loans.
Seminole Nation of Oklahoma.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the balances of all outstanding expert assistance loans made to the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma under the authority of Public Law 88-168 (77 United States Statutes at Large 301), and relating to Seminole Nation v. United States (United States Court of Federal Claims Docket No.
247), are canceled and the Secretary of the Interior shall take such action as may be necessary to document the cancellation and to release the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma from any liability associated with those loans.