This Act may be cited as the ``Patent Term Amendment Act of 1994''.
Section 154 of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
154 Contents and term of patent ``(a) Every patent shall contain a short title of the invention and a grant to the patentee, his heirs or assigns, of the right to exclude others from making, using, or selling the invention throughout the United States and, if the invention is a process, of the right to exclude others from using or selling throughout the United States, or importing into the United States, products made by that process, referring to the specification for the particulars thereof.
Subject to the payment of fees as provided for in this title, such grant shall be for a term beginning on the date on which the patent issues and ending twenty years from the date on which the application for the patent was filed in the United States or, if the application contains a specific reference to an earlier filed application or applications under sections 120, 121 or 365(c) of this title, from the date on which the earliest such application was filed.
Priority under sections 119, 365(a) or 365(b) of this title shall not be taken into account in determining the term of a patent.
A copy of the specification and drawings shall be annexed to the patent and be a part thereof.
Where the issuance of an original patent is delayed because of a proceeding under section 135(a) of this title or the application is placed under an order pursuant to section 181 of this title, the term of the patent shall be extended for the period of delay up to five years.
Any and all extensions available under this subsection shall not extend the term of an original patent for more than five years.''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A DOMESTIC PRIORITY SYSTEM.
Section 119 of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
119 Benefit of earlier filing date; right of priority ``(a) An application for patent for an invention filed in this country by any person who has, or whose legal representatives or assigns have, previously filed an application for a patent for the same invention in a foreign country which affords similar privileges in the case of applications filed in the United States shall have the same effect as the same application would have if filed in this country on the date on which the application for patent for the same invention was first filed in such foreign country, if the application in this country is filed within twelve months from the earliest date on which such foreign application was filed; but no patent shall be granted on any application for patent for an invention which had been patented or described in a printed publication in any country more than one year before the date of the actual filing of the application in this country, or which had been in public use or on sale in this country more than one year prior to such filing.
No application for patent shall be entitled to a right of priority under subsection (a) unless a claim therefor and a certified copy of the original foreign application, specification and drawings upon which it is based are filed in the Patent and Trademark Office before the patent is granted, or at such time during the pendency of the application as required by the Commissioner not earlier than six months after the filing of the application in this country.
Such certification shall be made by the patent office of the foreign country in which filed and show the date of the application and of the filing of the specification and other papers.
The Commissioner may require a translation of the papers filed if not in the English language and such other information as he deems necessary.
In like manner and subject to the same conditions and requirements, the right provided under subsection (a) may be based upon a subsequent regularly filed application in the same foreign country instead of the first filed foreign application, provided that any foreign application has been withdrawn, abandoned, or otherwise disposed of, without having been laid open to public inspection and without leaving any rights outstanding, and has not served, nor thereafter shall serve, as a basis for claiming a right of priority.
Applications for inventor's certificates filed in a foreign country in which applicants have a right to apply, at their discretion, either for a patent or for an inventor's certificate shall be treated in this country in the same manner and have the same effect for purpose of the right of priority under subsection (a) as applications for patents, subject to the same conditions and requirements of this section as apply to applications for patents, provided such applicants are entitled to the benefits of the Stockholm Revision of the Paris Convention at the time of such filing.
An application for patent filed under sections 111(a) or 363 of this title for an invention disclosed in the manner provided by the first paragraph of section 112 of this title in a provisional application filed under section 111(b) of this title, by an inventor or inventors named in the provisional application shall have the same effect, as to such invention, as though filed on the date of the provisional application filed under section 111(b) of this title, if the application for patent filed under sections 111(a) or 363 of this title is filed within twelve months from the date on which the provisional application was filed and if it contains or is amended to contain a specific reference to the provisional application.
A provisional application filed under section 111(b) of this title may not be relied upon in any proceeding in the Patent and Trademark Office unless the fee set forth in subsections 41(a)(1) (A) or (C) has been paid and the provisional application was pending on the filing date of the application for patent under sections 111(a) or 363 of this title.''.
Section 41(a)(1) of title 35, United States Code, is amended to include a new subparagraph c, as follows: ``c. On filing each provisional application for an original patent, $150.00.''.
Section 111 of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
111 Application ``(a) Application for patent shall be made, or authorized to be made, by the inventor, except as otherwise provided in this title, in writing to the Commissioner.
Such application shall include (1) a specification as prescribed by section 112 of this title; (2) a drawing as prescribed by section 113 of this title; and (3) an oath by the applicant as prescribed by section 115 of this title.
The application must be accompanied by the fee required by law.
The fee and oath may be submitted after the specification and any required drawing are submitted, within such period and under such conditions, including the payment of a surcharge, as may be prescribed by the Commissioner.
Upon failure to submit the fee and oath within such prescribed period, the application shall be regarded as abandoned, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the delay in submitting the fee and oath was unavoidable or unintentional.
The filing date of an application shall be the date on which the specification and any required drawing are received in the Patent and Trademark Office.
(1) A provisional application for patent shall be made, or authorized to be made, by the inventor, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Commissioner.
Such application shall include (A) a specification as prescribed by the first paragraph of section 112 of this title; and (B) a drawing as prescribed by section 113 of this title.
A claim shall not be required in a provisional application.
The application must be accompanied by the fee required by law.
The fee may be submitted after the specification and any required drawing are submitted, within such period and under such conditions, including the payment of a surcharge, as may be prescribed by the Commissioner.
Upon failure to submit the fee within such prescribed period, the application shall be regarded as abandoned, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the delay in submitting the fee was unavoidable or unintentional.
The filing date of a provisional application shall be the date on which the specification and any required drawing are received in the Patent and Trademark Office.
The provisional application shall be regarded as abandoned twelve months after its filing date and shall not be subject to revival thereafter.
Subject to all the conditions in this subsection, subsections 111(b)(2) and 119(e) and as prescribed by the Commissioner, an application for patent filed under section 111(a) of this title may be treated as a provisional application for patent.
A provisional application shall not be entitled to the right of priority of any other application under sections 119 or 365(a) of this title or the benefit of an earlier filing date in the United States under sections 120, 121 or 365(c) of this title.
The provisions of this title relating to applications for patent shall be applicable to provisional applications for patent, except as otherwise provided and except that provisional applications for patent shall not be subject to sections 115, 131, 135 and 157 of this title.''.
The table of sections for chapter 11 of title 35, United States Code, is amended in the item relating to section 111 by deleting ``for patent'' and in the item relating to section 119 by deleting ``in foreign country.''
Section 156 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding ``under subsection (e)(1) of this section'' after ``extended'' in subsection (a)(2).
Section 172 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by changing ``section 119'' to ``subsections 119(a) through 119(d)''.
Further, ``The right of priority provided for by subsection 119(e) of this title shall not apply to designs.''
has been added as a second sentence.
Section 173 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding ``from the date of grant'' after ``years.''
Subsection 365(a) of title 35, United States Code, is amended by changing ``section 119'' to ``subsections 119(a) through 119(d)'' and subsection 365(b) of title 35, United States Code, is amended by changing ``the first paragraph of section 119'' to ``subsection 119(a).''
Subsection 373 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by changing ``section 119'' to ``subsections 119(a) through 119(d)''.
Sections 2 through 4 shall take effect six months from the date of enactment and shall apply to all applications filed in the United States on or after the effective date.
The term of a patent granted on a plant or utility application that is filed after the effective date and that contains a specific reference to an earlier filed application under the provisions of sections 120, 121 or 365(c) of title 35 shall be measured from the filing date of the earliest filed application, a reference to which is made under sections 120, 121 or 365(c) of this title.