This Act may be cited as the ``Air Service Improvement Act of 1997''.
TITLE I--SERVICE TO AIRPORTS NOT RECEIVING SUFFICIENT SERVICE SEC.
Period of Effectiveness.-- (1) Slots for foreign air transportation.--Section 41714(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking paragraph (4).
Slots for new entrants.--Section 41714(c) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking paragraph (2); and (B) in paragraph (1), by striking the subsection heading and all that follows through ``If the Secretary'' and inserting the following: ``(c) Slots for New Entrants.--If the Secretary''.
Slots for Airports Not Receiving Sufficient Service.--Section 41714 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking subsections (e) and (f) and inserting the following: ``(e) Slots for Airports Not Receiving Sufficient Service.-- ``(1) Exemptions.--The Secretary may, by order, grant exemptions from the requirements under subparts K and S of part 93 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations (pertaining to slots at high density airports) (or any subsequent similar regulations), to enable air carriers to provide nonstop air transportation using aircraft that comply with the stage 3 noise levels contained in part 36 of such title 14 between a high density airport and a small hub airport or nonhub airport that the Secretary determines is not receiving sufficient air carrier service to and from that high density airport.
Limitations.-- ``(A) In general.--No more than 2 exemptions per hour may be granted under this subsection for slots at any high density airport.
Washington national airport.--Not more than 6 exemptions per day may be granted under this subsection for slots at Washington National Airport.
Application.--An air carrier interested in an exemption under this subsection shall submit to the Secretary an application for that exemption.
No application may be submitted to the Secretary before the last day of the 30-day period beginning on the date of enactment of the Air Service Improvement Act of 1997.
Deadline for decision.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall make a decision with regard to granting an exemption under this subsection not later than the 120th day following the date on which the application for the exemption is submitted under paragraph (3).
Effects of failure of secretary to make a decision.--If the Secretary does not make a decision on or before the date specified in subparagraph (A), the air carrier requesting the service may provide the service that is subject to the exemption until such time as-- ``(i) the Secretary makes a decision to deny that request; or ``(ii) the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration decides that providing that service would have an adverse effect on air safety.
Period of effectiveness.--An exemption granted under this subsection may remain in effect while the air carrier with respect to which the exemption is granted continues to provide nonstop air transportation between the airport that the Secretary determined was not receiving sufficient air carrier service and the high density airport involved.
Definitions.--In this subsection, the following definitions apply: ``(A) Nonhub airport.--The term `nonhub airport' means an airport that each year has less than 0.05 percent of the total annual boardings in the United States.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Small hub airport.--The term `small hub airport' means an airport that for an annual period, has, with respect to the total annual boardings of the United States-- ``(i) at least 0.05 percent of those boardings; and ``(ii) less than 0.25 percent of those boardings.
''; and (2) by redesignating subsections (g) and (h) as subsections (e) and (f), respectively.
FUNDING FOR AIR CARRIER SERVICE TO AIRPORTS NOT RECEIVING SUFFICIENT SERVICE.
Section 41742(b) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Funding for Small Community Air Service.-- ``(1) Source of funding.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, amounts credited to the account established under section 45303(a) of this title, including the funds derived from fees imposed under the authority contained in section 45301(a) of this title, shall be used to carry out the essential air service program under this subchapter.
Funding for air carrier service to airports not receiving sufficient service and rural air safety.--Any amounts from fees imposed under section 45301(a) that the Secretary determines will not be obligated or expended by the last day of a fiscal year for the purpose of funding the essential air service program under this subchapter shall be made available in that fiscal year to the Administration as follows: ``(A) Not more than $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, and for each fiscal year thereafter, shall be used-- ``(i) for assisting an air carrier in purchasing aircraft to provide air transportation to an airport that serves an underserved market; ``(ii) to purchase slots to provide air service between a high density airport and an airport that the Secretary determines is not receiving sufficient air carrier service to and from such high density airport; ``(iii) to subsidize service to and from an underserved airport for a period not to exceed 3 years; and ``(iv) for assisting an underserved airport to market service to and from the underserved airport.
Any remaining amounts of the amounts determined by the Secretary under this paragraph shall be available for use under this subchapter in improving rural air safety at airports with less than 100,000 annual boardings.
Underserved airport.--In this subsection, the term `underserved airport' means an airport that the Secretary determines is not receiving sufficient air carrier service.''.
Section 41712 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before ``On''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Deadline for Decision on Unfair Competition Complaints.--The Secretary shall make a decision with respect to any complaint that the Secretary receives under this section regarding whether an air carrier has been, or is, engaged in an unfair method of competition in air transportation or the sale of air transportation not later than 180 days after the date of receipt of the complaint.''.
TITLE II--REGIONAL AIR SERVICE INCENTIVE PROGRAM SEC.
AMENDMENT OF TITLE 49, UNITED STATES CODE.
In General.--Chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER III--REGIONAL AIR SERVICE INCENTIVE PROGRAM ``Sec.
Purpose ``The purpose of this subchapter is to improve service by jet aircraft to underserved markets by providing assistance, in the form of loan guarantees, to commuter air carriers that purchase regional jet aircraft for use in serving those markets.
Definitions ``In this subchapter: ``(1) Aircraft purchase loan.--The term `aircraft purchase loan' means any loan made for the purchase of commercial transport aircraft, including spare parts normally associated with the aircraft.
Air carrier.--The term `air carrier' means any air carrier holding a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Secretary of Transportation under section 41102.
Commuter air carrier.--The term `commuter air carrier' means an air carrier that primarily operates aircraft designed to have a maximum passenger seating capacity of 75 passengers or less in accordance with published flight schedules.
Nonhub airport.--The term `nonhub airport' means an airport that for an annual period has less than 0.05 percent of the total annual boardings in the United States.
Regional jet aircraft.--The term `regional jet aircraft' means a civil aircraft-- ``(A) powered by jet propulsion; and ``(B) designed to have a maximum passenger seating capacity of-- ``(i) not less than 30 passengers; and ``(ii) not more than 75 passengers.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Small hub airport.--The term `small hub airport' means an airport that for an annual period has with respect to the total annual boardings of the United States-- ``(A) at least 0.05 percent of these boardings; and ``(B) less than 0.25 percent of these boardings.
Underserved market.--The term `underserved market' means a passenger air transportation market (as defined by the Secretary) that-- ``(A) is served (as determined by the Secretary) by a nonhub airport or a small hub airport; ``(B) is not within a 40-mile radius of an airport that each year has at least .25 percent of the total annual boardings in the United States; and ``(C) the Secretary determines does not have sufficient air service.
Loan guarantees ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may guarantee any lender against loss of principal or interest on any aircraft purchase loan made by that lender to a commuter air carrier.
Form, Terms, and Conditions.--A guarantee shall be made under subsection (a)-- ``(1) in such form and on such terms and conditions; and ``(2) pursuant to such regulations, as the Secretary considers to be necessary and consistent with this subchapter.
Conditions and limitations ``(a) Limitations on Funds.--Subject to subsection (d), no loan guarantee shall be made under this subchapter-- ``(1) extending to an amount greater than the unpaid interest and 90 percent of the unpaid principal of any loan; ``(2) on any loan or combination of loans for an aggregate amount greater than 90 percent of the purchase price of the aircraft, including spare parts, to be purchased with the loan or loan combination; ``(3) on any loan with respect to which terms permit repayment later than 15 years after the date the loan is made; and ``(4) in any case in which the total face amount of the loan and any other loans to the same commuter air carrier or corporate predecessor of that commuter air carrier that are guaranteed and outstanding under the terms of this subchapter exceed $100,000,000.
Conditions for Making Loans.--Subject to subsection (c), the Secretary of Transportation may only make a loan guarantee under this subchapter if the Secretary determines that-- ``(1) the aircraft to be purchased with the loan is a regional jet aircraft that is needed to improve the service and efficiency of operation of the commuter air carrier; ``(2) the commuter air carrier agrees to use the aircraft to provide service to underserved markets; and ``(3) the prospective earning power of the commuter air carrier, together with the character and value of the security pledged, furnish-- ``(A) reasonable assurances of the ability and intention of the air carrier to repay the loan during the term of the loan-- ``(i) to continue the operations of the air carrier as a commuter air carrier; and ``(ii) to the extent that the Secretary determines to be necessary, to continue the operations of the air carrier as a commuter air carrier between the same route or routes that are operated by the air carrier at the time of the loan guarantee; and ``(B) reasonable protection to the United States.
Requirement.--Subject to subsection (d), no loan guarantee may be made under this subchapter on any loan or combination of loans for the purchase of any regional jet aircraft that does not comply with the stage 3 noise levels contained in part 36 of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on January 1, 1997.
Other Limitations.--No loan guarantee shall be made by the Secretary under this subchapter on any loan for the purchase of a regional jet aircraft unless the commuter air carrier agrees that the air carrier will provide service to the underserved market for which the aircraft is purchased for a period of not less than 12 consecutive months after the aircraft is placed in service.
Fees ``The Secretary of Transportation shall prescribe and collect from a lending institution a reasonable guarantee fee in connection with each loan guaranteed under this subchapter.
Use of Federal facilities and assistance ``(a) Use of Federal Facilities.--To permit the Secretary of Transportation to make use of such expert advice and services as the Secretary may require in carrying out this subchapter, the Secretary may use available services and facilities of other agencies and instrumentalities of the Federal Government-- ``(1) with the consent of the appropriate Federal officials; and ``(2) on a reimbursable basis.
Assistance.--The head of each appropriate department or agency of the Federal Government shall exercise the duties and functions of that head in such manner as to assist in carrying out the policy specified in section 41761.
Oversight.--The Secretary shall make available to the Comptroller General of the United States such information with respect to the loan guarantee program conducted under this subchapter as the Comptroller General may require to carry out the duties of the Comptroller General under chapter 7 of title 31.
Receipts; payments ``(a) Miscellaneous.--Amounts received by the Secretary under this subchapter shall be credited to miscellaneous receipts of the Treasury.
Payments.--Payments to lenders required as a consequence of any loan guarantee made under this subchapter may be made from funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization under section 202 of the Air Service Improvement Act of 1997.
Administrative Expenses.--In carrying out this subchapter, the Secretary shall use funds made available by appropriations to the Department of Transportation for the purpose of administration to cover administrative expenses of the loan guarantee program under this subchapter.
Termination ``The authority of the Secretary under section 41763 shall terminate on the date that is 5 years after the date of the enactment of this subchapter.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER III--REGIONAL AIR SERVICE INCENTIVE PROGRAM ``Sec.
Use of Federal facilities and assistance.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out subchapter III of chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code.