This Act may be cited as the ``Widows and Orphans Act of 2003''.
NEW SPECIAL IMMIGRANT CATEGORY.
Certain Children and Women at Risk of Harm.--Section 101(a)(27) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(27)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (L), by inserting a semicolon at the end; (2) in subparagraph (M), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(N) subject to subsection (j), an immigrant who is not present in the United States-- ``(i) who is-- ``(I) referred to a consular, immigration, or other designated official by a United States Government agency, an international organization, or recognized nongovernmental entity designated by the Secretary of State for purposes of such referrals; and ``(II) determined by such official to be a minor under 10 years of age (as determined under subsection (j)(5))-- ``(aa) for whom no parent or legal guardian is able to provide adequate care; ``(bb) who faces a credible fear of harm related to his or her age; ``(cc) who lacks adequate protection from such harm; and ``(dd) for whom it has been determined to be in his or her best interests to be admitted to the United States; or ``(ii) who is-- ``(I) referred to a consular or immigration official by a United States Government agency, an international organization or recognized nongovernmental entity designated by the Secretary of State for purposes of such referrals; and ``(II) determined by such official to be a female who has-- ``(aa) a credible fear of harm related to her sex; and ``(bb) a lack of adequate protection from such harm.''.
Statutory Construction.--Section 101 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j)(1) No natural parent or prior adoptive parent of any alien provided special immigrant status under subsection (a)(27)(N)(i) shall thereafter, by virtue of such parentage, be accorded any right, privilege, or status under this Act.
(A) No alien who qualifies for a special immigrant visa under subsection (a)(27)(N)(ii) may apply for derivative status or petition for any spouse who is represented by the alien as missing, deceased, or the source of harm at the time of the alien's application and admission.
The Secretary of Homeland Security may waive this requirement for an alien who demonstrates that the alien's representations regarding the spouse were bona fide.
An alien who qualifies for a special immigrant visa under subsection (a)(27)(N) may apply for derivative status or petition for any sibling under the age of 10 years or children under the age of 10 years of any such alien, if accompanying or following to join the alien.
For purposes of this subparagraph, a determination of age shall be made using the age of the alien on the date the petition is filed with the Department of Homeland Security.
An alien who qualifies for a special immigrant visa under subsection (a)(27)(N) shall be treated in the same manner as a refugee solely for purposes of section 412.
The provisions of paragraphs (4), (5), and (7)(A) of section 212(a) shall not be applicable to any alien seeking admission to the United States under subsection (a)(27)(N), and the Secretary of Homeland Security may waive any other provision of such section (other than paragraph 2(C) or subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (E) of paragraph (3) with respect to such an alien for humanitarian purposes, to assure family unity, or when it is otherwise in the public interest.
Any such waiver by the Secretary of Homeland Security shall be in writing and shall be granted only on an individual basis following an investigation.
The Secretary of Homeland Security shall provide for the annual reporting to Congress of the number of waivers granted under this paragraph in the previous fiscal year and a summary of the reasons for granting such waivers.
For purposes of subsection (a)(27)(N)(i)(II), a determination of age shall be made using the age of the alien on the date on which the alien was referred to the consular, immigration, or other designated official.
The Secretary of Homeland Security shall waive any application fee for a special immigrant visa for an alien described in section 101(a)(27)(N).''.
Allocation of Special Immigrant Visas.--Section 203(b)(4) of the Immigration Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1153(b)(4)) is amended by striking ``(A) or (B) thereof'' and inserting ``(A), (B), or (N) thereof''.
Expedited Process.--Not later than 45 days from the date of referral to a consular, immigration, or other designated official as described in section 101(a)(27)(N) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by subsection (a), special immigrant status shall be adjudicated and, if granted, the alien shall be paroled to the United States pursuant to section 212(d)(5) of that Act (8 United States Code 1182(d)(5)) and allowed to apply for adjustment of status to permanent residence under section 245 of that Act (8 United States Code 1255) within 1 year of the alien's arrival in the United States.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall report to the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and the House of Representatives on the progress of the program, including-- (1) data related to the implementation of this section; (2) data regarding the number of placements of females and children at risk of harm as referred to in section 101(a)(27)(N) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by subsection (a); and (3) any other appropriate information that the Secretary of Homeland Security determines to be appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section and the amendments made by this section.