This Act may be cited as the ``National Park Enhancement and Revitalization Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The National Park Service has insufficient funds for the operations, maintenance, and rehabilitation of certain units of the National Park System.
Federal full fee land ownership is not always required to preserve the aesthetic, natural, cultural, and historical values of National Park System lands, and at times may even prevent desirable preservation.
The sale or lease or any extension thereof of lands or interests therein within units of the National Park System could generate needed funds while preserving the values for which the units were established.
PERMITTING PRIVATE OWNERSHIP OR USE OF NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM LANDS.
The Act of August 25, 1916 (popularly known as the National Park Service Organic Act; 16 United States Code 1241 et sequentes), is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Disposal of Property and Interests.--(1) The Secretary of the Interior, after determining it to be in the public interest and after publication of notice in the Federal Register and 30 days for public comment-- ``(A) may dispose of lands, or interests therein (but not the mineral estate), within the National Battlefields, National Historical Parks, and other National Park System units which preserve American history; and ``(B) may accept as consideration for the disposal other lands, interests in lands, cash payment, or any combination thereof which is equal in value to the lands or interests being disposed of.
To protect the aesthetic, recreational, cultural, or historic values of the unit of the National Park System, the Secretary shall include in such disposals any terms, covenants, conditions, or reservations deemed necessary to ensure preservation of the public interest and uses consistent with the purposes for which the area was designated and to attempt to stimulate the land use patterns existing at the relevant historic period.
In disposing of lands or interests under this subsection, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, provide the person or persons, or their heirs, as determined from the deed and land records, from whom the land or interest was acquired by the United States an opportunity to reacquire the land or interest.
The Secretary shall publish a notice in an appropriate regional or local newspaper in an attempt to locate such persons.
Each disposal in excess of $150,000 shall be reported to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate at least 30 days prior to consummation of the disposal.
The person or persons acquiring lands or interests therein under this subsection shall bear all reasonable costs of survey and appraisal incidental to such conveyance, as determined by the Secretary.
Lease.--(1) The Secretary of the Interior, after determining it to be in the public interest and after publication of notice in the Federal Register and 30 days for public comment, may lease lands or extend existing leases within the National Battlefields, National Historical Parks, and other National Park System units which preserve American history for private uses that promote, and are consistent with, the purposes for which the area was designated and that attempt to stimulate the land use patterns existing at the relevant historic period.
To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall provide the person or persons, or their heirs, as determined from the deed and land records, from whom the land or interest was acquired by the United States an opportunity to lease the land for acceptable uses.
The Secretary shall publish a notice in an appropriate regional or local newspaper in an attempt to locate such persons.
Such leases may be negotiated noncompetitively.
If the original owner or heirs cannot be identified or are not interested, leases shall be offered competitively.
In either case, leases must specify acceptable uses and terms and must at least recover the costs of establishing and administering the lease.
Use of Revenues.--Amounts received by the United States as proceeds from the sale or lease of lands or interests therein under this section, in excess of administrative costs, shall be deposited in a special fund in the Treasury and shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior, without further appropriation, for operation, maintenance, or improvement of, or for acquisition of lands or interests therein for, the unit which generated the proceeds.
Acquiring Less Than Fee Title.--The Secretary of the Interior, after determining it to be in the public interest and in compliance with other acquisition requirements, may acquire easements or other interests in lands for inclusion in the National Park System, if-- ``(1) the easement or interest provides public benefits greater than the cost of the easement or interest, and ``(2) the cost of the easement or interest is less than a fee simple purchase of the land, including the costs for periodic monitoring and enforcement to ensure compliance with such agreements.''.
The Government Accounting Office (GAO) of the United States shall undertake a study of easements and other less-than-fee title acquisitions of interests in lands for the National Park System to assess their effectiveness, including total costs and compliance with agreements, and their efficiency for producing public benefits.