This Act may be cited as the ``Tribal-State Tax Fairness Act of 2001''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Covered state tax.--The term ``covered State tax'' means a lawfully imposed and nondiscriminatory State or local excise, sales, or transaction tax that is collected by the State, levied or imposed on purchases, by nonmembers of a tribe, of tobacco products or motor fuels from a tribal retail enterprise.
Indian country.--The term ``Indian country'' means any land where an Indian tribe may legally assert sovereignty over a tribal retail enterprise.
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(e) of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
Person.--The term ``person'' includes individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations of persons, State or local governments, non-Indian retailers affiliated with one or more Indian tribes, Indian tribes, or Indian tribal governments.
Petition for enforcement.--The term ``petition for enforcement'' means a petition submitted to the Secretary by a Governor of a State which requires action by the Secretary under section 4(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior or a designee of the Secretary.
Service.--The term ``Service'' means the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service established under section 202 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 172).
Tribal retail enterprise.--The term ``tribal retail enterprise'' means a person that has conducted business in Indian country and at the time that such business was conducted, was owned or operated (in whole or in part) by one or more of the following: (A) An Indian tribe.
A member of an Indian tribe.
A person who is not a member of an Indian tribe under a management contract with an Indian tribe or a member of an Indian tribe.
Tribal-state agreement.--The term ``tribal-State agreement'' means an agreement or compact between a State and an Indian tribe concerning State taxes on tobacco products, motor fuels, or both, that is in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, or was in effect at any time between January 1, 1990, and the date of enactment of this Act.
If there is more than 1 such agreement or compact, the term ``tribal-State agreement'' means the agreement or compact that was most recently in effect.
In General.--Except to the extent that a tribal-State agreement provides otherwise, this Act shall not apply to-- (1) that part of any covered State tax for which a State law specifically exempts, either in whole or in part, the collection or remittance of such taxes; or (2) any covered State tax for which, under State or local law which requires the collection or remittance tax, the legal incidence of the otherwise applicable State tax falls on a tribe or its members, thereby subjecting the purchase by a tribal member from a tribal retail enterprise to a State excise, sales, or transaction tax.
Prospective Applicability.--This Act shall apply only to covered State taxes due, or amounts due under tribal-State agreements, with respect to purchases completed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
COLLECTION OF COVERED STATE TAXES PURSUANT TO AN ENFORCEMENT PETITION.
Enforcement Petition by the Governor; Determination of Validity by the Secretary.--Not later than 60 days after receiving a petition from the Governor of a State within the exterior borders of which a tribal retail enterprise is located alleging the non-collection, non- remittance, or both, of a covered State tax by the tribal retail enterprise and requesting action under this Act by the Secretary, the Secretary shall determine, through an investigation, audit or other method, whether or not the tribal retail enterprise is collecting and remitting the appropriate amount of covered State tax.
Notice Upon Finding of Validity of Enforcement Petition; Remittance.-- (1) Notice.--Not later than 60 days after a determination of the validity of the allegations in an Enforcement Petition, the Secretary shall notify the tribal retail enterprise that is the subject of the Enforcement Petition of this determination and direct the tribal retail enterprise to collect the covered State tax and remit it to the Secretary pursuant to subsection (c).
Remittance.--A tribal retail enterprise shall begin remitting funds to the Secretary on the schedule established in subsection (c) not later than 60 days after the later of the following: (A) The date that the Secretary notifies the tribal retail enterprise under paragraph (1).
The date that a determination is made as a result of a mediation under subsection (c)(2)(D).
Timing and Amount of Remittance to Secretary.-- (1) In general.--A tribal retail enterprise shall remit to the Secretary covered State taxes collected pursuant to subsection (b) on a monthly basis, by the 15th day following the month in which the taxes were collected.
Determination of amount to be remitted to secretary.-- (A) Existence of tribal-state agreement.--In the event a tribal-State agreement exists or existed with respect to the tribal retail enterprise or Indian tribe named in a Enforcement Petition, then the amount of covered State taxes collected and remitted to the Secretary pursuant to such a Enforcement Petition shall in no event be more than the amount provided for by the terms of such tribal-State agreement, even if such tribal-State agreement is no longer in effect at the time that the Enforcement Petition was submitted because the agreement has expired or one of the parties to the agreement has terminated the agreement.
Absence of tribal-state agreement.--In the event a tribal-State agreement with respect to the tribal retail enterprise or Indian tribe named in a Enforcement Petition did not or does not exist, then the Secretary shall consult with the Governor of the State that submitted the Enforcement Petition to determine the appropriate amount of covered State taxes that should be remitted to the Secretary under this subsection based upon relevant State law.
Calculation of amounts to be remitted.--The Secretary shall collect from the tribal retail enterprise or Indian tribe named in an Enforcement Petition all covered State taxes that the Secretary determines should have been remitted to the appropriate State since the date of enactment of this Act, unless the Enforcement Petition specifies a alternative date after the enactment of this Act.
Mediation.-- (i) In general.--If the parties cannot agree on the amount required to be remitted under this subsection, the Secretary shall contact the Service and request the establishment of a mediation between the tribal retail enterprise or the Indian tribe and the Governor of the State for the purposes of determining such amount.
Deadline for completion.--Not later than 180 days after the initial contact by the Secretary regarding the mediation, the Service shall complete such mediation and render its determination on the appropriate amount to be remitted to the Secretary.
Use of determination.--The determination of the Service shall be used by the Secretary in establishing the appropriate amount to be remitted.
Refusal to cooperate with mediation.-- If a tribal retail enterprise, Indian tribe, or Governor of a State (or the designee of the Governor) fails to participate in the mediation under this subparagraph or fails to cooperate with the Service regarding the mediation, the Service may make its determination based upon information available to the Service.
Termination of Remittances to Secretary.--Remittances of covered State taxes to the Secretary required under this subsection shall continue until one of the following occurs: (1) The Governor of the State submitting the Enforcement Petition certifies in writing to the Secretary that the Secretary's involvement is no longer required.
The Governor of the State submitting the Enforcement Petition and the appropriate Indian tribe enter into a binding tribal-State agreement covering the collection and remittance of covered State taxes.
Return of Funds to Appropriate State.--Not later than 30 days after receiving a covered State tax payment from a tribal retail enterprise or Indian tribe under subsection (c), the Secretary shall remit the balance of taxes collected under subsection (c) (after subtracting administrative expenses subject to subsection (f)) to the State fund specified to the Secretary by the Governor.
Administrative Expenses.--Prior to remitting funds to the appropriate State fund under subsection (e), the Secretary shall deduct from the amount remitted from the tribal retail enterprise pursuant to subsection (c) an administrative fee that is equal to the lesser of the following: (1) The direct cost of administering this Act.
One percent of the amounts remitted pursuant to subsection (c).
Satisfaction of Obligations.--Amounts remitted to the Secretary under subsection (c) or paid pursuant to a judgment under section 6 shall be applied by the State to amounts due under the terms of the tribal-State agreement or the covered State tax obligation of the relevant tribal retail enterprise.
MEDIATION OF DISPUTES BETWEEN TRIBES AND STATES UNDER TRIBAL- STATE AGREEMENTS.
In General.--Not later than 60 days after receiving a request from the Governor of a State or an Indian tribe for the Secretary to mediate a dispute between a the Governor of the State and an Indian tribe regarding compliance with the terms of a tribal-State agreement in effect on the date of an Enforcement Petition, the Secretary shall initiate a mediation, or direct the Service to initiate a mediation, for the Governor of the State and the Indian tribe to resolve the dispute.
Completion of Mediation.--Not later than 210 days after a request for mediation is received by the Secretary under subsection (a), the Secretary shall ensure that the mediation is concluded and notify the parties to the mediation of the resulting determination by the Secretary or the Service and urge the adoption of the determination by such parties.
Notice of Violation--If a tribal retail enterprise fails to comply with section 4(b)(2), the Secretary shall notify the tribal retail enterprise of this violation and demand immediate compliance.
Referral of Violation to Department of Justice.--If a tribal retail enterprise is not in compliance with section 4(b)(2) within 30 days of the notification under subsection (a), the Secretary shall refer the matter within 15 days to the Department of Justice.
Commencement of Civil Enforcement Action.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after a referral under subsection (b), the Department of Justice shall initiate a civil enforcement action in Federal district court against the tribal retail enterprise that is the subject of the referral.
Tribal-owned retail enterprise.--If the tribal retail enterprise named in such a civil enforcement action is owned or operated by an Indian tribe, then the civil action shall include requests for injunctive relief against the tribal retail enterprise and for the payment to the Secretary of all covered State taxes, as determined under section 4 (and interest as permitted by the State law of State regarding which the Enforcement Petition was submitted) owed by the tribal retail enterprise from the date of the enactment of this Act.
Tribal member-owned retail enterprise.--If the tribal retail enterprise named in such a civil enforcement action is owned or operated by a member of an Indian tribe, then the civil action shall include requests for injunctive relief and civil penalties in the amount of 3 times the covered State taxes, as determined under section 4, (and interest as permitted by the State law of the State regarding which the Enforcement Petition was submitted) owed by the tribal retail enterprise from the date of enactment of this Act.
Posting of Bond During Appeal.--If the tribal retail enterprise appeals the decision of the Federal district court in an action pursuant to subsection (c), then the tribal retail enterprise shall post a bond for the amount of the covered State taxes and interest that was the subject of the action until a final determination has been made in the action.
The Governor of a State that has filed an enforcement petition, or a tribal retail enterprise that has been named in such an enforcement petition, may challenge the Secretary's conclusions under Section 4 by commencing an action in Federal district court.
If the challenge is not sustained by the court, the challenging State or tribal retail enterprise shall be liable to the Secretary for attorney's fees and court costs.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations providing for the implementation and enforcement of this Act.
This Act shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, regardless of whether regulations have been issued under section 7.