TITLE I--POTASH ROYALTY REDUCTION SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Potash Royalty Reduction Act of 2005''.
POTASSIUM AND POTASSIUM COMPOUNDS FROM SYLVITE.
Royalty Rate.--Notwithstanding section 102(a)(9) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701(a)(9)), section 2 of the Act of February 7, 1927 (30 United States Code 282) and the term of any lease issued under such section 2, the royalty rate on the quantity or gross value of the output from Federal lands of potassium and potassium compounds from the mineral sylvite at the point of shipment to market in the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be 1.0 percent.
Reclamation Fund.--Fifty percentum of any royalties paid pursuant to this title during the 5-year period referred to in subsection (a), together with any interest earned from the date of payment, shall be paid by the Secretary of the Treasury to the payor of the royalties to be used solely for land reclamation purposes in accordance with a schedule to implement a reclamation plan for the lands for which the royalties are paid.
No payment shall be made by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to this subsection until the Secretary of the Interior receives from the payor of the royalties, and approves, the reclamation plan and schedule, and submits the approved schedule to the Secretary of the Treasury.
The share of royalties held by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to this subsection, and interest earned thereon, shall be available until paid pursuant to this subsection, without further appropriation; shall not be considered as money received under section 35 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 191) for the purpose of revenue allocation; and shall not be reduced by any administrative or other costs incurred by the United States.
Study and Report.--After the end of the 4-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, and before the end of the 5- year period beginning on that date, the Secretary of the Interior shall report to the Congress on the effects of the royalty reduction under this title, including a recommendation on whether the reduced royalty rate for potassium from sylvite should apply after the end of the 5- year period.
TITLE II--SODA ASH ROYALTY REDUCTION SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Soda Ash Royalty Reduction Act of 2005''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The combination of global competitive pressures, flat domestic demand, and spiraling costs of production threaten the future of the United States soda ash industry.
Despite booming world demand, growth in United States exports of soda ash since 1997 has been flat, with most of the world's largest markets for such growth, including Brazil, the People's Republic of China, India, the countries of eastern Europe, and the Republic of South Africa, have been closed by protectionist policies.
The People's Republic of China is the prime competitor of the United States in soda ash production, and recently supplanted the United States as the largest producer of soda ash in the world.
Over 700 jobs have been lost in the United States soda ash industry since the Department of the Interior increased the royalty rate on soda ash produced on Federal land, in 1996.
Reduction of the royalty rate on soda ash produced on Federal land will provide needed relief to the United States soda ash industry and allow it to increase export growth and competitiveness in emerging world markets, and create new jobs in the United States.
REDUCTION IN ROYALTY RATE ON SODA ASH.
Notwithstanding section 102(a)(9) of the Federal Land Policy Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701(a)(9)), section 24 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 262), and the terms of any lease under that Act, the royalty rate on the quantity or gross value of the output of sodium compounds and related products at the point of shipment to market from Federal land in the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be 2 percent.
After the end of the 4-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, and before the end of the 5-year period beginning on that date, the Secretary of the Interior shall report to the Congress on the effects of the royalty reduction under this title, including-- (1) the amount of sodium compounds and related products at the point of shipment to market from Federal land during that 4-year period; (2) the number of jobs that have been created or maintained during the royalty reduction period; (3) the total amount of royalty paid to the United States on the quantity or gross value of the output of sodium compounds and related products at the point of shipment to market produced during that 4-year period, and the portion of such royalty paid to States; and (4) a recommendation of whether the reduced royalty rate should apply after the end of the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives May 16, 2005.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.