This Act may be cited as the ``Felon Identification and Police Safety Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) State laws requiring a waiting period before the purchase of a firearm have endangered the lives of law-abiding Americans by preventing them from protecting themselves, as demonstrated by the following examples: (A) In 1991, Bonnie Elmasri of Wisconsin tried to get a handgun to protect herself from her estranged husband, but he returned home and killed her and her 2 children before the 48-hour waiting period required by State law had expired.
In 1990, Catherine Latta of North Carolina tried to buy a firearm but was told by police that it would take her 2 to 4 weeks to get the necessary permit.
After telling the clerk she ``would be dead by then,'' she illegally bought a handgun on the street.
5 hours later she was attacked again by the man who had already robbed, assaulted, and raped her.
She used her handgun to protect herself by shooting and killing him.
Had she not had a handgun, the outcome would have been much different.
Residents of Los Angeles were forced to wait 15 days during the 1991 riots before they could legally buy a firearm for protection, in spite of the fact that police were admitting that they could not protect the people.
A point-of-sale instant background check can easily lead to a gun owner registration system.
Commenting on the Virginia State instant check system, the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment said ``The Virginia transaction log does not include the names of firearm purchasers, but the potential exists regardless of legal prohibitions.''.
Laws requiring a waiting period before the purchase of a firearm have not prevented crime rates in various States that have enacted such laws from increasing far above the national average increase in crime rates.
Police cannot protect, and are not legally responsible for protecting, individual citizens, as evidenced by the following: (A) The courts have consistently ruled that the police do not have an obligation to protect individuals, only the public in general.
In Warren v. District of Columbia Metropolitan Police Department (D.C. App.
2d 1 (1981)), the court stated ``courts have without exception concluded that when a municipality or other governmental entity undertakes to furnish police services, it assumes a duty only to the public at large and not to individual members of the community''.
Former Florida Attorney General Jim Smith told Florida legislators that police responded to only 200,000 of 700,000 calls for help to Dade County authorities.
The Department of Justice found that, in 1989, there were 168,881 crimes of violence which were not responded to by police within 1 hour.
Currently, there are about 150,000 police officers on duty to protect a population of more than 250,000,000 Americans.
SYSTEM FOR IDENTIFYING FELONS AND PERSONS ADJUDICATED MENTALLY INCOMPETENT.
In General.--The laws and procedures of a State are of the type described in this subsection if the laws and procedures, in substance, provide the following: (1) Records check required before issuance of driver's license and identification documents; use of magnetic strips to identify prohibited persons.--Before the State transportation agency issues, reissues, or reinstates a license, the agency shall-- (A) conduct a record check to determine whether the applicant therefor is a prohibited person by examining the State list referred to in paragraph (4) of this subsection and the national list referred to in subsection (b)(1); and (B) affix to the license of the person a magnetic strip on which is encoded information that-- (i) identifies the licensee as a prohibited person or as a nonprohibited person; and (ii) may be discerned only through the use of an electronic device that-- (I) is read only; (II) does not have storage or communication capabilities; and (III) signals the user of the device with-- (aa) a green light if the device reads a magnetic strip that does not identify the person as a prohibited person; and (bb) a red light if the device reads a magnetic strip that identifies the person as a prohibited person.
Effects of felony conviction or adjudication of mental incompetency.-- (A) Seizure and voiding of driver's license.--If a State court convicts a person of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year or adjudicates a person as mentally incompetent, the court shall seize any license issued to the person by the State transportation agency, and any such license shall be void.
Issuance of new license upon request.--Upon request of a person referred to in subparagraph (A), the State transportation agency shall issue to the person (if otherwise eligible therefor) another such license affixed to which is a magnetic strip identifying the person as a prohibited person.
Funding of records checks.-- (A) Increase in fines imposed upon convicted felons.--Any person convicted in the State of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year shall, in addition to any sentence imposed under any other provision of State law, be fined an amount sufficient to cover the expenses of criminal records checks conducted pursuant to paragraph (1)(A), taking all such convictions into account on an annual basis.
Surcharge imposed on prohibited persons to obtain a driver's license.--In addition to any fee required to be paid by a person to obtain a license, the State transportation agency shall require a prohibited person to pay surcharge in an amount determined by the State to be sufficient to cover the expenses of criminal records checks conducted by the agency pursuant to paragraph (1)(A), taking into account fines imposed under subparagraph (B) of this paragraph.
Requirement to maintain and update computerized list of prohibited persons.--The State shall create and maintain a computerized list of all persons who are prohibited persons by reason of a conviction or adjudication in the State, and, within 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, shall achieve and maintain at least 80 percent currency of case dispositions in the computerized list for all cases in which there has been an entry of activity within the then immediately preceding 5 years.
Duties of the Attorney General.--The Attorney General of the United States shall-- (1) create a national, computerized list of prohibited persons; (2) incorporate State criminal history records into the Federal criminal records system maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation; (3) develop hardware and software systems to link State lists referred to in subsection (a)(4) with the national list referred to in paragraph (1) of this subsection; and (4) provide any responsible State agency with access to the national list, upon request.
Procedures for Correcting Erroneous Records.-- (1) Request for information.--Any person identified as a prohibited person in records maintained under this section may request the Attorney General of the United States to notify the person of the reasons therefor.
Compliance with request.--Within 5 days after receipt of a request under paragraph (1), the Attorney General shall comply with the request.
Submission of additional information.--Any person described in paragraph (1) may submit to the Attorney General information to correct, clarify, or supplement records maintained under this section with respect to the person.
Consideration and use of additional information.-- Within 5 days after receipt of such information, the Attorney General shall consider the information, investigate the matter further, correct any and all erroneous Federal records relating to such person, and notify any Federal department or agency or any State that was the source of the erroneous records of the errors.
Judicial Review.--Any person erroneously identified as a prohibited person in records maintained pursuant to this section may bring an action in any United States district court against the United States, or any State or political subdivision thereof which is the source of the erroneous information, for damages (including consequential damages), injunctive relief, and such other relief as the court deems appropriate.
If the person prevails in the action, the court shall allow the person a reasonable attorney's fee as part of the costs.
Definitions.--As used in this section: (1) License.--The term ``license'' means a license or permit to operate a motor vehicle on the roads and highways of the State, and any identification document issued by a State transportation agency solely for purposes of identification.
Prohibited person.--The term ``prohibited person'' means a person who-- (A) has been convicted of a crime punishable under Federal or State law by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year; or (B)(i) has been adjudicated mentally incompetent; and (ii)(I) has not been restored to capacity by court order; or (II) has been so restored to capacity for less than 5 years.
State transportation agency.--The term ``State transportation agency'' means the State agency responsible for issuing a license, permit, or identification document described in paragraph (1).
Justice Assistance Funds Withheld From Certain States Unless Certain Laws and Procedures are in Effect.--2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall reduce by 25 percent the annual allocation to a State for a fiscal year under title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 if the State has in effect, as of such date of enactment, a waiting period, or a system for identifying felons, before the purchase of a handgun, and the State does not, by the end of such 2-year period, have in effect all of the laws and procedures of the type described in subsection (a).
If, at any time after such 2-year period, any State has in effect a waiting period before the purchase of a handgun, or a system for identifying felons or persons adjudicated mentally incompetent other than as provided pursuant to laws and procedures of the type described in subsection (a), the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall reduce by 25 percent the annual allocation to the State for a fiscal year under title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968.
LICENSED FIREARMS DEALERS REQUIRED TO CHECK MAGNETIC STRIP ON DRIVER'S LICENSE OF ANY PERSON ATTEMPTING TO PURCHASE A HANDGUN.
Prohibition.--Section 922 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(s)(1) It shall be unlawful for any licensed dealer knowingly to-- ``(A) sell a handgun to any person not licensed under section 923, unless the licensed dealer has used an electronic device described in section 3(a)(1)(B)(ii) of Felon Identification and Police Safety Act of 1993 to read the magnetic strip affixed to an identification document issued to the person by the transportation agency of the State in which the premises of the licensed dealer is located; or ``(B) fail to notify local law enforcement authorities, within 72 hours, of any person attempting to purchase a handgun who is identified as a prohibited person through the use of such a device.
As used in paragraph (1): ``(A) The term `handgun' means a firearm which has a short stock and is designed to be held and fired by the use of a single hand.
The term `identification document' means a license or permit to operate a motor vehicle, and any identification document issued solely for purposes of identification.
The term `transportation agency' means the agency responsible for issuing commercial or noncommercial identification documents.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply in any State that does not have in effect the laws and procedures required by section 3(a) of the Felon Identification and Police Safety Act of 1993.''.
Penalty.--Section 924(a) of such title is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2) or (3) of''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Any licensed dealer who violates section 922(s) shall be imprisoned not more than 1 year, fined not more than $1,000, or both.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to conduct engaged in after the 2-year period that begins with the date of the enactment of this Act.