Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Appalachian Regional Development Act Amendments of 1997''.
References.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1965 (40 United States Code App.
Elimination of Growth Center Requirement.--Section 2 (40 United States Code App.
is amended by deleting the sixth sentence of subsection (a).
1997 Statement of Purpose.--Section 2 (40 United States Code App.
is further amended by deleting subsection (b) and substituting the following: ``(b) The Congress further finds and declares that, while substantial progress had been made in fulfilling many of the objectives of this Act, rapidly changing national and global economies over the past decade have created new challenges for rural areas throughout the Nation and especially for the Appalachian region.
It is, therefore, also the purpose of this Act to assist Appalachia to become a region with an educated and trained work force, healthy people, a sound physical infrastructure, a dynamic economic base, and the local and regional capacity to be economically self-sustaining.
In carrying out this Act, the Commission shall be an advocate for and partner with the people of Appalachia and shall seek to achieve a viable and self- sustaining economy for the region in accordance with the following principles: ``(1) The most valuable investment that can be made in the region is in its people.
Entrepreneurial economies that focus on high-value- added goods and services offer the best future for many parts of the region.
Strategies and objectives should take into consideration participation in the global economy.
Economic development should be community-based and should emphasize local decision making.
Commission investments should take advantage of technology and telecommunications applications.
The Commission shall promote an atmosphere of open and productive communication among all stakeholders in the Region.
The Commission shall focus special attention on the areas of greatest need.''.
Annual Meeting Requirement.--Section 101(a) (40 United States Code App.
101(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Commission shall conduct at least one meeting each year with the Federal Co- Chairman and at least a majority of the State members present.''.
Additional Meetings by Electronic Means.--Section 101 (40 United States Code App.
101) is amended as follows: (1) In subsection (a), as amended by subsection (a) of this section, by adding at the end the following: ``The Commission may conduct such additional meetings by electronic means as the Commission considers advisable, including meetings to decide matters requiring an affirmative vote.''
In subsection (c) by striking ``to be present'' at the end of the fourth sentence.
Decisions Requiring a Quorum.--Section 101(b) (40 United States Code App.
101(b)) is amended by striking the third sentence and inserting the following: ``No decision involving Commission policy, approval of State, regional, or subregional development plans or implementing investment programs, any modification or revision of the Appalachian Regional Commission Code, any allocation of funds among the States, or the criteria for the designation of counties as distressed or economically strong under section 226 may be made without a quorum of State members.''.
AUTHORIZATIONS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
Section 105(b) (40 United States Code App.
105(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $3,645,000 for fiscal year 1998 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
Expenses of the federal co-chairman.--Of the amounts appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1), not to exceed $1,225,000 for fiscal year 1998 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002 shall be available for expenses of the Federal Co-Chairman, the Federal Co-Chairman's alternate, and the Federal Co-Chairman's staff.''.
Section 106(2) (40 United States Code App.
106(2)) is amended by striking ``the salary of the alternate to the Federal Co-Chairman on the Commission as provided in section 101'' and inserting ``the maximum rate for the Senior Executive Service under section 5382 of title 5, United States Code, including any applicable locality-based comparability payment that may be authorized under section 5304(h)(2)(c) of such title 5.''.
EXTENSION OF LEASE TERMS.
Section 106(7) (40 United States Code App.
106(7)) is amended by striking ``1982'' and inserting ``2002''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 201(g) (40 United States Code App.
201(g)) is amended to read as follows: ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $90,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
Cost Sharing--General Rule.--Section 201(h)(1) (40 United States Code App.
201(h)(1)) is amended by striking ``70 per centum'' and inserting ``80 percent''.
SUPPLEMENTS TO FEDERAL GRANT-IN-AID PROGRAMS; FUNDING LIMITATION.
Availability of Amounts.--The first sentence of section 214(a) (40 United States Code App.
214(a)) is amended by striking ``the President is authorized to provide funds to the Federal Co-Chairman to be used'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``the Federal Co-Chairman may use amounts made available to carry out this Act''.
Federal Grant-in-Aid Programs Defined.--The first sentence of section 214(c) (40 United States Code App.
214(c)) is amended by striking ``on or before December 31, 1980,''.
Limitation on Covered Road Projects.--The second sentence of section 214(c) is amended by inserting ``authorized by title 23, United States Code'' after ``road construction''.
Considerations.--Section 224(a) (40 United States Code App.
224(a)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end of paragraph (1) the following: ``or in a severely and persistently distressed and underdeveloped county or area''.
Outcome Measurements.--Section 224(a) is further amended by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon and adding the following: ``and (6) the extent to which the project design provides for detailed outcome measurements by which grant expenditures may be evaluated.''.
Removal of Limitations.--Section 224(b) (40 United States Code App.
224(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Limitation.--No financial assistance made available under this Act may be used to assist establishments relocating from one area to another.''.
DISTRESSED AND ECONOMICALLY STRONG COUNTIES.
Part C of title II (40 United States Code App.
221-225) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
DISTRESSED AND ECONOMICALLY STRONG COUNTIES.
Designations.--Not later than 90 days after the effective date of the Appalachian Regional Development Act Amendments of 1997, and annually thereafter, the Commission, in accordance with such criteria as the Commission may establish, shall-- ``(1) designate as `distressed counties' those counties in the region that are the most severely and persistently distressed and underdeveloped; and ``(2) designate two categories of economically strong counties, as follows: ``(A) `competitive counties' which shall be those counties in the region which are approaching economic parity with the rest of the Nation; and ``(B) `attainment counties' which shall be those counties in the region which have attained or exceeded economic parity with the rest of the Nation.
Distressed Counties.--In program and project development and implementation and in the allocation of appropriations made available to carry out this Act, the Commission shall give special consideration to the needs of those counties for which a distressed designation is in effect under this section.
Funding Prohibition for Projects Located in Economically Strong Counties.-- ``(1) Competitive counties.--Except as provided by paragraphs (3) and (4), assistance under this Act will be limited to no more than 30 percent of project cost for a project located in a county for which a competitive county designation is in effect under this section.
Attainment counties.--Except as provided by paragraphs (3) and (4), no funds may be provided under this Act for a project located in a county for which an attainment county designation is in effect under this section.
Exceptions.--The prohibitions established by paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply to-- ``(A) projects on the Appalachian development highway system authorized by section 201; ``(B) local development district administrative projects authorized by section 302(a)(1); or ``(C) a multicounty project that includes a county or counties designated as `competitive' or `attainment' under this section provided all participating counties share in the costs and benefits of the project.
Waiver.--The prohibitions established by paragraphs (1) and (2) may be waived by the Commission for a particular project upon a showing of one or more of the following: ``(A) The existence of a significant pocket of distress in the part of the county in which the project is located.
A significant decline in economic conditions affecting the county which is not reflected in current designation data.
The existence of a significant potential benefit from the project in areas of the region outside the designated county.''.
GRANTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES AND DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS; AVAILABILITY OF AMOUNTS.
Section 302(a) (40 United States Code App.
302(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``The President'' and inserting ``The Commission''; and (2) in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) by striking ``to the Commission'' each place it appears.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR GENERAL PROGRAM.
Section 401 (40 United States Code App.
401) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``In addition to the appropriations authorized by section 105 for administrative expenses and by section 201(g) for the Appalachian development highway system and local access roads, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Commission to carry out this Act $71,355,000 for fiscal year 1998 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
EXTENSION OF TERMINATION DATE.
Section 405 (40 United States Code App.
405) is amended by striking ``1982'' and inserting ``2002''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect October 1, 1997.