This Act may be cited as the ``Insurance Tax Fairness Act of 1994''.
REVISION OF LIMITATION ON DEDUCTION OF POLICYHOLDER DIVIDENDS BY MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 808(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to reduction in case of mutual companies) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Limitation in case of mutual companies.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of a mutual life insurance company, the amount allowed as a deduction under paragraph (1) for any taxable year shall not exceed the lesser of-- ``(i) 90 percent of the policyholder dividends paid or accrued by such company during such taxable year, or ``(ii) 30 percent of the life insurance company taxable income of such company for such taxable year (determined without regard to any deduction for policyholder dividends).
In no event shall the limitation under this subparagraph for any taxable year be less than $35,000,000.
Treatment of stock companies owned by mutual life insurance companies.--Solely for purposes of this paragraph, a stock life insurance company shall be treated as a mutual life insurance company if stock possessing-- ``(i) at least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of such stock life insurance company entitled to vote, or ``(ii) at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such stock life insurance company, is owned at any time during the calendar year directly (or through the application of section 318) by one or more mutual life insurance companies).''
Repeal of Section 809.-- (1) Section 809 of such Code is hereby repealed.
Subparagraph (B) of section 807(a)(2) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(B) the amount of the policyholders' share of tax-exempt interest,''.
Subparagraph (B) of section 807(b)(1) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(B) the amount of the policyholders' share of tax-exempt interest,''.
Subparagraph (A) of section 812(b)(3) of such Code is amended by striking ``sections 808 and 809'' and inserting ``section 808''.
Subsection (c) of section 817 of such Code is amended by striking ``(other than section 809)''.
Subsection (c) of section 842 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3).
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
Recomputation under section 809(f) not affected.--The amendments made by this section shall not affect the application of section 809(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect before its repeal by subsection (b)) in respect of any taxable year beginning before January 1, 1994.
Limitation on loss carrybacks.--In the case of a life insurance company subject to the limitation under section 808(b)(2) of such Code, no capital loss arising in a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1993, may be carried to a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1994.
SMALL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES EXEMPT FROM REQUIRED CAPITALIZATION OF CERTAIN POLICY ACQUISITION EXPENSES.
Section 848 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to capitalization of certain policy acquisition expenses) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Exemption for Small Life Insurance Companies.--This section shall not require any small life insurance company (as defined in section 806) to capitalize any specified policy acquisition expenses for any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1993.''
SENSE OF CONGRESS RELATING TO USE OF INCREASED REVENUES.
It is the sense of the Congress that any increase in revenues to the Treasury resulting from the amendments made by this Act shall be dedicated to the funding of programs benefiting the nutrition, early education, housing, and family support of the Nation's children.