This Act may be cited as the ``Persian Gulf Security Cost Fairness Act''.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the several key oil-producing countries that relied on the United States for their military protection in 1990 and 1991, including during the Persian Gulf conflict, and continue to depend on the United States for their security and stability, should share in the responsibility for that stability and security commensurate with their national capabilities; and (2) the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates) have the economic capability to contribute more toward their own security and stability and therefore these countries should contribute commensurate with that capability.
EFFORTS TO INCREASE BURDENSHARING BY COUNTRIES IN THE PERSIAN GULF REGION BENEFITTING FROM UNITED STATES MILITARY PRESENCE.
The President shall seek to have each country in the Persian Gulf region to which the United States extends military protection (either through security agreements, basing arrangements, or mutual participation in multinational military organizations or operations) take one or more of the following actions: (1) For any country in which United States military personnel are assigned to permanent duty ashore, increase its financial contributions to the payment of the nonpersonnel costs incurred by the United States government for stationing United States military personnel in that country, with the goal of achieving by September 30, 2004, 75 percent of such costs.
An increase in financial contributions by any country under this paragraph may include the elimination of taxes, fees, or other charges levied on the United States military personnel, equipment, or facilities stationed in that country.
Increase its annual budgetary outlays for national defense as a percentage of its gross domestic product by 10 percent or at least to a level commensurate to that of the United States by September 30, 2002.
Increase its annual budgetary outlays for foreign assistance (to promote democratization, economic stabilization, transparency arrangements, defense economic conversion, respect for the rule of law, and internationally recognized human rights) by 10 percent or at least to a level commensurate to that of the United States by September 30, 2002.
Increase the amount of military assets (including personnel, equipment, logistics, support and other resources) that it contributes, or would be prepared to contribute, to military activities in the Persian Gulf region.
AUTHORITIES TO ENCOURAGE ACTIONS BY UNITED STATES ALLIES.
In seeking the actions described in section 3 with respect to any country, or in response to a failure by any country to undertake one or more of such actions, the President may take any of the following measures to the extent otherwise authorized by law: (1) Reduce the end strength level of members of the Armed Forces assigned to permanent or part-time duty in the Persian Gulf region.
Impose on those countries fees or other charges similar to those that such countries impose on United States forces stationed in such countries.
Suspend, modify, or terminate any bilateral security agreement the United States has with that country, consistent with the terms of such agreement.
Reduce (through rescission, impoundment, or other appropriate procedures as authorized by law) any United States bilateral assistance appropriated for that country.
Take any other action the President determines to be appropriate as authorized by law.
REPORT ON PROGRESS IN INCREASING ALLIED BURDENSHARING.
Not later than March 1, 2002, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report on-- (1) steps taken by other countries to complete the actions described in section 3; (2) all measure taken by the President, including those authorized in section 4, to achieve the actions described in section 3; (3) the difference between the amount allocated by other countries for each of the actions described in section 3 during the period beginning on October 1, 2001, and ending on September 30, 2002, and during the period beginning on October 1, 2002, and ending on September 30, 2003; and (4) the budgetary savings to the United States that are expected to accrue as a result of the steps described under paragraph (1).
REVIEW AND REPORT ON NATIONAL SECURITY BASES FOR FORWARD DEPLOYMENT AND BURDENSHARING RELATIONSHIPS.
Review.--In order to ensure the best allocation of budgetary resources, the President shall undertake a review of the status of elements of the United States Armed Forces that are permanently stationed outside the United States.
The review shall include an assessment of the following: (1) The requirements that are to be found in agreements between the United States and the allies of the United States in the Persian Gulf region.
The national security interests that support permanent stationing of elements of the United States Armed Forces outside the United States.
The stationing costs associated with forward deployment of elements of the United States Armed Forces.
The alternatives available to forward deployment (such as material prepositioning, enhanced airlift and sealift, or joint training operations) to meet such requirements or national security interests, with such alternatives identified and described in detail.
The costs and force structure configurations associated with such alternatives to forward deployment.
The financial contributions that allies of the United States in the Persian Gulf region make to common defense efforts (to promote democratization, economic stabilization, transparency arrangements, defense economic conversion, respect for the rule of law, and internationally recognized human rights).
The contributions that allies of the United States in the Persian Gulf region make to meeting the stationing costs associated with the forward deployment of elements of the United States Armed Forces.
The annual expenditures of the United States and its allies in the Persian Gulf region on national defense, and the relative percentages of each country's gross domestic product constituted by those expenditures.
Report.--The President shall submit to Congress a report on the review under subsection (a).
The report shall be submitted not later than March 1, 2002, in classified and unclassified form.