TRANSFER OF LANDS INTO TRUST FOR PUEBLOS OF SAN ILDEFONSO AND SANTA CLARA, NEW MEXICO.
Lands Held in Trust for Pueblo of Santa Clara.--All right, title, and interest of the United States in the lands described in subsection (b), including all improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto and rights to all minerals, including oil and gas, are hereby declared to be held by the United States in trust for the Pueblo of Santa Clara.
Land Description.--The lands referred to in subsection (a) consist of approximately 2,484 acres of land presently under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management of the Department of the Interior situated within Rio Arriba County, New Mexico, and are more particularly described as follows: That portion of Section 22, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is north of the line established in accordance with the provisions of Section 2(a) of this Act.
South half of Section 23, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian.
South half of Section 24, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian.
All of Section 25, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, except for the 5 acre tract in the Southeast quarter owned by San Ildefonso Pueblo.
That portion of Section 26, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is north and east of the line established in accordance with the provisions of Section 2(a) of this Act.
That portion of Section 27, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is north of the line established in accordance with the provisions of Section 2(a) of this Act.
That portion of Section 19, Township 20 North, Range 8 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is not included within the Santa Clara Pueblo Grant or the Santa Clara Indian Reservation.
That portion of Section 30, Township 20 North, Range 8 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is not included within the Santa Clara Pueblo Grant or the San Ildefonso Grant.
Lands Held in Trust for Pueblo of San Ildefonso.--All right, title, and interest of the United States in the lands described in subsection (d), including all improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto and rights to all minerals, including oil and gas, are hereby declared to be held by the United States in trust for the Pueblo of San Ildefonso.
Land Description.--The lands referred to in subsection (c) consist of approximately 2,000 acres of land presently under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management of the Department of the Interior situated within Rio Arriba and Santa Fe Counties, New Mexico, and are more particularly described as follows: That portion of Section 22, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is south of the line established in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 (a) of this Act.
That portion of Section 26, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is south and west of the line established in accordance with the provisions of Section 2(a) of this Act.
That portion of Section 27, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is south of the line established in accordance with the provisions of Section 2(a) of this Act.
All of Section 34, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian.
That portion of Section 35, Township 20 North, Range 7 East, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is not included within the San Ildefonso Pueblo Grant.
SURVEY OF BOUNDARY LINE; PUBLICATION OF DESCRIPTION IN FEDERAL REGISTER.
Survey of Boundary Line.--In order to accurately establish on the ground the boundary of the lands declared to be held in trust for the Pueblo of Santa Clara and the boundary of the lands declared to be held in trust for the Pueblo of San Ildefonso as described in section 1 of this Act, the Secretary of Interior shall, by the date that is 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, cause a survey to be conducted by the Office of Cadastral Survey of the Bureau of Land Management of the boundary lines established under the provisions of the Agreement to Affirm Boundary Between Pueblo of Santa Clara and Pueblo of San Ildefonso Aboriginal Lands Within Garcia Canyon Tract, that was executed on December 20, 2000, by the respective Governors of the two Pueblos, which survey shall be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of such Agreement.
Publication of Land Descriptions in Federal Register.--Upon completion of the survey described in subsection (a), and its acceptance by the respective Governors of the 2 Pueblos, the Secretary shall cause the full metes and bounds description of the lines thus established, together with a full and accurate description of the lands declared to be held in trust for each Pueblo by Section 1 of this Act, respectively, to be published in the Federal Register, and such descriptions shall, upon their publication, constitute the official descriptions of the lands transferred into trust hereunder.
In preparing such publication, the Secretary is authorized to correct any technical errors in the legal descriptions contained in this Act, so as to make the descriptions of the lands declared to be held in trust for the two Pueblos consistent with the terms of the Agreement described in subsection (a).
ADMINISTRATION OF LANDS DECLARED TO BE HELD IN TRUST.
Upon the enactment of this Act, and subject to the other provisions of this Act, the lands described in section 1(b) are hereby declared to be part of the Pueblo of Santa Clara's reservation and the lands described in section 1(d) are hereby declared to be part of the Pueblo of San Ildefonso's reservation.
All lands described in Section 1 shall be administered in accordance with the laws and rules of law generally applicable to property held in trust by the United States for Indian tribes.
VALID EXISTING RIGHTS PRESERVED.
Nothing in this Act shall deprive any person (other than the United States) of any legal existing right-of-way, lease, permit, mining claim, grazing permit, water right, or any other right or interest which such person may have in any of the trust lands within the purview of this Act on the date preceding the date of enactment of this Act.
No existing right or claim of either Pueblo to any lands or interest in lands based upon Aboriginal or Indian title shall be enlarged, impaired or otherwise affected by this Act.
LANDS SUBJECT TO SECTION 17 OF PUEBLO LANDS ACT.
The lands described in section 1, and all lands owned or acquired by the Pueblo of Santa Clara within the Santa Clara Pueblo Grant, and all lands owned or acquired by the Pueblo of San Ildefonso within the San Ildefonso Pueblo Grant, shall be fully subject to the provisions of Section 17 of the Act of June 7, 1924 (43 United States Statutes at Large 641; commonly referred to as the ``Pueblo Lands Act'').
Land conveyed under this Act may only be used for traditional and customary uses or stewardship conservation for the benefit of the Pueblo of San Ildefonso or the Pueblo of Sanat Clara for whom the land is held in trust.
The Secretary of the Interior shall work with the Pueblos to develop appropriate criteria for use of the land to ensure that the land is preserved for traditional and customary uses or stewardship conservation.
Nothing in this Act shall constitute or be construed to constitute-- (1) an express or implied reservation of water or water rights with respect to the land conveyed under this Act; or (2) a creation, recognition, disclaimer, relinquishment, or reduction of any water rights of Pueblo of San Ildefonso or the Pueblo Santa Clara existing prior to the date of the enactment of this Act.