This Act may be cited as the ``Steamtown National Historic Site Act of 1994''.
As used in this Act: (1) Advisory committee.--The term ``Advisory Committee'' means the Steamtown National Historic Site Advisory Committee established by the Secretary under section 5.
Hazardous substance.--The term ``hazardous substance'' has the meaning given such term in section 101(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601(14)).
Historic site.--The term ``historic site'' means the Steamtown National Historic Site established under section 3.
National park service.--The term ``National Park Service'' means the National Park Service of the Department of the Interior.
Remedial action.--The term ``remedial action'' has the meaning given such term in section 101(24) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601(24)).
Removal.--The term ``removal'' has the meaning given such term in section 101(23) of such Act (42 United States Code 9601(23)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ESTABLISHMENT OF STEAMTOWN NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
In General.-- (1) Establishment.--In order to preserve and interpret certain elements of railroading, especially steam-operated railroads that were in operation during the period of 1850 to 1950, there is hereby established the Steamtown National Historic Site.
Purposes.--The purposes of the historic site shall include providing for the interpretation of-- (A) the evolution of railroads; and (B) the impact of railroads on the development of the United States, including technological, economic, social, and political effects and the relationship of railroads to the industrialization of the United States.
Description of Site.--The historic site shall consist of the lands and interests in lands within the area generally depicted on the map entitled ``Boundary Map, Steamtown National Historic Site'', numbered STTO-80,000 and dated September 1986.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the National Park Service.
Except by act of Congress, no revisions may be made in the boundary of the historic site.
Repeal of Superseded Law.--The Steamtown National Historical Site Act of 1986 (the twelfth proviso in the paragraph relating to the operation of the national park system (including transfer of funds) under the heading ``National Park Service'' in title I of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1987, which was enacted in identical forms in section 101(h) of Public Law 99-500 and section 101(h) of Public Law 99-591; 100 United States Statutes at Large 1783-248 and 100 United States Statutes at Large 3341-248), is repealed.
ADMINISTRATION OF STEAMTOWN NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall administer the historic site in accordance with this Act and any other provision of law generally applicable to units of the national park system, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1, 2, 3, and 4) and the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the preservation of historic American sites, buildings, objects, and antiquities of national significance, and for other purposes'', approved August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Comprehensive General Management Plan.--Not later than September 30, 1995, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives a new comprehensive general management plan for the historic site.
The plan shall be consistent with this Act, section 12 of Public Law 91-383 (16 United States Code 1a-7), and any other applicable provision of law.
In General.--The Secretary may acquire lands or interests in land within the boundaries of the historic site only by-- (1) donation; or (2) purchase with donated funds.
Prohibition on Acquisition of Contaminated Lands.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may not acquire any land or interest in land to serve the purposes of the historic site unless such lands are not contaminated with a hazardous substance for which a removal or remedial action at the expense of the United States is required under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes).
Reimbursement.-- (A) In general.--Before the Secretary may accept title to any lands to further the purposes of the historic site, the Secretary shall seek reimbursement of any funds expended by the National Park Service, prior to the date of the enactment of this Act, on a removal or remedial action with respect to any contamination of lands within the boundaries of the historic site under applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes).
Crediting of reimbursement.--Any amount received as reimbursement under subparagraph (A) shall be credited to miscellaneous receipts in the Treasury.
Treatment of certain funds expended for a removal or remedial action.--After the full amount of a reimbursement made pursuant to subparagraph (A) is credited pursuant to subparagraph (B), the amount expended by the National Park Service with respect to which the reimbursement was made shall not be treated as amounts expended for development with respect to the limitation under section 8(b).
In General.--The Secretary shall take such action as is necessary and appropriate to-- (1) administer the historic site; (2) interpret, for the public, the significance of the resources of the site and the history of the site; and (3) provide essential services for the public at the historic site.
Preservation of Collection of Railroad Equipment.-- (1) Existing collection.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary shall preserve the collection of railroad equipment, including locomotives and rolling stock, that is present at the historic site as of the date of enactment of this Act.
The Secretary may also preserve such equipment and essential machinery as are necessary for the maintenance of the locomotives and rolling stock.
Acquisition of additional equipment.--The Secretary may acquire by exchange or purchase, appropriate examples of locomotives and rolling stock to enhance the collection of railroad equipment at the historic site if-- (A) the Secretary takes such action as is necessary to ensure that the total number of locomotives and rolling stock in the collection of railroad equipment does not increase as a result of the exchange or purchase; and (B) the exchange or purchase is carried out in a manner consistent with the general management plan for the historic site.
Cost-Sharing.--The Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, seek donations and assistance from volunteers and carry out other cost- sharing measures to restore the locomotives and rolling stock in the collection of railroad equipment.
Preservation of Artifact Collection and Archival Materials.-- The Secretary shall take such action as is necessary to preserve the artifact collection and archival materials located at the historic site.
Prohibition.--No Federal funds may be expended to provide access between the historic site and any structure that is privately owned and operated for profit.
Excursions.--To the extent that providing regular excursions with appropriate interpretation under this subsection furthers public understanding of the matters described in section 3(a)(2), the Secretary may provide regular excursions with appropriate interpretation between Scranton, Pennsylvania, and Moscow, Pennsylvania.
To carry out the excursions, the Secretary may provide essential visitor services at Moscow, Pennsylvania.
Use of Funds for the Restoration of Tracks, Bridges, or Tunnels.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary may not expend funds made available to the National Park Service for the restoration or maintenance of tracks, bridges, or tunnels located outside the historic site.
Exception.-- (A) Restoration pursuant to cooperative agreement with owner.--If the Secretary and the owner of the tracks and bridges between the historic site and Moscow, Pennsylvania, enter into a cooperative agreement described in subparagraph (B), the Secretary may expend funds described in subparagraph (C) for restoring and maintaining such tracks and bridges.
Cooperative agreement described.--A cooperative agreement referred to in subparagraph (A) is a cooperative agreement that-- (i) provides for the Secretary to restore and maintain such tracks and bridges; and (ii) permits the National Park Service to use such tracks and bridges for excursions authorized under subsection (f).
Funds described.--The funds referred to in subparagraph (A) are funds that-- (i) were appropriated to the Secretary before November 15, 1991; and (ii) remain available for obligation.
Track usage fees.--If the Secretary enters into an agreement to use tracks and bridges pursuant to paragraph (2), the Secretary may pay customary and appropriate track usage fees.
Excursion Fees.--Excursion fees charged for any rail excursion carried out by the Secretary pursuant to this section shall be established at a level that ensures that, at a minimum, 75 percent of the costs of maintenance, personnel, and equipment for the excursion shall be covered by amounts collected as user fees.
Bridge 60.--The Secretary may assist the owner of Bridge 60 and Bridge 60 Wye (as defined and determined by the Secretary) with track and switch rehabilitation to facilitate activities associated with the historic site.
Establishment.--There is established the Steamtown National Historic Site Advisory Committee.
Purposes.--The purposes of the Advisory Committee are as follows: (1) To provide the Secretary with a readily available source of professional expertise in railroad management and history.
To advise the Secretary in the development and operation of the historic site.
Membership.--The Advisory Committee shall be composed of 11 members who shall be appointed by the Secretary, as follows: (1) Two members shall be individuals with recognized expertise in the operation of historic railways.
Two members shall be individuals with recognized expertise in the operation of commercial railways.
Two members shall be historians with recognized expertise in the history of technology.
Two members shall be historians with recognized expertise in social history.
Three members shall be representatives of the general public.
Terms.--Each member shall serve for a term of 3 years.
A member of the Advisory Committee may continue to serve as a member after the expiration of the member's term until a successor is appointed.
Chairperson.--The Advisory Committee shall select a Chairperson from among its members.
Duties of the Secretary.--The Secretary, or a designee of the Secretary, shall from time to time, but at least semiannually, meet and consult with the Advisory Committee on matters relating to the management and development of the historic site.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Advisory Committee have been appointed, the Chairperson shall convene the Advisory Committee.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Advisory Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Frequency of meetings.--The Advisory Committee shall meet at least 3 times during each year.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Advisory Committee shall constitute a quorum.
Compensation.--Members of the Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation, except the Secretary may, on receipt of a voucher approved by the Chairperson, pay expenses reasonably incurred in the performance of duties of the Committee.
Termination of Advisory Committee.--The Advisory Committee shall terminate 10 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
In General.--Subject to the limitations under subsections (b) and (c), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of the Interior such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Limitation of Expenditures for Development.--The aggregate amount of funds expended by the Department of the Interior after September 30, 1986, for the development of the historic site may not exceed $58,000,000.
Limitation of Expenditures of Funds.--No funds made available to the Department of the Interior from Federal sources may be expended with respect to the historic site for a purpose other than a purpose specified in section 6 and in section 7(h).