This Act may be cited as the ``World War II Memorial Completion Act''.
FUND RAISING BY AMERICAN BATTLE MONUMENTS COMMISSION FOR WORLD WAR II MEMORIAL.
Codification of Existing Authority; Expansion of Authority.-- (1) Chapter 21 of title 36, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
World War II memorial in the District of Columbia ``(a) Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `World War II memorial' means the memorial authorized by Public Law 103-32 (107 United States Statutes at Large 90) to be established by the American Battle Monuments Commission on Federal land in the District of Columbia or its environs to honor members of the Armed Forces who served in World War II and to commemorate the participation of the United States in that war.
The term `Commission' means the American Battle Monuments Commission.
The term `memorial fund' means the fund created by subsection (c).
Solicitation and Acceptance of Contributions.--Consistent with the authority of the Commission under section 2103(e) of this title, the Commission shall solicit and accept contributions for the World War II memorial.
Creation of Memorial Fund.--(1) There is hereby created in the Treasury a fund for the World War II memorial, which shall consist of the following: ``(A) Amounts deposited, and interest and proceeds credited, under paragraph (2).
Obligations obtained under paragraph (3).
The amount of surcharges paid to the Commission for the World War II memorial under the World War II 50th Anniversary Commemorative Coins Act.
Amounts borrowed using the authority provided under subsection (e).
Any funds received by the Commission under section 2103(l) of this title in exchange for use of, or the right to use, any mark, copyright or patent.
The Chairman of the Commission shall deposit in the memorial fund the amounts accepted as contributions under subsection (b).
The Secretary of the Treasury shall credit to the memorial fund the interest on, and the proceeds from sale or redemption of, obligations held in the memorial fund.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest any portion of the memorial fund that, as determined by the Chairman of the Commission, is not required to meet current expenses.
Each investment shall be made in an interest bearing obligation of the United States or an obligation guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States that, as determined by the Chairman of the Commission, has a maturity suitable for the memorial fund.
Use of Memorial Fund.--The memorial fund shall be available to the Commission for-- ``(1) the expenses of establishing the World War II memorial, including the maintenance and preservation amount provided for in section 8(b) of the Commemorative Works Act (40 United States Code 1008(b)); ``(2) such other expenses, other than routine maintenance, with respect to the World War II memorial as the Commission considers warranted; and ``(3) to secure, obtain, register, enforce, protect, and license any mark, copyright or patent that is owned by, assigned to, or licensed to the Commission under section 2103(l) of this title to aid or facilitate the construction of the World War II memorial.
Special Borrowing Authority.--(1) To assure that groundbreaking, construction, and dedication of the World War II memorial are completed on a timely basis, the Commission may borrow money from the Treasury of the United States in such amounts as the Commission considers necessary, but not to exceed a total of $65,000,000.
Borrowed amounts shall bear interest at a rate determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking into consideration the average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of comparable maturities during the month preceding the month in which the obligations of the Commission are issued.
The interest payments on such obligations may be deferred with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, but any interest payment so deferred shall also bear interest.
The borrowing of money by the Commission under paragraph (1) shall be subject to such maturities, terms, and conditions as may be agreed upon by the Commission and the Secretary of the Treasury, except that the maturities may not exceed 20 years and such borrowings may be redeemable at the option of the Commission before maturity.
The obligations of the Commission shall be issued in amounts and at prices approved by the Secretary of the Treasury.
The authority of the Commission to issue obligations under this subsection shall remain available without fiscal year limitation.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall purchase any obligations of the Commission to be issued under this subsection, and for such purpose the Secretary of the Treasury may use as a public debt transaction of the United States the proceeds from the sale of any securities issued under chapter 31 of title 31.
The purposes for which securities may be issued under such chapter are extended to include any purchase of the Commission's obligations under this subsection.
Repayment of the interest and principal on any funds borrowed by the Commission under paragraph (1) shall be made from amounts in the memorial fund.
The Commission may not use for such purpose any funds appropriated for any other activities of the Commission.
Treatment of Borrowing Authority.--In determining whether the Commission has sufficient funds to complete construction of the World War II memorial, as required by section 8 of the Commemorative Works Act (40 United States Code 1008), the Secretary of the Interior shall consider the funds that the Commission may borrow from the Treasury under subsection (e) as funds available to complete construction of the memorial, whether or not the Commission has actually exercised the authority to borrow such funds.
Voluntary Services.--(1) Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, the Commission may accept from any person voluntary services to be provided in furtherance of the fund-raising activities of the Commission relating to the World War II memorial.
A person providing voluntary services under this subsection shall be considered to be a Federal employee for purposes of chapter 81 of title 5, relating to compensation for work-related injuries, and chapter 171 of title 28, relating to tort claims.
A volunteer who is not otherwise employed by the Federal Government shall not be considered to be a Federal employee for any other purpose by reason of the provision of such voluntary service, except that any volunteers given responsibility for the handling of funds or the carrying out of a Federal function are subject to the conflict of interest laws contained in chapter 11 of title 18, and the administrative standards of conduct contained in part 2635 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations.
The Commission may provide for reimbursement of incidental expenses which are incurred by a person providing voluntary services under this subsection.
The Commission shall determine which expenses are eligible for reimbursement under this paragraph.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require Federal employees to work without compensation or to allow the use of volunteer services to displace or replace Federal employees.
Treatment of Certain Contracts.--A contract entered into by the Commission for the design or construction of the World War II memorial is not funding agreement as that term is defined in section 201 of title 35.
Extension of Authority to Establish Memorial.-- Notwithstanding section 10 of the Commemorative Works Act (40 United States Code 1010), the legislative authorization for the construction of the World War II memorial contained in Public Law 103-32 (107 United States Statutes at Large 90) shall not expire until December 31, 2005.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``2113.
World War II memorial in the District of Columbia.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Public Law 103-32 (107 United States Statutes at Large 90) is amended by striking sections 3, 4, and 5.
Effect of Repeal of Current Memorial Fund.--Upon the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer amounts in the fund created by section 4(a) of Public Law 103-32 (107 United States Statutes at Large 91) to the fund created by section 2113 of title 36, United States Code, as added by subsection (a).
GENERAL AUTHORITY OF AMERICAN BATTLE MONUMENTS COMMISSION TO SOLICIT AND RECEIVE CONTRIBUTIONS.
Subsection (e) of section 2103 of title 36, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Solicitation and Receipt of Contributions.--(1) The Commission may solicit and receive funds and in-kind donations and gifts from any State, municipal, or private source to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
The Commission shall deposit such funds in a separate account in the Treasury.
Funds from this account shall be disbursed upon vouchers approved by the Chairman of the Commission as well as by a Federal official authorized to sign payment vouchers.
The Commission shall establish written guidelines setting forth the criteria to be used in determining whether the acceptance of funds and in-kind donations and gifts under paragraph (1) would-- ``(A) reflect unfavorably on the ability of the Commission, or any employee of the Commission, to carry out the responsibilities or official duties of the Commission in a fair and objective manner; or ``(B) compromise the integrity or the appearance of the integrity of the programs of the Commission or any official involved in those programs.''.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND RELATED ITEMS.
Section 2103 of title 36, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(l) Intellectual Property and Related Items.--(1) The Commission may-- ``(A) adopt, use, register, and license trademarks, service marks, and other marks; ``(B) obtain, use, register, and license the use of copyrights consistent with section 105 of title 17; ``(C) obtain, use, and license patents; and ``(D) accept gifts of marks, copyrights, patents and licenses for use by the Commission.
The Commission may grant exclusive and nonexclusive licenses in connection with any mark, copyright, patent, or license for the use of such mark, copyright or patent, except to extent the grant of such license by the Commission would be contrary to any contract or license by which the use of such mark, copyright or patent was obtained.
The Commission may enforce any mark, copyright, or patent by an action in the district courts under any law providing for the protection of such marks, copyrights, or patents.
The Attorney General shall furnish the Commission with such legal representation as the Commission may require under paragraph (3).
The Secretary of Defense shall provide representation for the Commission in administrative proceedings before the Patent and Trademark Office and Copyright Office.
Section 203 of title 17 shall not apply to any copyright transferred in any manner to the Commission.