This Act may be cited as the ``Common Sense Campaign Reform Act''.
INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR CONGRESSIONAL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new section: ``SEC.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed, subject to the limitations in subsection (b), as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year, an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(1) 100 percent of the portion of all qualified congressional campaign contributions which does not exceed $25, and ``(2) 50 percent of the remaining portion of all qualified congressional campaign contributions.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for a taxable year shall not exceed $100 ($200 in the case of a joint return).
Verification.--A credit shall be allowed by subsection (a) with respect to any contribution only if the contribution is verified in the manner prescribed by the Secretary in regulations.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified congressional campaign contribution.--The term `qualified congressional campaign contribution' means a contribution or gift of money-- ``(A) payment of which is made during the taxable year to an individual who is a candidate for nomination or election to the office of Senator or Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress in any primary, general, or special election, for use by the individual to further the candidacy of the individual for nomination or election to the office, and ``(B) which is from a taxpayer (or either spouse in the case of a joint return) who is a resident of the State in which the election is held.
Candidate.--The term `candidate' means an individual who-- ``(A) publicly announces before the close of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the contribution or gift is made that the individual is a candidate for nomination or election to an office referred to in paragraph (1)(A), and ``(B) meets the qualifications prescribed by law to hold the office.
Inflation Adjustment.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 1994, each dollar amount contained in subsections (a) and (b) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(1) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(2) the cost-of-living adjustment under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, determined by substituting `calendar year 1994' for `calendar year 1989' in subparagraph (B) of such section.
Credit not Allowed to Estates and Trusts.--No credit shall be allowed under this section to any estate or trust.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subpart A is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 23 the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
REDUCTION IN THE CEILING ON MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES.
Section 315(a)(2)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(2)(A)) is amended by striking out ``$5,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$2,500''.
INCREASE IN THE CEILING ON CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES BY PERSONS OTHER THAN MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEES.
Section 315(a)(1)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(1)(A)) is amended by striking out ``$1,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$2,000''.
PROHIBITION OF LEADERSHIP COMMITTEES.
Section 302 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 432) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) A candidate for Federal office may not establish, maintain, finance, or control a political committee other than the principal campaign committee of the candidate.''.
PROHIBITION OF CONTRIBUTIONS BETWEEN MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEES.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) No multicandidate political committee may make any contribution to another multicandidate political committee.''.
ADDITIONAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN CONTRIBUTIONS.
Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) In addition to any other reporting requirement under this section, each authorized committee of a candidate shall include in any report of contributions to such committee, with respect to any contribution of more than $25, the name and mailing address of the person making the contribution, and, in the case of a contribution by an individual, the occupation and the name of the employer of the individual.''.
NAME REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN SEPARATE SEGREGATED FUNDS.
Section 316(b)(2) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441b(b)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Any separate segregated fund under subparagraph (C) that is a multicandidate political committee shall include in its name the name of the entity that establishes the fund.''.
SIGNATURE OF CANDIDATE REQUIRED ON REPORTS OF AUTHORIZED COMMITTEES.
Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434), as amended by section 7, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Any report required by this section with respect to an authorized committee of a candidate shall be signed by the candidate.