This Act may be cited as the ``Computer and Communications Trade Freedom Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Increased communications and exchange of information through computer and telecommunications networks promotes the development of democratic political institutions, free market reforms, and economic modernization; nevertheless, computers, telecommunications, semiconductor, and related equipment, software, and technology account for more than 85 percent of the value of exports controlled by the United States Department of Commerce under the Export Administration Act of 1979.
The computer, telecommunications, and semiconductor industries account for $55,000,000,000 in exports and 12.3 percent of all of the export trade of the United States.
These sectors represent over 850,000 jobs in the United States.
The rapid pace of technological development and the dramatic reductions in product innovation cycles for these products have rendered any system for controlling their export meaningless.
The availability of advanced computer, telecommunications, and semiconductor products from sources of supply other than the United States and members of the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Countries (COCOM) exists, and the perpetuation of export controls on these products disadvantages United States exporters to the detriment of the domestic economy, United States innovation, and employment of American workers in these 3 industries and in those United States industries which are the suppliers and customers of these industries.
REMOVAL OF EXPORT CONTROLS ON COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT.
Section 4 of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 United States Code App.
2401) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) License Authority for Computers, Telecommunications Equipment, and Semiconductors.-- ``(1)(A) No validated license or reexport authorization may be required for the export or reexport (as the case may be), for consumption or use in any country other than a targeted country, of any product or related software or technology that is or would be classified under the following entries of the control list as in effect on July 1, 1993, except for any such product or related software or technology to which missile technology controls apply under the control list: ``(i) Computers and related equipment under Category 4, code letter A.
Telecommunications and related equipment under Category 5, Part I.
Semiconductors, as follows: ``(I) Items 3A01A.a, 3A02A.h, 3A92F, and all integrated circuits or their microelectronic devices classified under 3A96G.
Items 3D01A related to 3A01A.a and 3A02A.h, 3D03A, 3D94F, and 3D96G related to integrated circuits or other microelectronic devices classified under 3A96G.
Items 3E01A related to 3A01A.a and 3A02A.h, 3E02A, 3E94F related to 3A92F, and 3E96G related to integrated circuits or other microelectronic devices classified under 3A96G.
The United States shall not propose (or ask any other government to propose) to the Coordinating Committee the transfer of any item subject to subparagraph (A) from the Industrial List of the Coordinating Committee to the International Munitions List of the Coordinating Committee.
The United States shall not agree to any proposal to transfer any item subject to subparagraph (A) from the Industrial List of the Coordinating Committee to the International Munitions List of the Coordinating Committee.
No control on the export or reexport of any good or technology for which no license or authorization may be required under paragraph (1)(A) may be imposed, directly or indirectly, under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, the Trading with the Enemy Act, or other provision of law, other than in connection with a prohibition on all or substantially all exports to a specific country, government, entity, or person.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the Secretary from requiring a validated license for exports to (A) a country against which the United States maintains an embargo of all or substantially all exports, or (B) a party lawfully denied export privileges under this Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, the term `targeted country' means any country-- ``(A) the government of which the Secretary of State has determined, under section 6(j), to be a government that has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism; or ``(B) which is subject to an embargo-- ``(i) which has been imposed by the United Nations on all or substantially all exports to that country; and ``(ii) in which the United States is participating.
The provisions of this subsection apply notwithstanding any other provision of this Act.''.
For Amendment.--The amendment made by section 3 shall take effect 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Interim Negotiations.--Upon the enactment of this Act, the President shall undertake negotiations with the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (``COCOM'') and other relevant multilateral export control regimes for the purpose of attaining agreement among the members of COCOM and such other regimes to apply export controls consistent with the amendment made by section 3.
Whether such agreement is attained shall not affect the effective date set forth in subsection (a).