This Act may be cited as the ``Save Consumers Aggravation and Money Act of 2000''.
RATE DISCLOSURES BY PROVIDERS OF DIAL-AROUND SERVICES.
Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by inserting after section 231 (47 United States Code 231) the following new section: ``SEC.
RATE DISCLOSURES BY PROVIDERS OF DIAL-AROUND SERVICES.
Definitions.--As used in this section: ``(1) Dial-around services.--The term `dial-around services' means a product or service by which a person may use a seven-digit code to bypass such person's preferred interstate carrier to gain access to the telecommunications services of another carrier.
Consumer.--The term `consumer' means a person initiating any interstate telephone call using a seven-digit code to obtain dial-around services.
Preferred interstate carrier.--The term `preferred interstate carrier' means the carrier that provides interstate service to a consumer on a prescribed basis.
Presubscribed basis.--The term `presubscribed basis' means the selection of a common carrier to carry all interstate calls initiated by dialing `1' or `0' plus the area code, plus the terminating telephone number, or by dialing `011' or `00'.
Provider of dial-around services.--The term `provider of dial-around services' means any common carrier that provides interexchange services, or any other person determined by the Commission to be providing interexchange services, through the use of a dial-around code.
Requirements for Providers.--Beginning not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, each provider of dial- around services shall, at a minimum-- ``(1) identify itself, audibly and distinctly, to the consumer at the beginning of each telephone call and before the consumer incurs any charge for the call; ``(2) disclose immediately to the consumer, upon request and at no charge to the consumer-- ``(A) a quote of its rates or charges for the call; ``(B) the methods by which such rates or charges will be collected; and ``(C) the methods by which complaints concerning such rates, charges, or collection practices will be resolved; and ``(3) permit the consumer to terminate the telephone call at no charge before the call is connected.
General Rulemaking Required.-- ``(1) Rulemaking proceeding.--The Commission shall conduct a rulemaking proceeding pursuant to this section and section 201(b) to prescribe regulations to-- ``(A) protect consumers from unfair and deceptive practices relating to their use of dial-around services to place interstate telephone calls; and ``(B) ensure that consumers have the information necessary to make informed choices in making such calls.
Contents of regulations.--The regulations prescribed under this section shall-- ``(A) contain provisions to implement each of the requirements of this section; and ``(B) contain such other provisions as the Commission determines necessary to carry out this section and section 201(b) and the purposes and policies of this section and section 201(b).
Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter the obligations, powers, or duties of common carriers or the Commission under section 201(b) on the other sections of this Act.''.
PREVENTION OF FRAUDULENT ADVERTISING OF DIAL-AROUND SERVICES.
Amendment.--Section 201 of the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (15 United States Code 5711) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection: ``(b) Dial-Around Services Advertising.-- ``(1) Advertising regulations.--The Commission shall prescribe rules in accordance with this subsection to prohibit unfair and deceptive acts and practices in any advertisement for dial-around services.
Such rules shall require that the person offering such dial-around services-- ``(A) clearly and conspicuously disclose in any advertising the cost of the use of such dial-around services, including the total cost or the cost per minute and any other fees for that service and for any other dial-around service to which the caller may be transferred; ``(B) be prohibited from using advertisements that emit electronic tones which can automatically dial a dial-around telephone number; ``(C) ensure that, whenever the dial-around code number to be called is shown in television and print media advertisements, the charges for dial-around services are clear and conspicuous and (when shown in television advertisements) displayed for the same duration as that number is displayed; and ``(D) in delivering any telephone message soliciting calls to a dial-around service, specify clearly, and at no less than the audible volume of the solicitation, the total cost and the cost per minute and any other fees for that service and for any other dial-around service to which the caller may be transferred.
Access to information.--The Commission shall by rule require a common carrier that provides telephone services to a provider of dial-around services to make available to the Commission any records and financial information maintained by such carrier relating to the arrangements (other than for the provision of local exchange service) between such carrier and any provider of dial-around services.
Evasions.--The rules issued by the Commission under this section shall include provisions to prohibit unfair or deceptive acts or practices that evade such rules or undermine the rights provided to customers under this title, including through the use of alternative billing or other procedures.
Treatment of rules.--A rule issued under this subsection shall be treated as a rule issued under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)(1)(B)).
Effect on fcc.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or otherwise alter the authority of the Federal Communications Commission under section 201(b), section 232, or any other provisions, of the Communications Act of 1934.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Deadline for regulations.--Section 201(c) of such Act (as redesignated by subsection (a)(1)) is amended by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``The Commission shall prescribe the rules under subsection (b) within 270 days after the date of enactment of the Save Consumers Aggravation and Money Act of 2000.''.
Cross references.--Sections 202, 203, and 204 of such Act are amended by striking ``section 201(a)'' each place it appears and inserting ``subsection (a) or (b) of section 201''.
Heading.--The heading of section 201(a) is amended by striking ``In General'' and inserting ``Pay-per-Call Services Regulations''.
Definition.--Section 204 of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) The term `dial-around services' has the meaning provided in section 232(a) of the Communications Act of 1934.