This Act may be cited as the ``Economic Security Act of 1996''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) economic security is an integral part of national security; (2) the development of new ideas and technical innovation is critical to sustaining a healthy and competitive national economy; (3) encouraging innovation and creativity requires adequate protection of vital economic proprietary information, both tangible and intangible; (4) over 50 countries have covertly tried to obtain advanced technologies from United States industries; (5) the theft, wrongful destruction or alteration, misappropriation, or wrongful conversion by foreign governments or their agents of vital economic proprietary information belonging to United States owners directly and substantially threatens the health and competitiveness of critical segments of the United States economy and, consequently, the Nation's security; and (6) current laws are inadequate to protect against economic espionage by foreign governments or those acting on their behalf.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to protect the national security by preventing economic espionage and furthering the development and lawful utilization of United States vital proprietary economic information by protecting it from theft, wrongful destruction or alteration, misappropriation, and conversion by foreign governments and their agents or instrumentalities.
This Act is intended to protect the vital proprietary economic information of the United States Government and United States firms, businesses, industries, and individuals both domestically and abroad by punishing individuals, corporations, and institutions that engage in economic espionage with the intent or purpose of aiding foreign nations or governments and their instrumentalities and agents.
PREVENTION OF ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE AND PROTECTION OF VITAL PROPRIETARY ECONOMIC INFORMATION.
In General.--The National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 421 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE IX--ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE AND PROTECTION OF VITAL PROPRIETARY ECONOMIC INFORMATION ``SEC.
``As used in this title: ``(1) The term `foreign corporation, institution, or instrumentality' means any corporation, agency, component, institution, association, instrumentality, or legal, commercial, or business entity that is substantially owned, controlled, sponsored, commanded, managed, or dominated by a foreign government or subdivision of a foreign government.
The term `foreign agent' means any officer, employee, proxy, servant, delegate, or representative of a foreign nation or government.
The term `person' means a natural person, corporation, agency, association, institution, or any other legal, commercial, or business entity.
The term `vital proprietary economic information' means all forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering information, including data, plans, tools, mechanisms, compounds, formulas, designs, prototypes, processes, procedures, programs, codes, or commercial strategies, whether tangible or intangible, and however stored, compiled, or memorialized, if-- ``(A) the owner has taken reasonable measures to keep such information confidential; and ``(B) the information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable, acquired, or developed by legal means by the public.
The term `owner' means the United States person or persons in whom, or United States Government component, department, or agency in which, rightful legal, beneficial, or equitable title to, or license in, vital proprietary economic information is reposed.
The term `United States person' means-- ``(A) in the case of a natural person, a United States citizen or permanent resident alien; and ``(B) in the case of a nonnatural person, an entity substantially owned or controlled by the United States Government or by United States citizens or permanent resident aliens, or incorporated in the United States.
ENGAGING IN ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE TO AID FOREIGN NATIONS, GOVERNMENTS, CORPORATIONS, INSTITUTIONS, INSTRUMENTALITIES, OR AGENTS.
In General.--Any person who, with intent to, or reason to believe that it will, injure any owner and benefit any foreign nation, government, corporation, institution, instrumentality, or agent-- ``(1) steals, wrongfully appropriates, takes, carries away, or conceals, or by fraud, artifice, or deception obtains vital proprietary economic information; ``(2) wrongfully copies, duplicates, sketches, draws, photographs, downloads, uploads, alters, destroys, photocopies, replicates, transmits, delivers, sends, mails, communicates, or conveys vital proprietary economic information; ``(3) receives, buys, or possesses vital proprietary economic information, knowing the vital proprietary economic information to have been obtained by any of the means described in paragraph (1) or (2); ``(4) attempts to commit any offense described in paragraphs (1) through (3); ``(5) wrongfully solicits another to commit any offense described in paragraphs (1) through (3); or ``(6) conspires with one or more other persons to commit any offense described in paragraphs (1) through (3), and one or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, shall, except as provided in subsection (b), be fined not more than $500,000 or imprisoned not more than 25 years, or both.
Corporations.--Any corporation that commits any offense described in subsection (a) shall be fined not more than $10,000,000.
In General.--Notwithstanding any provision of State law, any person convicted of a violation under this title shall forfeit to the United States-- ``(1) any property constituting or derived from, any proceeds the person obtained, directly or indirectly, as the result of such violation; and ``(2) any of the person's property used, or intended to be used, in any manner or part to commit or facilitate the commission of such violation.
Court Order.--The court, in imposing a sentence on such person, shall order, in addition to any other sentence imposed pursuant to this title, that the person forfeit to the United States all property described in this section.
Applicable Law.--Property subject to forfeiture under this section, any seizure and disposition thereof, and any administrative or judicial proceeding in relation thereto, shall be governed by section 413 of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (21 United States Code 853), except for subsection 413(d) which shall not apply to forfeitures under this section.
Crime Victims Fund.--Notwithstanding section 524(c) of title 28, United States Code, there shall be deposited in the Crime Victims Fund established under section 1402 of the Victims of Crime Act of 1984 (42 United States Code 10601) all amounts from the forfeiture of property under this section remaining after the payment of the expenses for forfeiture and sale authorized by law.
IMPORT AND EXPORT SANCTIONS.
In General.--The President may prohibit, for a period of up to 5 years, the importation into, or exportation from, the United States of any product produced, made, assembled, or manufactured by a person convicted of any offense described in section 902.
Civil Penalties.--The Attorney General may impose a civil penalty not to exceed 5 times the value of the exports or imports involved or $100,000, whichever is greater, against any person who knowingly violates any order of the President issued under the authority of this title.
Such penalty may be imposed only after notice and opportunity for a hearing on the record in accordance with sections 554 through 557 of title 5.
Conduct Occurring in the United States.--This title applies to conduct occurring within the territorial and special maritime jurisdiction of the United States.
Conduct Occurring Outside the United States.--This title applies to conduct occurring outside the United States if-- ``(1) the offender is a United States person; or ``(2) the victim of the offense is an owner, as defined in section 901, and the offense was intended to have or had a substantial or direct effect on the United States.
CONSTRUCTION WITH OTHER LAWS.
``This title shall not be construed to preempt or displace any other Federal or State remedies, whether civil or criminal, for the misappropriation of vital proprietary economic information, or to affect the otherwise lawful disclosure of information by any government employee under section 552 of title 5 (commonly known as the Freedom of Information Act).
``In any prosecution under this title, the court may enter such orders and take such other action as may be necessary and appropriate to preserve the confidentiality of vital proprietary economic information, consistent with rule 16 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Federal Rules of Evidence, and other applicable laws.
An interlocutory appeal by the United States shall lie from a decision or order of a district court authorizing the disclosure of vital proprietary economic information.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES.
``This title does not prohibit any lawfully authorized investigative, protective, or intelligence activity of a law enforcement agency of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State, or an intelligence agency of the United States.''.
Technical Amendment.--The table of contents of the National Security Act of 1947 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE IX--ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE AND PROTECTION OF VITAL PROPRIETARY ECONOMIC INFORMATION ``Sec.
Engaging in economic espionage to aid foreign nations, governments, corporations, institutions, instrumentalities, or agents.
Import and export sanctions.
Construction with other laws.
Law enforcement and intelligence activities.''.
WIRE AND ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS INTERCEPTION AND INTERCEPTION OF ORAL COMMUNICATIONS.
Section 2516(1)(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``title IX of the National Security Act of 1947 (relating to economic espionage and protection of vital proprietary economic information in interstate and foreign commerce),'' after ``fuel),''.