This Act may be cited as the ``Public Land Management Participation Act of 1997''.
The purpose of this Act is to ensure that the public and the Congress have both the right and a reasonable opportunity to participate in decisions that affect the use and management of all public lands owned or controlled by the Government of the United States.
CLARIFICATION OF PUBLIC AND CONGRESSIONAL ROLE IN DECLARATION OF NATIONAL MONUMENTS.
The Antiquities Act (16 United States Code 431a) is amended by adding the following new section: ``Sec.
Public and congressional roles in national monument declarations ``(a) The Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture shall provide an opportunity for public involvement and by regulation shall establish procedures, including public hearings where appropriate, to give Federal, State, and local governments and the public, adequate notice and opportunity to comment upon and participate in the formulation of plans relating to the declaration of national monuments upon the lands owned or controlled by the Government of the United States pursuant to the authority of the Antiquities Act (16 United States Code 431).
In addition, the Secretary of the Interior and Agriculture shall, prior to any recommendations for declaration of an area-- ``(1) ensure compliance with all applicable federal land management and environmental statutes, including the National Environmental Policy Act (40 United States Code 4321-4370d); ``(2) cause mineral surveys to be conducted by the Geological Survey to determine the mineral values, if any, that may be present in such areas; ``(3) identify all existing rights held on federal lands contained within such areas by type and acreage; and ``(4) identify all State lands contained within such areas.
After such reviews and mineral surveys, the Secretary of the Interior or Agriculture shall report to the President his recommendations as to what lands owned or controlled by the Government of the United States warrant declaration as a national monument.
The President shall advise the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives of his recommendations with respect to declaration as national monuments of each such area, together with a map thereof and a definition of its boundaries.
Such advice by the President shall be given within two years of the receipt of each report from the Secretary.
After the effective date of the Public Land Management Participation Act, a recommendation of the President for declaration of a national monument shall become effective only if so provided by an Act of Congress.''.
CLARIFICATION OF PUBLIC AND CONGRESSIONAL ROLES IN WORLD HERITAGE SITE LISTING.
Section 401 of the National Historic Preservation Act Amendments of 1980 (16 United States Code 470a-1) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a) in the first sentence, by-- (A) inserting ``(in this section referred to as the Convention)'' after ``1973''; and (B) inserting ``and subject to subsections (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f)'' before the period at the end; (2) in subsection (b) in the first sentence, by inserting ``, subject to subsection (d),'' after ``shall''; and (3) adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(d) If the area proposed for designation is not wholly contained within an existing unit of the National Park System, the Secretary of the Interior and Agriculture: ``(1) Shall provide an opportunity for public involvement and by regulation shall establish procedures, including public hearings where appropriate, to give Federal, State, and local governments and the public, adequate notice and opportunity to comment upon and participate in the formulation of plans relating to the designation of any lands owned by the United States for inclusion on the World Heritage List pursuant to the Convention.
After such review, the Secretary of the Interior or Agriculture shall report to the President his recommendations as to what lands owned by the United States warrant inclusion on the World Heritage List pursuant to the Convention.
The President shall advise the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives of his recommendations with respect to the designation of any lands owned by the United States for inclusion on the World Heritage List pursuant to the Convention.
Such advice by the President shall be given within two years of the receipt of each report from the Secretary.
After the effective date of Public Land Participation Management Act, a recommendation of the Presisident for designation of any lands owned by the United States for inclusion on the World Heritage List shall become effective only if so provided by an Act of Congress.
The Secretary of the Interior or Agriculture shall object to the inclusion of any property in the United States on the list of World Heritage in Danger established under Article 11.4 of the Convention unless-- ``(1) the Secretary has submitted to the Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate a report describing the necessity for including that property on the list; and ``(2) the Secretary is specifically authorized to assent to the inclusion of the property on the list, by a joint resolution of the Congress enacted after the date that report is submitted.
The Secretary of the Interior and Agriculture shall submit an annual report on each World Heritage Site within the United States to the chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, that contains the following information for each site: ``(1) An accounting of all money expended to manage the site.
A summary of Federal full-time-equivalent hours related to management of the site.
A list and explanation of all nongovernmental organizations contributing to the management of the site.
A summary and account of the disposition of complaints received by the Secretary related to management of the site.''.
CLARIFICATION OF PUBLIC AND CONGRESSIONAL ROLES IN THE DESIGNATION OF UNITED NATIONS BIOSPHERE RESERVES.
Title IV of the National Historic Preservation Act Amendments of 1980 (16 United States Code 470a-1 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
No Federal official may nominate any lands in the United States for designation as a Biosphere Reserve under the Man and Biosphere Program of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization.
Any designation of an area in the United States as a Biosphere Reserve under the Man and Biosphere Program of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization shall not have, and shall not be given, any force or effect, unless the Biosphere Reserve is specifically authorized by an Act of Congress.
The Secretary of the Interior and Agriculture shall provide an opportunity for public involvement and by regulation shall establish procedures, including public hearings where appropriate, to give Federal, State, and local governments and the public, adequate notice and opportunity to comment upon and participate in the formulation of plans relating to the designation of any lands owned by the United States as a Biosphere Reserve under the Man and Biosphere Program of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization.
After such review, the Secretary of the Interior or Agriculture shall report to the President his recommendations as to what lands owned by the United States warrant inclusion as a Biosphere Reserve.
The President shall advise the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives of his recommendations with respect to the designation of any lands owned by the United States for inclusion as a Biosphere Reserve.
Such advice by the President shall be given within two years of the receipt of each report from the Secretary.
After the effective date of the Public Land Participation Management Act, a recommendation of the President for declaration of a Biosphere Reserve shall become effective only if so provided by an Act of Congress.
The Secretary of State shall submit an annual report on each Biosphere Reserve within the United States to the Chairman and Ranking Minority member of the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, that contains the following information for each reserve: ``(1) An accounting of all money expended to manage the reserve.
A summary of Federal full time equivalent hours related to management of the reserve.
A list and explanation of all nongovernmental organizations contributing to the management of the reserve.
A summary and account of the disposition of the complaints received by the Secretary related to management of the reserve.''