This Act may be cited as the ``National Materials Corridor Partnership Act of 1999''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the region adjacent to the 2,000-mile border between the United States and Mexico is an important region for energy- intensive manufacturing and materials industries critical to the economic and social wellbeing of both countries; (2) there are currently more than 800 multinational firms (including firms known as ``maquiladoras'') representing United States investments of more than $1,000,000,000 in the San Diego, California, and Tijuana, Baja California, border region and in the El Paso, Texas, and Juarez, Chihuahua, border region; (3) materials and materials-related industries comprise a major portion of the industries operating on both sides of the border, amounting to more than $6,800,000,000 in annual commerce on the Mexican side alone; (4) there are a significant number of major institutions in the border States of both countries currently conducting academic and research activities in materials; (5)(A) the United States Government currently invests approximately $1,000,000,000 annually in materials research, of which, in 1996, the Department of Energy funded the largest proportion of civilian materials research; and (B) there are also major materials programs at the National Science Foundation, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and Department of Defense, among other entities; (6) the United States and Mexico have invested heavily in domestic and binational cooperative programs to address major concerns for the natural resources, environment, and public health of the United States-Mexico border region, expending hundreds of millions of dollars annually in those efforts; (7)(A) scientific and technical advances in materials and materials processing provide major opportunities for-- (i) significantly improving energy efficiency; (ii) reducing emissions of global climate change gases; (iii) using recycled natural resources as primary materials for industrial production; and (iv) minimizing industrial wastes and pollution; and (B) such advances will directly benefit both sides of the United States-Mexico border by encouraging energy efficient, environmentally sound economic development that protects the health and natural resources of the border region; (8)(A) promoting clean materials industries in the border region that are energy efficient has been identified as a high priority issue by the United States-Mexico Foundation for Science Cooperation; and (B) at the 1998 discussions of the United States-Mexico Binational Commission, Mexico formally proposed joint funding of a ``Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative'', proposing $1,000,000 to implement the Initiative if matched by the United States; (9) recognizing the importance of materials and materials processing, academic and research institutions in the border States of both the United States and Mexico, in conjunction with private sector partners of both countries, and with strong endorsement from the Government of Mexico, in 1998 organized the Materials Corridor Council to implement a cooperative program of materials research and development, education and training, and sustainable industrial development as part of the Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative; and (10) successful implementation of the Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative would advance important United States energy, environmental, and economic goals not only in the United States-Mexico border region but also as a model for similar collaborative materials initiatives in other regions of the world.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a multiagency program in support of the Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative referred to in section 2(8) to promote energy efficient, environmentally sound economic development along the United States-Mexico border through the research, development, and use of new materials technology.
In this Act: (1) Program.--The term ``program'' means the program established under section 5(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
ESTABLISHMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a comprehensive program to promote energy efficient, environmentally sound economic development along the United States-Mexico border through the research, development, and use of new materials technology.
Considerations.--In developing the program, the Secretary shall give due consideration to the proposal made to the United States-Mexico Binational Commission for the Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative.
Participation of Other Federal Agencies.--The Secretary shall organize and conduct the program jointly with-- (1) the Department of State; (2) the Environmental Protection Agency; (3) the National Science Foundation; (4) the National Institute of Standards and Technology; and (5) any other departments or agencies the participation of which the Secretary considers appropriate.
Participation of the Private Sector.--When appropriate, funds made available under this Act shall be made available for research and development or education and training activities that are conducted with the participation and support of private sector organizations located in the United States and, subject to section 7(c)(2), Mexico, to promote and accelerate in the United States-Mexico border region the use of energy efficient, environmentally sound technologies and other advances resulting from the program.
Mexican Resource Contributions.--The Secretary shall-- (1) encourage public, private, nonprofit, and academic organizations located in Mexico to contribute significant financial and other resources to the program; and (2) take any such contributions into account in conducting the program.
Transfer of Technology From National Laboratories.--In conducting the program, the Secretary shall emphasize the transfer and use of materials technology developed by the national laboratories of the Department of Energy before the date of enactment of this Act.
ACTIVITIES AND MAJOR PROGRAM ELEMENTS.
Activities.--Funds made available under this Act shall be made available for research and development and education and training activities that are primarily focused on materials, and the synthesis, processing, and fabrication of materials, that promote-- (1) improvement of energy efficiency; (2) elimination or minimization of emissions of global climate change gases and contaminants; (3) minimization of industrial wastes and pollutants; and (4) use of recycled resources as primary materials for industrial production.
Major Program Elements.-- (1) In general.--The program shall have the following major elements: (A) Applied research, focused on maturing and refining materials technologies to demonstrate the feasibility or utility of the materials technologies.
Basic research, focused on the discovery of new knowledge that may eventually prove useful in creating materials technologies to promote energy efficient, environmentally sound manufacturing.
Education and training, focused on educating and training scientists, engineers, and workers in the border region in energy efficient, environmentally sound materials technologies.
Applied research.--Applied research projects under paragraph (1)(A) should typically involve significant participation from private sector organizations that would use or sell such a technology.
Basic research.--Basic research projects conducted under paragraph (1)(B) should typically be led by an academic or other research institution.
PARTICIPATION OF DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES OTHER THAN THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY.
Agreement.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall enter into an agreement with the departments and agencies referred to in section 5(b) on the coordination and implementation of the program.
Actions of Departments and Agencies.--Any action of a department or agency under an agreement under subsection (a) shall be the responsibility of that department or agency and shall not be subject to approval by the Secretary.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary and the departments and agencies referred to in section 5(b) may use funds made available for the program for research and development or education and training activities carried out by-- (A) State and local governments and academic, nonprofit, and private organizations located in the United States; and (B) State and local governments and academic, nonprofit, and private organizations located in Mexico.
Condition.--Funds may be made available to a State or local government or organization located in Mexico only if a government or organization located in Mexico (which need not be the recipient of the funds) contributes a significant amount of financial or other resources to the project to be funded.
Transfer of Funds.--The Secretary may transfer funds to the departments and agencies referred to in section 5(b) to carry out the responsibilities of the departments and agencies under this Act.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee consisting of representatives of the private, academic, and public sectors.
Considerations.--In establishing the advisory committee, the Secretary shall take into consideration organizations in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, such as the Materials Corridor Council and the Business Council for Sustainable Development-Gulf Mexico.
Consultation and Coordination.--Departments and agencies of the United States to which funds are made available under this Act shall consult and coordinate with the advisory committee in identifying and implementing the appropriate types of projects to be funded under this Act.
FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Federal departments and agencies participating in the program may provide financial and technical assistance to other organizations to achieve the purpose of the program.
Applied Research.-- (1) Use of cooperative agreements.-- (A) In general.--Federal departments and agencies shall, to the extent practicable, use cooperative agreements to fund applied research activities by organizations outside the Federal Government.
National laboratories.--In the case of an applied research activity conducted by a national laboratory, a funding method other than a cooperative agreement may be used if such a funding method would be more administratively convenient.
Federal share.-- (A) In general.--The Federal Government shall pay not more than 50 percent of the cost of applied research activities under the program.
Qualified funding and resources.--No funds or other resources expended either before the start of a project under the program or outside the scope of work covered by the funding method determined under paragraph (1) shall be credited toward the non-Federal share of the cost of the project.
Basic Research and Education and Training.-- (1) In general.--Federal departments and agencies shall, to the extent practicable, use grants to fund basic research and education and training activities by organizations outside the Federal Government.
National laboratories.--In the case of a basic research or education activity conducted by a national laboratory, a funding method other than a grant may be used if such a funding method would be more administratively convenient.
Federal share.--The Federal Government may fund 100 percent of the cost of the basic research and education and training activities of the program.
Competitive Selection.--All projects funded under the program shall be competitively selected using such selection criteria as the Secretary, in consultation with the departments and agencies referred to in section 5(b), determines to be appropriate.
Accounting Standards.-- (1) Waiver.--To facilitate participation in the program, Federal departments and agencies may waive any requirements for Government accounting standards by organizations that have not established such standards.
GAAP.--Generally accepted accounting principles shall be sufficient for projects under the program.
No Construction.--No program funds may be used for construction.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.