This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Prosecutor Act of 2011''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRADE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION AND DEPUTY UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE FOR TRADE ENFORCEMENT.
Establishment.--Chapter 4 of title I of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2171) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
TRADE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION AND DEPUTY UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE FOR TRADE ENFORCEMENT.
Establishment of Trade Enforcement Division.--There is established within the Office of the United States Trade Representative a Trade Enforcement Division (in this section referred to as the `Division').
Establishment of Position of Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement.-- ``(1) In general.--The Division shall be headed by a Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement.
Appointment and nomination.--The Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
As an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate, any nomination of the Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement submitted to the Senate for its advice and consent, and referred to a committee, shall be referred to the Committee on Finance.
Rank.--The Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement shall hold office at the pleasure of the President and shall have the rank of Ambassador.
Functions of Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement.-- ``(1) Principal function.--The principal function of the Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement shall be to ensure that United States trading partners comply with trade agreements to which the United States is a party.
Additional functions.--The Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement shall-- ``(A) assist the United States Trade Representative in investigating and prosecuting disputes before the World Trade Organization and pursuant to other bilateral or regional trade agreements to which the United States is a party; ``(B) assist the United States Trade Representative in carrying out the United States Trade Representative's functions under section 141(d); ``(C) make recommendations with respect to the administration of United States trade laws relating to barriers imposed by foreign governments to the importation of United States goods, services, and intellectual property, and other trade matters; and ``(D) perform such other functions as the United States Trade Representative may direct.
Office of Trade Assistance for Small Business.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established within the Division the Office of Trade Assistance for Small Business.
Functions.--The Office of Trade Assistance for Small Business shall provide technical and legal assistance and advice to eligible small businesses to enable such small businesses to prepare and file petitions (other than those that, in the opinion of the Office, are frivolous) under section 302.
Eligible small business defined.--The term `eligible small business' means any business concern that, in the judgment of the Office of Trade Assistance for Small Business, due to its size, has neither adequate internal resources nor financial ability to obtain qualified outside assistance in preparing and filing petitions and complaints under section 302.
In determining whether a business concern is an eligible small business, the Office of Trade Assistance for Small Business may consult with the Administrator of the Small Business Administration and the heads of other appropriate Federal departments and agencies.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents for the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 141 the following: ``Sec.
Trade Enforcement Division and Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement.''.
Compensation for Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement.--Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Deputy United States Trade Representatives (3).''
and inserting ``Deputy United States Trade Representatives (4).''.
Conforming Repeal.--Section 2112 of the Bipartisan Trade Promotion Authority Act of 2002 (19 United States Code 3812) is repealed.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CHIEF MANUFACTURING NEGOTIATOR.
Establishment of Position.--Section 141(b)(2) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2171(b)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) There shall be in the Office 3 Deputy United States Trade Representatives (in addition to the Deputy United States Trade Representative for Trade Enforcement established under section 142), 1 Chief Agricultural Negotiator, and 1 Chief Manufacturing Negotiator who shall all be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
As an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate, any nomination of a Deputy United States Trade Representative, the Chief Agricultural Negotiator, or the Chief Manufacturing Negotiator submitted to the Senate for its advice and consent, and referred to a committee, shall be referred to the Committee on Finance.
Each Deputy United States Trade Representative, the Chief Agricultural Negotiator, and the Chief Manufacturing Negotiator shall hold office at the pleasure of the President and shall have the rank of Ambassador.''.
Functions of Position.--Section 141(c) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2171(c)) is amended-- (1) by moving paragraph (5) 2 ems to the left; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6)(A) The principal function of the Chief Manufacturing Negotiator shall be to conduct trade negotiations and to enforce trade agreements relating to United States manufacturing products and services.
The Chief Manufacturing Negotiator shall be a vigorous advocate on behalf of United States manufacturing interests and shall perform such other functions as the United States Trade Representative may direct.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, and annually thereafter, the Chief Manufacturing Negotiator shall submit to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives a report on the actions taken by the Chief Manufacturing Negotiator in the preceding year.''.
Compensation.--Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code, as amended by section 101(c), is further amended by inserting ``Chief Manufacturing Negotiator.''
after ``Chief Agricultural Negotiator.''.
Technical Amendments.--Section 141(e) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2171(e)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``5314'' and inserting ``5315''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``the maximum rate of pay for grade GS-18, as provided in section 5332'' and inserting ``the maximum rate of pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule in section 5315''.