This Act may be cited as the ``Project SEARCH Act of 2000''.
Congress finds that-- (1) small communities often struggle to meet environmental goals due to difficulty in securing funding; (2) often, traditional sources of funding for environmental projects require expensive, complex studies or other application materials; (3) a small community that secures funding for an environmental project from a traditional source often is unable to provide matching funds required by the traditional source; and (4) small communities would benefit from a grant program designed to provide funding for environmental projects-- (A) through a simplified application process; and (B) without the requirement of matching funds.
In this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Council.--The term ``council'' means an independent citizens' council established by section 4(b) .
Environmental project.-- (A) In general.--The term ``environmental project'' means a project that is carried out for the benefit of the public health or welfare or the environment.
Inclusion.--The term ``environmental project'' includes an initial feasibility study.
Region.--The term ``region'' means a geographic area of a State, as determined by the Governor of the State.
SEARCH grant.--The term ``SEARCH grant'' means a grant for special environmental assistance for the regulation of communities and habitat awarded under section 4(c)(3).
Small community.--The term ``small community'' means an incorporated or unincorporated community having a population of not more than 2500 individuals.
In General.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established the SEARCH Grant Program.
Grant to council.--Not later than November 1 of each year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall transfer $1,000,000 to the Governor of each State, for use by the council in the State.
Independent Citizens' Council.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established in each State an independent citizens' council.
Composition.-- (A) In general.-- (i) Representation.--Each council shall be composed of 9 members that broadly represent the general population of the State in which the council is established, as determined by the Governor of the State.
Appointment.--A member of a council shall be appointed by the Governor of the State, except that-- (I) not more than 1 member shall be an agent, employee, or official of the Federal Government; and (II) not more than 1 member shall be an agent, employee, or official of the State government.
Chairperson.--Each council shall select a chairperson from among the members of the council, except that a member described in subclause (I) or (II) of subparagraph (A)(ii) shall not serve as chairperson.
SEARCH grants.-- (A) In general.--Each council shall review applications for and award SEARCH grants from the funds transferred under subsection (a)(1) to small communities that meet the eligibility criteria under subsection (c).
No matching requirement.--A small community that receives a SEARCH grant under this section shall not be required to provide matching funds.
SEARCH Grants to Small Communities.-- (1) Eligibility criteria.--Each council may award a SEARCH grant under this section to a small community for an environmental project for which the small community-- (A)(i) is unable to secure funding; or (ii) is underfunded; (B) has incurred unexpected expenses during construction of the environmental project; or (C) needs funds for initial feasibility or environmental studies before applying to traditional funding sources.
Application.--To apply for a SEARCH grant under this section, a small community shall submit to the council in the State in which the small community is located an application that includes-- (A) a description of the proposed environmental project (including an explanation of how the project would assist the small community in complying with environmental regulations); (B) an explanation of why the project is important to the community; (C) a description of all actions taken with respect to the project, including any attempt to secure funding, as of the date of the application; and (D) a SEARCH grant application form provided by the council, completed and with all required supporting documentation.
Application and review.-- (A) Application.--An application for a SEARCH grant under this section shall be submitted to a council not later than February 5 of the fiscal year for which the grant is to be awarded.
Review and award.--Not later than March 5 of each year, each council shall-- (i) review all applications received under subparagraph (A); and (ii) award SEARCH grants to small communities based on an evaluation of the eligibility criteria under paragraph (1).
Unexpended funds.-- (i) In general.--If any unexpended funds remain after SEARCH grants are awarded under subparagraph (B), the council may repeat the application and review process so that any remaining funds may be awarded not later than July 30.
Retention of funds.--Any unexpended funds that are not awarded under subparagraph (B) or clause (i) shall be retained by the council for award during the following year.
Report.--Not later than September 1 of the first fiscal year for which a SEARCH grant is awarded by a council under this section, and annually thereafter, the council shall submit to the Administrator a report that-- (1) describes the number of SEARCH grants awarded during the fiscal year; (2) identifies each small community that received a SEARCH grant during the fiscal year; (3) describes the project or purpose for which each SEARCH grant was awarded; and (4) describes the status of each project or portion of a project for which a SEARCH grant was awarded, including a project or portion of a project for which a SEARCH grant was awarded for any fiscal year before the fiscal year in which the report is submitted.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Grant funding.-- (A) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 4(a)(2) $1,000,000 for each State for each fiscal year.
Actual appropriation.--If funds to carry out section 4(a)(2) are made available for a fiscal year in an amount that is less than the amount authorized under subparagraph (A) for the fiscal year, the appropriated funds shall be divided equally among the 50 States.
Other expenses.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act other than section 4(a)(2).