This Act may be cited as the ``Job Placement Act of 1995''.
JOB PLACEMENT VOUCHER PROGRAM.
Addition of Program.--Section 482 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 682) is amended-- (1) in subsection (d)(1)(A)(ii)-- (A) in subclause (III), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in subclause (IV), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subclause: ``(V) a job placement voucher program as described in subsection (h).
''; (2) by redesignating subsections (h) and (i) as subsections (i) and (j), respectively; and (3) by inserting after subsection (g), the following subsection: ``(h) Job Placement Voucher Program.--(1) The State agency may establish and operate a job placement voucher program for individuals participating in the program under this part.
A State that elects to operate a job placement voucher program under this subsection-- ``(i) shall establish eligibility requirements for participation in the job placement voucher program; and ``(ii) may establish other requirements for such voucher program as the State deems appropriate.
A job placement voucher program operated by a State under this subsection shall include the following requirements: ``(A) The State shall identify, maintain, and make available to an individual applying for or receiving assistance under part A a list of State-approved job placement organizations that offer services in the area where the individual resides and a description of the job placement and support services each such organization provides.
Such organizations may be publicly or privately owned and operated.
(i) An individual determined to be eligible for assistance under part A shall, at the time the individual becomes eligible for such assistance-- ``(I) receive the list and description described in subparagraph (A); ``(II) agree, in exchange for job placement and support services, to-- ``(aa) execute, within a period of time permitted by the State, a contract with a State-approved job placement organization which provides that the organization shall attempt to find employment for the individual; and ``(bb) comply with the terms of the contract; and ``(III) receive a job placement voucher (in an amount to be determined by the State) for payment to a State-approved job placement organization.
The State shall impose the sanctions provided for in section 402(a)(19)(G) on any individual who does not fulfill the terms of a contract executed with a State-approved job placement organization.
At the time an individual executes a contract with a State-approved job placement organization, the individual shall provide the organization with the job placement voucher that the individual received pursuant to subparagraph (B).
(i) A State-approved job placement organization may redeem for payment from the State not more than 25 percent of the value of a job placement voucher upon the initial receipt of the voucher for payment of costs incurred in finding and placing an individual in an employment position.
The remaining value of such voucher shall not be redeemed for payment from the State until the State-approved job placement organization-- ``(I) finds an employment position (as determined by the State) for the individual who provided the voucher; and ``(II) certifies to the State that the individual remains employed with the employer that the organization originally placed the individual with for the greater of-- ``(aa) 6 continuous months; or ``(bb) a period determined by the State.
A State may modify, on a case-by-case basis, the requirement of clause (i)(II) under such terms and conditions as the State deems appropriate.
(i) The State shall establish performance-based standards to evaluate the success of the State job placement voucher program operated under this subsection in achieving employment for individuals participating in such voucher program.
Such standards shall take into account the economic conditions of the State in determining the rate of success.
The State shall, not less than once a fiscal year, evaluate the job placement voucher program operated under this subsection in accordance with the performance-based standards established under clause (i).
The State shall submit a report containing the results of an evaluation conducted under clause (ii) to the Secretary and a description of the performance-based standards used to conduct the evaluation in such form and under such conditions as the Secretary shall require.
The Secretary shall review each report submitted under this clause and may require the State to revise the performance-based standards if the Secretary determines that the State is not achieving an adequate rate of success for such State.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 601 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 403(l)(1)(A) (42 United States Code 603(l)(1)(A)), (A) in clause (ii)(II) by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iii) with respect to expenditures made for a job placement voucher program under section 482(h) in a fiscal year, the greater of-- ``(I) 70 percent; or ``(II) the percentage paid to the State under clause (ii)(II) plus 10 percent.
''; and (2) in section 431(a)(6) (42 United States Code 629a(a)(6))-- (A) by striking ``482(i)(5)'' and inserting ``482(j)(5)''; and (B) by striking ``482(i)(7)(A)'' and inserting ``482(j)(7)(A)''.
The amendments made by section 2 shall be effective with respect to calendar quarters beginning with the second calendar quarter beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.