This Act may be cited as the ``Cooperative Interjurisdictional Rivers Fisheries Resources Act of 1993''.
Congress finds that-- (1) several rivers flow between, or are common to, 2 or more State boundaries; (2) in many cases, there is not a single entity which has complete jurisdictional responsibility for the fisheries resources in these rivers; (3) a strong partnership between Federal and State governmental authorities is vital in coordinating and facilitating cooperative research and in resolving problems associated with large river ecosystems because, among other reasons, many fishery management problems are caused by federally regulated activities (including activities resulting in point and nonpoint pollution) and federally constructed projects (including dams and navigation facilities); (4) in some rivers, the once rich assemblages of fish fauna and diverse habitats have been lost and formerly abundant native fish now exist only as endangered or depleted populations; (5) without positive management actions, native species in some rivers will continue to decline, fostering even greater conflicts among water users; (6) construction of waterway developments (including navigation, flood control, water level fluctuation, power generation, irrigation, and general water depletion projects) is accelerating and increasingly degrading large river ecosystems nationwide; (7) the United States public will face reduced opportunities for recreational, commercial, subsistence, and aesthetic uses of river systems without demonstrable change in management strategies in the near future; (8) several programs have been proposed or are underway to resolve conflicts in these management strategies; (9) in one of these programs, Federal, State, and local fisheries managers in the Mississippi River drainage basin have entered into the Mississippi Interstate Cooperative Resource Agreement under which the managers will share resources, facilities, and funding for preparation and development of long-range strategic plans for management of the drainage basin's interjurisdictional fisheries; (10) the Mississippi Interstate Cooperative Resource Agreement merits detailed evaluation as a model for the development of long-range strategic plans for the management of interjurisdictional rivers fisheries resources; and (11) to ensure that these programs are appropriately coordinated and to conserve the fisheries resources in interjurisdictional rivers, there is a need for strategies to improve coordination, cooperation, research, and information sharing.
COUNCIL ON INTERJURISDICTIONAL RIVERS FISHERIES.
Establishment.--There is established a council to be known as the ``Council on Interjurisdictional Rivers Fisheries'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Council'').
Duties.-- (1) In general.--The Council shall develop recommendations for cooperative action strategies on the management of interjurisdictional rivers fisheries.
Contents of strategies.--The recommended strategies to be developed by the Council under this subsection shall at a minimum contain the following: (A) A listing of the 10 highest priority interjurisdictional rivers in need of cooperative fisheries management.
Comprehensive fishery strategic plans for the 5 highest priority interjurisdictional rivers identified pursuant to subparagraph (A), including goals, objectives, implementation schedules, and estimates of costs necessary to fully develop and implement the strategic plans.
Considerations.--In developing a listing of the highest priority interjurisdictional rivers in developing and comprehensive fishery strategic plans, the Council shall consider the following: (A) The nature and severity of problems of the interjurisdictional rivers creating the need for enhanced cooperation.
The adequacy of existing management programs for the interjurisdictional rivers to address these problems.
The status and trends of fisheries resources in the interjurisdictional rivers.
The biological, physical, geologic, and hydrographic characteristics of the interjurisdictional rivers and the economic demands (including water uses) on these rivers.
Review and approval of strategic plans by states.--The Council may not issue a cooperative action strategy under this section in final form unless-- (A) the Council has submitted each comprehensive fishery strategic plan contained in the strategy to each State having jurisdiction over an interjurisdictional river that is covered by the plan; and (B) the director of each State fish and wildlife agency has been offered the opportunity to choose whether the strategy will be applicable to his State.
Membership.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Council shall be composed of 13 members as follows: (A) The Secretary (or the Secretary's designee) who shall serve as chairperson of the Council.
7 individuals appointed by the Secretary who are qualified to serve on the Council by virtue of being the director of a State fish and wildlife agency which represents 1 of the following major interjurisdictional drainage systems of the United States: the upper Mississippi, lower Mississippi, Colorado, Missouri, Ohio, Pacific Coastal, and Atlantic Coastal Systems.
The Assistant Administrator for Fisheries of the National Marine Fisheries Service of the Department of Commerce (or the Assistant Administrator's designee).
The Secretary of the Department of Energy (or the Secretary's designee).
The Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works (or the Assistant Secretary's designee).
The Chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority (or the Chairman's designee).
One member of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to be appointed by the Secretary (or the member's designee).
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for a term of 3 years.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Council shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of such term.
Pay.--Members shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Council, members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code; except that members shall be entitled to receive such expenses only to the extent that amounts are made available for such purpose in advance in appropriations Acts.
Transaction of Business.--In resolving matters before the Council, attempts shall be made to reach consensus by the members.
In the event consensus cannot be reached, all decisions of the Council will be made by majority vote of all its members.
Provisions shall be made to include a statement of minority opinion in matters in which a consensus cannot be reached.
Meetings.--The Council shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or upon the request of a majority of the members.
Staff and Administration.-- (1) Administrative support.--The Secretary shall provide the Council with such administrative support services as are necessary for the effective functioning of the Council.
Organization.--The Council shall determine its organization and prescribe the practices and procedures for carrying out its duties under subsection (b).
Limitation on Spending Authority.--No money authorized to be appropriated under this Act may be used to reimburse any agency or governmental unit (whose employees are Council members) for time spent by any such employee performing duties of the Council.
Federal Advisory Committee Act Exemption.--Conduct of business of the Council is exempt from the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 36 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report containing the strategies to be developed under this section, together with all statements of minority opinion received by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (d).
Termination.--The Council shall terminate 30 days after the date on which a report is submitted under subsection (i).
Limitation on Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed-- (1) to diminish the authority or responsibility of a State with respect to interjurisdictional resources within an interjurisdictional river or which depend on an interjurisdictional river; (2) to authorize the Secretary to implement any strategy developed under this Act which is beyond the Secretary's authority on the date of the enactment of this Act; or (3) to supercede the authority and agreements of existing commissions or compacts.
MISSISSIPPI INTERSTATE COOPERATIVE RESOURCE AGREEMENT.
Evaluation.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Mississippi Interstate Cooperative Resource Agreement Steering Committee, shall conduct a pilot test of the Mississippi Interstate Cooperative Resource Agreement.
Contents.--The pilot test to be conducted under this section shall include the following: (1) Identification and description of each of the river ecosystems of the Mississippi River drainage system and the associated fishery resources and fish habitat of such river ecosystems.
Identification and description of the known impacts of and mitigation techniques for navigation, flood control, power generation, irrigation, and municipal water supplies projects on fishery resources of the Mississippi River drainage basin, including the impacts of dredging, channel maintenance, water level management, sediment and contaminant transport, vessel traffic, water withdrawal, and changes in salinity and various hydrologic conditions.
Analysis of existing resource data with regard to regional depletion of important fish stocks (including paddlefish, lake sturgeon, and walleye) and the potential for restoration of such fish stocks.
Identification of major information gaps and technological needs to improve the cooperative management of interjurisdictional fisheries resources.
A comprehensive study of the status, and the management, research, and restoration needs, of the interjurisdictional fisheries of the Mississippi River drainage system.
Development of recommendations regarding the scope, schedule, regional priorities, and roles of participants in the Mississippi Interstate Cooperative Resource Agreement for undertaking cooperative management and research projects.
Development of plans and testing projects for the restoration and enhancement of depleted fish stocks (including lake sturgeon, paddlefish, walleye, and other high priority nonanadromous species) and associated habitats of such fish stocks.
Evaluation of the feasibility and expected success of the program under the Mississippi Interstate Cooperative Resource Agreement and the merits of extending such program of cooperative management strategy to other river basins in the United States.
Estimates of funds required to implement recommendations and plans developed under paragraphs (6), (7), and (8).
Report to Congress.--Not later than 36 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report containing the evaluation of the pilot test to be conducted under this section.
For the purpose of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Interjurisdictional fisheries resources.--The term ``interjurisdictional fisheries resources'' means fisheries resources, and associated river ecosystems, that depend on interjurisdictional rivers and are under the management of 2 or more governmental entities.
Interjurisdictional river.--The term ``interjurisdictional river'' means a river that flows between, or is common to, 2 or more State boundaries.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
State fish and wildlife agency.--The term ``State Fish and Wildlife Agency'' includes any State department or agency, or a part thereof, that is empowered under the laws of the State to exercise the functions ordinarily exercised by a State fish and wildlife agency.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for each of fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996-- (1) $1,000,000 per fiscal year to carry out section 3; and (2) $2,000,000 per fiscal year to carry out section 4.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.