This Act may be cited as the ``Combined Welfare Administration Act of 1993''.
COMBINED GRANT TO STATE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF AFDC, MEDICAID, AND FOOD STAMP PROGRAMS.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make grants, in accordance with the provisions of this section, to each State for the costs of the necessary and proper administration of its State plan for aid to families with dependent children approved under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act, its State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of such Act and its State plan of operation approved (by the Secretary of Agriculture) under the Food Stamp Act of 1977.
Source of Funds.--Grants to States under subsection (a) shall be made from amounts appropriated to carry out this Act, or from funds made available for such purpose-- (1) by the Secretary of Health and Human Services pursuant to part A of title IV, or title XIX, of the Social Security Act; or (2) by the Secretary of Agriculture pursuant to the Food Stamp Act of 1977.
Establishment of Single Fund.--Amounts made available pursuant to subsection (b) shall be combined in a single fund account established by the Secretary of the Treasury for the administration of this Act by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
ELIMINATION OF ENHANCED FEDERAL PAYMENTS FOR STATE ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIVITIES UNDER AFDC, MEDICAID, AND FOOD STAMPS.
AFDC.-- (1) In general.--Section 403(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 603(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) in the case of any State, an amount equal to 50 percent of the total amounts expended during such quarter as found necessary by the Secretary for the proper and efficient administration of the State plan;''.
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 402(e) of such Act (42 United States Code 602(e)) is amended-- (i) by striking ``(e)(1)'' and inserting ``(e)''; and (ii) by striking paragraph (2).
Part A of title IV of such Act (42 United States Code 601 et sequentes) is amended by striking section 413.
Medicaid.-- (1) In general.--Section 1903(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(a)) is amended-- (A) by striking paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (6); (B) in paragraph (5), by adding ``plus'' at the end; and (C) by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (7) as paragraphs (2) and (3).
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1158 of such Act (42 United States Code 1320c-7) is amended-- (i) by striking ``(a) A State plan'' and inserting ``A State plan''; and (ii) by striking subsection (b).
Section 1902(a)(25)(A)(ii) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(25)(A)(ii)) is amended by striking ``shall--'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``shall be integrated with a mechanized claims processing and information retrieval system;''.
Section 1903 of such Act (42 United States Code 1396b) is amended by striking subsections (b)(3) and (r).
Section 1903(w) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396b(w)) is amended-- (i) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``subsection (a)(7)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(3)''; and (ii) by striking ``paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (6), and (7)'' each place it appears in paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(A)(iii) and inserting ``paragraph (3)''.
Section 1919 of such Act (42 United States Code 1396r) is amended-- (i) in subsection (g)(3)(C), by striking ``1903(a)(2)(D)'' and inserting ``1903(a)(3)''; and (ii) by striking ``1903(a)(7)'' each place it appears in subsections (h)(2)(E) and (h)(2)(F) and inserting ``1903(a)(3)''.
Food Stamp Program.-- (1) In general.--Section 16(a) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2025(a)) is amended by striking ``: Provided, That the Secretary'' and all that follows through the end and inserting a period.
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 16(c)(1) of such Act (7 United States Code 2025(c)(1)) is amended-- (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``and provide'' and all that follows through ``error rates''; (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``other than those receiving adjustments under subparagraph (A)''; (iii) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (A)''; and (iv) by striking subparagraph (A) and redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Section 16(c)(5) of such Act (7 United States Code 2025(c)(5)) is amended-- (i) by striking ``either incentive payments under paragraph (1)(A) or''; and (ii) by striking ``paragraph (1)(C)'' each place it appears and inserting ``paragraph (1)(B)''.
Section 16(c)(6) of such Act (7 United States Code 2025(c)(6)) is amended-- (i) by striking ``and incentive payments'' and all that follows through ``(1)(C)'' and inserting ``and claims pursuant to paragraph (1)''; and (ii) by striking ``paragraph (1)(C)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)(B)''.
Section 16(c)(7) of such Act (7 United States Code 2025(c)(7)) is amended by striking ``paragraph (1)(C)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)(B)''.
Section 16 of such Act (7 United States Code 2025(c)) is amended by striking subsections (g) and (j).
Section 23(a)(1) of such Act (7 United States Code 2032(a)(1)) is amended-- (i) in paragraph (1)(C), by striking ``either section 16(a) or 16(g)'' and inserting ``section 16(a)''; and (ii) by striking subparagraph (E).
ALLOTMENT AND PAYMENT OF FUNDS UNDER GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.-- (1) Basis for payments in initial year of applicability.-- The total amount payable to a State under this Act for fiscal year 1994 shall be that amount which bears the same ratio to the amount available pursuant to section 2 for that year as the allowable administrative amounts determined to be payable to such State for the last two quarters in fiscal year 1993 and the first two quarters in fiscal year 1994 (as defined in subsection (b), and subject to the limitation in subsection (c)) bear to the total of such amounts for all States.
Payments in subsequent years.--The total amount payable to a State under this Act for each subsequent fiscal year shall be the amount payable to the State under this subsection in the preceding year increased by the percentage increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (United States Reports city average) for the 12-month period ending with June of the previous year.
Timing; frequency.--Payments under this section shall be made in accordance with section 203 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 from amounts determined to be available to the State under paragraph (1), and payments shall be made at the same time and in the same frequency as the Secretary determines appropriate for making payments under section 403(b)(3) or section 1903(d)(2) of the Social Security Act.
Allowable Administrative Amounts Defined.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1), the term ``allowable administrative amount'' means (subject to paragraphs (2) and (3)), with respect to a State, the amounts determined to be payable to a State for the quarter specified is equal to the sum of-- (A) payments to the State under section 403(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (excluding any amounts determined under section 403(a)(3)(B) of such Act); (B) payments to the State under paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (6) of section 1903(a) of such Act (excluding amounts paid for the activities described in paragraph (3)(A) of such section); and (C) payments to the State under section 16(a) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (excluding amounts retained by a State under such section because of its collection or recovery activities, and without regard to any adjustment under section 16(c) of such Act or any amounts paid under such section for the cost of investigations or prosecutions, or the cost of administering the food stamp program on all or part of an Indian reservation).
Limitation.--For purposes of paragraph (1), in determining the amount of payments to a State for a fiscal year, the State's expenditures shall be considered only if amounts have been transferred for grants under this Act for such year from sums otherwise available (but for such transfer) for administrative costs under title IV or title XIX of the Social Security Act or under the Food Stamp Act of 1977.
Elimination of enhanced administrative payments in determining amount of grants.--In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary shall apply the Social Security Act and the Food Stamp Act of 1977 as if the amendments to those Acts made by section 3 had been in effect for quarters beginning during 1993.
Treatment of Amounts in Dispute.--In the event that there is a dispute between a State and the Secretary (or the Secretary of Agriculture) with respect to any such claim for payment which, if approved, would be included in computing the State's allotment under subsection (a), the amount in dispute shall not be included for purposes of making allotments under such subsection for any year prior to the first year beginning after the dispute is resolved.
REPORT ON INTENDED USE OF FUNDS AND ACTIVITIES; AUDIT.
Report by State.--Each State desiring to receive an allotment for any fiscal year under this Act shall prepare a report on the intended use of such allotment.
Such report shall describe in general terms of goals to be achieved and classes of administrative expenditures for which funds received under the grant will be used.
The report shall assure that fiscal control and fund accounting procedures will be established that are adequate to meet the requirements of subsection (b).
The report (for the second and subsequent years for which an allotment is sought under this Act) shall also include a description of the State's activities under the Act in the fiscal year preceding the year for which such report is prepared and the extent to which the goals it identified in the report for such preceding year were achieved.
The report shall be made public within the State on a timely basis and in such manner as to facilitate review by and comments from interested persons and local governments on its content, and a copy of the report will be provided to the Secretary.
Audits.--Each State receiving a grant under this Act shall biennially conduct a financial and compliance audit of its expenditures from such grants.
Such State audits shall be conducted by an entity independent of any State agency administering activities carried out under this subsection, and in accordance with the Comptroller General's standards for auditing governmental organizations, programs, activities, and functions.
The State shall also make copies of the audit available for public inspection within the State.
INAPPLICABILITY OF SINGLE STATE AGENCY REQUIREMENTS UNDER OTHER ACTS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Social Security Act or of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, a State plan approved under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act, under title XIX of such Act, or a State plan of operation required by section 11(d) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, shall not be regarded as failing to comply with applicable requirements under such provisions solely because the agency administering the grant provided under this Act is not the same State agency otherwise responsible for the administration of such State plan.
AFDC.--Section 403(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 603(a)(3)) is amended by striking ``plan--'' and inserting ``plan (except to the extent that payment is made to the State for expenditures under this part during quarters in the fiscal year under the Combined Welfare Administration Act of 1993)--''.
Medicaid.--Section 1903(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(a)(3)) is amended by striking ``(3)'' and inserting ``(3) except to the extent that payment is made to the State for expenditures under this title during quarters in the fiscal year under the Combined Welfare Administration Act of 1993,''.
Food Stamp Program.--Section 16 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2025) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Payments to a State under this section for quarters in a fiscal year shall be reduced to the extent that payment is made to the State for activities under this Act during quarters in the fiscal year under the Combined Welfare Administration Act of 1993.''.
In this Act-- (1) except as otherwise provided, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services; and (2) the term ``State'' means each of the several States and the District of Columbia.
This Act shall apply to payments to States under part B of title IV of the Social Security Act, title XIX of the Social Security Act, and the Food Stamp Act of 1977 for quarters in fiscal years beginning after fiscal year 1993.