This Act may be cited as the ``Partnership for Productive Ports Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) A network of ports and harbors is essential to the United States economy, competitiveness in world trade, and national security.
Approximately 95 percent of United States overseas trade moves on ships in and out of United States ports.
The Nation's coastal, ocean, and freshwater resources are critical assets which must be protected, conserved, and restored.
These resources provide numerous economic and environmental benefits.
Port facilities serve as a key link in the intermodal transportation chain and can realize their full potential as magnets for shipping and commerce only if timely, cost- effective, and environmentally sound dredging and dredged material management occurs.
Approximately 400,000,000 cubic yards of sediment are dredged from our Nation's ports each year, 300,000,000 cubic yards of which is dredged from Federal channels.
Improved environmental responsibility requires that dredged material demonstrating a potential to unreasonably degrade human health or the environment be appropriately managed to minimize negative environmental interactions, yet suitable disposal sites are often not readily available.
All Federal navigation dredging projects are approved because they are in the national interest and therefore should not be blocked because of a lack of disposal capacity that meets the necessary Federal requirements.
The cost of disposal and management of sediments dredged in the course of constructing and maintaining a navigation project are integral to the total project costs and as such should be cost shared according to the allocations under existing law.
Inconsistent cost-sharing policies for the use of open water, upland, and confined disposal facilities create an economic incentive to use open water disposal sites even when more environmentally positive alternatives are preferable.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide Federal-non- Federal cost sharing for the construction and operation of confined disposal facilities for contaminated dredged materials in order to make suitable alternatives to open water disposal available nationwide.
CREATION OF CONFINED DREDGED MATERIAL DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
Federal Share.--Section 101(b) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2211(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``The Federal share'' and inserting the following: ``(1) General federal share.--The Federal share''; (2) by moving the text of paragraph (1), as so designated, 2 ems to the right; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Federal share for confined disposal facilities.--The Federal share of the cost of project features that are necessary for creation of confined dredged material disposal facilities shall be determined in accordance with subsection (a)(1).
The cost sharing requirements of this paragraph shall apply to projects authorized before, on, or after the the date of the enactment of this paragraph.
Confined disposal facility defined.--In this section and section 210, the term `confined disposal facility' means any alternative to ocean disposal or ocean disposal with capping, including subaqueous borrow pits, containment islands, and upland confined disposal facilities.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 101 of such Act is further amended-- (1) in the second sentence of subsection (a)(2)-- (A) by inserting ``and'' after ``rights-of-way,''; and (B) by striking ``, and dredged material disposal areas''; (2) in subsection (a)(3)-- (A) by inserting ``and'' after ``rights-of-way,''; and (B) by striking ``, and dredged material disposal areas'' and inserting ``, including those required for confined dredged material disposal facilities,''; and (3) in subsection (e)(1) by striking ``, and to provide dredged material disposal areas''.
FUNDING FROM HARBOR MAINTENANCE TRUST FUND.
Section 210 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2238) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Inclusion of Disposal Costs as O&M Costs.--For purposes of this section, the term `operation and maintenance costs' includes costs related to disposal of dredged materials in a confined dredged material disposal facility.
Operation and maintenance costs other than costs related to such disposal shall receive priority consideration for funding from the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund.''.
CONFINED DISPOSAL FACILITY IN THE PORT OF NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY.
Creation and Operation.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army, in cooperation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and State and local governmental agencies, shall create, operate, and maintain a confined dredged material disposal facility in the Port of New York and New Jersey.
The facility shall be designed for the disposal of dredged materials that do not meet applicable criteria for open water disposal.