This Act may be cited as the ``Alternative Routes to Teacher Certification Act of 1998''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) If current trends continue, American schools will need to hire more than two million teachers in the next decade to educate an increasing number of students and to replace current teachers who will retire or leave the profession.
There are highly qualified individuals who serve in other occupations that are interested in pursuing a teaching career; in 1996, ten percent of all teachers at the elementary or secondary level worked in an occupation outside of education in the previous year.
Schools are having trouble recruiting qualified teachers.
Nearly three-quarters of physical science students and one-third of English students in high-poverty schools take classes from unqualified teachers.
Urban and rural areas face significant challenges in finding highly qualified teachers.
In addition, while one-third of American students in 1998 are members of minority groups, members of racial and ethnic minorities make up only 13 percent of the teaching force.
In 1988, only eight percent of teacher education students enrolled in a national representative sample of college programs were minorities, while one study indicates that more than one third of the alternative route candidates were minorities.
The same study found that 69 percent of alternatively certified teacher interns that are being trained to teach mathematics would prefer to teach in an urban or city setting, while only 14 percent of university-certified teacher candidates in mathematics chose an urban or city setting.
Bringing distinctive life experiences and perspectives into the classroom can enrich the instructional curriculum and school climate, and enhance the quality of American education.
Alternative routes to certification programs help open the teaching profession to individuals with high subject knowledge and diverse life and professional experiences.
Alternative routes to certification partnerships will target Federal dollars directly to local school districts that desire to create a program that will attract qualified teachers to areas of high need, which would include a shortage of teachers in a subject-content area.
Alternative routes to certification programs should help states develop new teacher-licensing policies based on subject-matter knowledge, teaching knowledge, teaching skills, and other performance-based examinations.
ALTERNATIVE ROUTES TO TEACHER CERTIFICATION.
Title V of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding the end the following new part: ``PART G--ALTERNATIVE ROUTES TO TEACHER CERTIFICATION ``SEC.
PURPOSE; PARTNERSHIP FUNCTIONS; AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
Purpose.--The purpose of this part is to improve the supply of well-qualified elementary school and secondary school teachers-- ``(1) by authorizing support for partnerships that will have a significant impact on increasing the pool of qualified teachers for the purpose of developing alternative routes for preparing and certifying teachers in elementary and secondary schools; and ``(2) by awarding grants to innovative programs that recruit, prepare, and retain high quality individuals who plan to enter teaching from another occupational field and seek to become licensed teachers.
Partnership Functions.--A partnership under this part shall-- ``(1) recruit highly qualified individuals who hold postsecondary degrees in the academic subject area in which they plan to teach or a closely related field and who-- ``(A) plan to enter teaching from another occupational field and seek to become licensed teachers, which may include paraprofessionals seeking to achieve full teacher certification; teachers whom the partner local educational agencies have hired under `emergency certification' procedures; or former military personnel, mid-career professionals, or AmeriCorps or Peace Corps volunteers who desire to enter teaching; or ``(B) recent college graduates who (i) have a record of academic distinction, and (ii) hold a bachelor of arts degree in the academic subject area in which they plan to teach or a closely related field; ``(2) meet the needs of participating schools in addressing high demand areas; and ``(3) encourage States to develop new teacher-licensing policies based on subject-matter knowledge, teaching knowledge, teaching skills, and other performance-based examinations.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and such sums as necessary for 4 succeeding fiscal years.
Grants by the Secretary.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible applicants for the purposes of recruiting, preparing, and retaining high quality individuals who plan to enter teaching from another occupational field.
Grants Duration; Continuation.--The Secretary shall make competitive grants to partnerships, subject to the availability of appropriations, for a period not to exceed 5 years, including no more than 1 year to be used for planning and preparation.
The Secretary may make continuation awards only after determining satisfactory progress.
The Secretary shall conduct an extensive review of progress, with the assistance of outside experts, before making a continuation award for the 4th year.
GRANT APPLICATIONS AND CONTRACTS.
``To receive an award under this subpart, an eligible applicant shall submit to the Secretary an application that-- ``(1) designates a fiscal agent for the partnership; ``(2) contains a description of how the partnerships will develop an alternative route to a certification program that leads to an increased pool of highly qualified individuals entering the teaching profession; ``(3) contains information on the quality of the program, and how the applicants will ensure that high quality applicants will be recruited and prepared; ``(4) contains a description of the assessment that the partnership has undertaken to determine the critical teacher recruitment needs of the local educational agency; ``(5) contains a description of recruitment and outreach efforts; number and types of students that will be served under the program, which may include paraprofessionals, `emergency certification' hires; former military personnel, mid-career professionals or returned Peace Corps or AmeriCorps volunteers; ``(6) contains a description of-- ``(A) how the partnership will use funds to increase the number of recruits with high potential to be effective teachers that participate in its alternative certification program; ``(B) the criteria applicant will use to select students; ``(C) how the partnership will develop and implement performance criteria for program and candidate evaluation; ``(D) how the State agency will develop new teacher-licensing policies based on subject-matter knowledge, teaching knowledge, teaching skills, and other performance-based examinations; ``(E) the activities that will be carried out under the grant, including a description or justification of support services and induction program that will be offered to participating recruits; and ``(F) the commitments by the local educational agency partner to hire qualified individuals who complete the alternative certification program.
Required Activities.--In order to increase the pool of highly qualified individuals entering the teaching profession by developing alternative routes to certification, and to encourage States to develop new teacher-licensing policies based on subject-matter knowledge, teaching knowledge, teaching skills, and other performance-based examinations, each partnership selected to receive a grant under this part shall use the grant funds for each of the following purposes: ``(1) To develop, design, and implement programs that recruit and train highly qualified individuals to become licensed to teach in elementary and secondary schools.
To undertake an assessment to determine the critical needs of the local educational agency, particularly in terms of teacher recruitment.
To develop outreach and recruitment efforts to attract high quality individuals.
To develop new teacher-licensing policies based on subject-matter knowledge, teaching knowledge, teaching skills, and other performance-based examinations.
To develop an induction program, to include mentoring and support services.
``The Secretary shall evaluate programs under this part.
Such evaluation shall include-- ``(1) an evaluation of the effectiveness of the program in ensuring all teachers have demonstrated subject-matter knowledge, teaching knowledge, and teaching skills necessary to teach effectively in the content area or areas in which he or she will provide instruction; ``(2) a comparison of student achievement outcomes between teachers certified through grant alternative program and teachers certified through traditional programs; and ``(3) an assessment of increases in the pool of qualified applicants to alleviate teacher shortage in underserved areas, including minority individuals.
For purposes of this part: ``(1) Eligible applicant.--The term `eligible applicant' means a partnership of-- ``(A) the State agency responsible for certification of teachers; ``(B) 1 or more local education agencies that-- ``(i) are eligible for assistance for title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965; and ``(ii) have an enrollment of children counted under section 1124(c) of that Act that exceeds 30 percent of the total enrollment of the district; and ``(C) 1 or more nonprofit organizations, including institutions of higher education, that prepare teachers for their initial entry into the teaching profession.
Partnerships may also include 2-year colleges, other public and private, nonprofit agencies and organizations that serve, or are located in, communities served by the local education agencies in the partnership, and that have a record of training teachers.
Alternative route to certification.--The term `alternative route to certification' means a program, specifically for individuals who have at least a bachelor's degree, to obtain initial teacher licensure and to teach in elementary and secondary schools, and in which the awarded licenses are equal to licenses issued to teachers who complete a traditional teacher education program route.
Highly qualified individuals.--The term `highly qualified individuals' means individuals who have demonstrated the subject matter knowledge, the ability to attain teaching knowledge, and teaching skills necessary to teach effectively in the content area or areas in which he or she will provide instruction.
Matching Requirement.--The Federal share of the cost of activities carried out under a grant shall not exceed 75 percent.
The non-Federal share of activities may be provided in cash or in kind, and may be obtained from any non-Federal public or private source.