This Act may be cited as the ``Second Amendment Reaffirmation Act of 1995''.
The Congress finds: (1) Article I, section 8, of the Constitution of the United States gives no authority to Congress to require a waiting period or a background check before the sale of a firearm.
The United States Supreme Court, in United States v. Lopez, struck down gun control legislation for lack of constitutional authority.
A number of Federal district courts have ruled that the Federal mandate imposed on the States by Public Law 103-159 violates the tenth amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
Public Law 103-159 violates the second amendment to the Constitution of the United States because it impermissibly infringes on the right of the people to secure a firearm when necessary for the protection of person and property and for the pursuit of other constitutionally protected activities.
Waiting periods and background checks have produced devastating effects for law-abiding citizens trying to acquire firearms for self-defense.
During the 1992 riots in Los Angeles, residents were forced to wait fifteen days before they could legally buy firearms for protection, in spite of the fact that police admitted they could not protect citizens.
In addition to the problem of delays and erroneous denials for law-abiding citizens who need to protect themselves, background checks can also lend themselves to official abuse: (A) In 1991, the office of Technology Assessment commented on the possibility of gun owner registration under Virginia's instant check system.
It stated, ``[T]he potential [for registration] exists regardless of legal prohibitions.''
A Justice Department Task Force stated in 1989 that ``[a]ny system that requires a criminal record check prior to purchase of a firearm creates the potential for the automated tracking of individuals who seek to purchase firearms.''
Public Law 103-159 is hereby repealed, and any provisions of law amended or repealed by such Act are restored or revived as if such Act had not been enacted.
The Assault Weapon Manufacturing Strict Liability Act of 1990 (D.C. Act 8-289, signed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia on December 17, 1990) is hereby repealed, and any provisions of law amended or repealed by such Act are restored or revived as if such Act had not been enacted.
The second sentence of paragraph (4) of subsection (g) of section 923 of title 18, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Where discontinuance of the business is absolute, such records shall be delivered within thirty days after the business discontinuance to another licensee.''.
Subparagraph (2)(A) of subsection (d) of section 924 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding after ``chapter'' the following: ``or under chapter 53 of subtitle E of title 26, United States Code, including a proceeding before an administrative law judge''.
Subparagraph (2)(B) of subsection (d) of section 924 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding after ``chapter'' the following: ``or under chapter 53 of subtitle of title 26, United States Code, including a proceeding before an administrative law judge''.
Subparagraph (2)(D) of subsection (d) of section 924 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking all after ``(D)'' and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``Any person aggrieved by the violation of any civil or constitutional right in connection with the lawful possession or use of a firearm by the Government of the United States or any official or employee thereof or the Government of any State or subdivision or any official or employee thereof may bring an action for actual and punitive damages in the federal district court in which such person resides or transacts business.
The court may award a prevailing plaintiff, other than the Government of the United States or any State or any subdivision thereof, or any official or employee thereof, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.
Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to limit any remedies which may otherwise be available to such person.''
Section 926 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections: ``(d) No provision of law, nor any statute of any State or subdivision thereof, enacted to regulate the level of any pollutant or pollutants may be applied to the sale, transportation, possession, importation, or use of any firearm or ammunition.
No officer or employee of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms may undertake any investigation of a single individual, organization, or business which will reasonably require expenditures in excess of $4,000 without prior written approval by the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury.
No officer or employee or the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms may undertake any investigation in consultation or cooperation with the Internal Revenue Service without prior written approval by the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury.
Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be imprisoned for not more than two years, fined not more than $250,000, or both.
(1) No officer, agent, or employee of the United States may list, record, copy, or computerize the names of firearms owners, other than those required to be maintained under title 26, United States Code, nor shall such officer, agent, or employee transfer information concerning the identities of firearms owners to a facility owned, managed, or controlled by the United States or any State or political subdivision thereof, nor shall such officer, agent, or employee participate in the establishment of any system of registration of firearms, firearms owners, or firearms transactions or dispositions.
Any list, record, copy, computerization, facility, or system which, had it been created or expanded following the effective date of this Act, would be in violation of this Act, together with any records delivered to the Secretary pursuant to paragraph (4) of subsection (g) of section 923 of title 18, United States Code, shall be destroyed within ninety days of the effective date of this Act.
Any person aggrieved by the violation of any civil or constitutional right in connection with a violation of the provisions or this subsection by the Government of the United States or any official or employee thereof or the Government of any State or subdivision or any official or employee thereof or the Government of any State or subdivision or any official or employee thereof may bring an action for actual and punitive damages in the federal district court in which such person resides or transacts business.
The court may award a prevailing plaintiff, other than the Government of the United States or any State or any subdivision thereof, or any official or employee thereof, reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to limit any remedies which may otherwise be available to such person.''.
If any provision of this Act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the Act which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications, and to this end the provisions of this Act are severable.
The provisions of this Act shall take effect immediately upon enactment.