of April 6, 1937 (56 United States Statutes at Large 57, chapter 69; 7 United States Code 148 et sequentes).
The Act of January 31, 1942 (56 United States Statutes at Large 40, chapter 31; 7 United States Code 149).
The Act of August 20, 1912 (commonly known as the ``Plant Quarantine Act'') (37 United States Statutes at Large 315, chapter 308; 7 United States Code 151 et sequentes).
The Halogeton Glomeratus Control Act (7 United States Code 1651 et seq.).
The Act of August 28, 1950 (64 United States Statutes at Large 561, chapter 815; 7 United States Code 2260).
The Federal Noxious Weed Act of 1974 (7 United States Code 2801 et seq.
), other than the first section and section 15 of that Act (7 United States Code 2801 note, 2814).
Effect on Regulations.--Regulations promulgated under the authority of a provision of law repealed by subsection (a) shall remain in effect until such time as the Secretary promulgates a regulation under section 306 that supersedes the earlier regulation.
TITLE IV--FEDERAL COORDINATION SEC.
In this title: (1) Action plan.--The term ``Action Plan'' means the National Invasive Species Action Plan developed and submitted to Congress under section 404, including any updates to the Action Plan.
Alien species.--The term ``alien species'' means, with respect to a particular ecosystem, any species, including its seeds, eggs, spores, or other biological material capable of propagating the species, that is not native to that ecosystem.
Control.--The term ``control'' means-- (A) the suppression, reduction, or management of invasive species populations; (B) the prevention of the spread of invasive species from areas where the species are present; and (C) the taking of measures such as the restoration of native species and habitats to reduce the effects of invasive species and to prevent further invasions.
Council.--The term ``Council'' means the Invasive Species Council established by section 402.
Ecosystem.--The term ``ecosystem'' means the complex of a community of organisms and the community's environment.
Federal agency.--The term ``Federal agency'' has the meaning given the term ``agency'' in section 551 of title 5, United States Code, except that the term does not include an independent establishment (as defined in section 104 of title 5, United States Code).
Introduction.--The term ``introduction'' means the intentional or unintentional escape, release, dissemination, or placement of a species into an ecosystem as a result of human activity.
Invasive species.--The term ``invasive species'' means an alien species the introduction of which causes or is likely to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health.
Native species.--The term ``native species'' means, with respect to a particular ecosystem, a species that, other than as a result of an introduction, historically occurred or currently occurs in the ecosystem.
Species.--The term ``species'' means a group of organisms all of which-- (A) have a high degree of physical and genetic similarity; (B) generally interbreed only among themselves; and (C) show persistent differences from members of allied groups of organisms.
Stakeholder.--The term ``stakeholder'' means an entity with an interest in invasive species, including-- (A) a State, tribal, or local government agency; (B) an academic institution; (C) the scientific community; and (D) a nongovernmental entity, including an environmental, agricultural, or conservation organization, trade group, commercial interest, or private landowner.
Establishment.--There is established an advisory council to be known as the ``Invasive Species Council''.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Council shall be composed of-- (A) the Secretary of State; (B) the Secretary of the Treasury; (C) the Secretary of Defense; (D) the Secretary of the Interior, who shall be a cochairperson of the Council; (E) the Secretary of Agriculture, who shall be a cochairperson of the Council; (F) the Secretary of Commerce, who shall be a cochairperson of the Council; (G) the Secretary of Transportation; (H) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; and (I) a representative of State government appointed by the National Governors' Association.
Other federal agency representatives.--The Council may-- (A) invite other representatives of Federal agencies to serve as members of the Council, including representatives from subcabinet bureaus or offices with significant responsibilities concerning invasive species; and (B) prescribe special procedures for the participation by those other representatives on the Council.
Duties.--The Invasive Species Council shall-- (1) provide national leadership regarding invasive species; (2) oversee the implementation of this title and make recommendations designed to ensure that the activities of Federal agencies concerning invasive species are coordinated, complementary, cost-efficient, and effective, relying to the maximum extent practicable on organizations addressing invasive species, such as-- (A) the Aquatic Nuisance Species Task Force established by section 1201 of the Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 4721); (B) the Federal Interagency Committee for the Management of Noxious and Exotic Weeds; and (C) the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources of the Office of Science and Technology Policy; (3) encourage planning and action at local, tribal, State, regional, and ecosystem-based levels to achieve the goals and objectives of the Action Plan, in cooperation with stakeholders and organizations addressing invasive species; (4) develop recommendations for international cooperation in addressing invasive species; (5) develop, in consultation with the Council on Environmental Quality, guidance to Federal agencies under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et seq.)
concerning prevention and control of invasive species, including the procurement, use, and maintenance of native species in a manner designed to affect invasive species; (6) facilitate development of a coordinated network among Federal agencies to document, evaluate, and monitor impacts from invasive species on the economy, the environment, and human health; (7) facilitate establishment of a coordinated, up-to-date information-sharing system that-- (A) uses, to the maximum extent practicable, the Internet; and (B) facilitates access to and exchange of information concerning invasive species, such as-- (i) information on the distribution and abundance of invasive species; (ii) life histories of invasive species and invasive characteristics; (iii) economic, environmental, and human health impacts from invasive species; (iv) techniques for management of invasive species; and (v) laws and programs for management, research, and public education concerning invasive species; and (8) develop and submit to Congress the Action Plan.
Executive Director; Staff.--With the concurrence of the other cochairpersons, the Secretary of the Interior shall-- (1) appoint an Executive Director of the Council; and (2) provide staff and administrative support for the Council.
Establishment.--The Secretary of the Interior shall-- (1) establish an advisory committee to provide information and advice for consideration by the Council; and (2) after consultation with other members of the Council, appoint members of the advisory committee to represent stakeholders.
Duties.--The duties of the advisory committee shall include making recommendations for plans and actions at local, tribal, State, regional, and ecosystem-based levels to achieve the goals and objectives of the Action Plan.
Cooperation.--The advisory committee shall act in cooperation with stakeholders and organizations addressing the problem of invasive species.
Administrative and Financial Support.--The Secretary of the Interior shall provide administrative and financial support for the advisory committee.
INVASIVE SPECIES ACTION PLAN.
In General.--Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Council shall develop and submit to Congress a National Invasive Species Action Plan, which shall-- (1) detail and recommend performance-oriented goals and objectives and specific measures of success for Federal agency efforts concerning invasive species; (2) detail and recommend measures to be taken by the Council to carry out its duties under section 402; and (3) identify the personnel, other resources, and additional levels of coordination needed to achieve the goals and objectives of the Action Plan.
Public Participation and Coordination.--The Action Plan shall be-- (1) developed through a public process and in consultation with Federal agencies and stakeholders; and (2) coordinated with any State plans concerning invasive species.
Special Requirements for First Action Plan.-- (1) In general.--The first Action Plan submitted under subsection (a) shall-- (A) include a review of existing and prospective approaches and authorities for preventing the introduction and spread of invasive species, including approaches for-- (i) identifying pathways for the introduction of invasive species; and (ii) minimizing the risk of introductions by means of those pathways; and (B) identify research needs and recommend measures to minimize the risk that introductions will occur.
Recommended processes.--The measures recommended under paragraph (1)(B) shall provide for-- (A) a science-based process to evaluate risks associated with the introduction and spread of invasive species; and (B) a coordinated and systematic risk-based process to identify, monitor, and interdict pathways that may be involved in the introduction of invasive species.
Recommendations for legislation.--If any measure recommended under paragraph (1)(B) is not authorized by law in effect as of the date of the recommendation, the Council shall develop and submit to Congress legislative proposals for necessary changes in law.
Updates and Evaluations of Action Plan.--The Council shall-- (1) develop and submit to Congress biennial updates of the Action Plan; and (2) concurrently evaluate and report on success in achieving the goals and objectives specified in the Action Plan.
Response by Federal Agencies.--Not later than 18 months after the date of submission to Congress of the Action Plan, each Federal agency that is required to implement a measure recommended under subsection (a)(1) or (c)(1)(B) shall-- (1) take the recommended action; or (2) provide to the Council an explanation of why the action is not feasible.
TITLE V--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS SEC.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Compensation.--Except as provided in section 106 and as specifically authorized by law, no part of the amounts appropriated under this section shall be used to provide compensation for property injured or destroyed by or at the direction of the Secretary.
Authority To Transfer Certain Funds.--In connection with an emergency in which a plant pest or noxious weed threatens a segment of the agricultural production of the United States, the Secretary may transfer from other appropriations or funds available to the agencies or corporations of the Department of Agriculture such amounts as the Secretary considers necessary to be available in the emergency for the arrest, control, eradication, and prevention of the dissemination of the plant pest or noxious weed and for related expenses.
Availability.--Any funds transferred under this section shall remain available for such purposes until expended.
Conforming Amendments.--The first section of Public Law 97-46 (7 United States Code 147b) is amended-- (1) by striking ``plant pests or''; and (2) by striking ``section 102 of the Act of September 21, 1944, as amended (7 United States Code 147a), and''.