Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Capital Defense Counsel Standards Act of 2002''.
RIGHT TO LEGAL REPRESENTATION FOR INDIGENT DEFENDANTS.
Preconviction Representation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a defendant in a criminal action in a State court, which may result in punishment by death, who is or becomes financially unable to obtain adequate representation or investigative, expert, or other reasonably necessary services at any time-- (1) before judgment; or (2) after the entry of a judgment imposing a sentence of death, but before the execution of that judgment; shall be entitled to the appointment of 1 or more attorneys and the furnishing of such other services in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Postconviction Representation.--In a postconviction proceeding in which a defendant seeks to vacate or set aside a death sentence, a defendant who is or becomes financially unable to obtain adequate representation or investigative, expert, or other reasonably necessary services shall be entitled to the appointment of 1 or more attorneys and the furnishing of such other services in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
MINIMUM EXPERIENCE REQUIRED FOR DEFENSE COUNSEL.
Prejudgment Appointment.-- (1) In general.--If the appointment of legal counsel under this Act is made before judgment, at least 1 attorney so appointed-- (A) must have been admitted to practice for not less than 5 years in the court in which the prosecution is to be tried; and (B) must have not less than 3 years experience in the actual trial of felony prosecutions in that court.
Judicial appointment.--The court before which the defendant is to be tried, or a judge thereof, shall promptly, upon the request of the defendant, assign 2 attorneys to the case.
Expertise; accessibility.--At least 1 of the attorneys assigned under paragraph (2)-- (A) shall be learned in the law applicable to capital cases; and (B) shall have free access to the accused at all reasonable hours.
Recommendation.--In assigning counsel under this section, the court shall consider-- (A) the recommendation of the State public defender organization, community defender organization, or equivalent organization; or (B) if no such organization exists in the relevant jurisdiction, the administrative office of the local court or any governmental entity, bar association, or organization with knowledge regarding the skills and qualifications of local defense counsel.
Witnesses.--The court shall allow a defendant, under this Act, to produce lawful witnesses to testify in support of the defendant, and shall compel such witnesses to appear at trial in the same manner that witnesses are compelled to appear on behalf of the prosecution.
Postjudgment Appointment.--If the appointment is made after judgment, at least 1 attorney appointed shall-- (1) have been admitted to practice for not less than 5 years in the appropriate State appellate court; (2) have not less than 3 years experience in the handling of felony appeals in that court; and (3) be learned in the law applicable to capital cases.
Learned Standard.--In determining whether an attorney is learned in the law of capital cases under this section, the State court shall apply the standard used in the courts of the United States.
Appointment of Substitute Counsel.--With respect to this section, the court, for good cause, may appoint another attorney whose background, knowledge, or experience would otherwise enable the attorney to properly represent the defendant, with due consideration to the seriousness of the possible penalty and to the unique and complex nature of the litigation.
Scope of Legal Representation.--Unless replaced by similarly qualified counsel upon the motion of the attorney or the defendant, each attorney appointed under this Act shall represent the defendant throughout every stage of available judicial proceedings, including-- (1) pretrial motions and procedures; (2) competency proceedings; (3) trial; (4) sentencing; (5) executive and other clemency proceedings; (6) motions for new trial; (7) appeals; (8) applications for stays of execution; and (9) applications for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court of the United States.
Additional Services.-- (1) In general.--Upon a finding that investigative, expert, or other services are reasonably necessary for the representation of the defendant, whether in connection with issues relating to guilt or the sentence, the court may authorize the attorneys for the defendant to obtain such services on behalf of the defendant and, if so authorized, shall order the payment of fees and expenses for such services pursuant to section 5.
Ex parte communications.--No ex parte proceeding, communication, or request may be considered under this section unless a proper showing is made concerning the need for confidentiality.
Any such proceeding, communication, or request shall be transcribed and made a part of the record available for appellate review.
ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS.
Attorney Fees.--Compensation shall be paid to attorneys appointed under this Act at a rate equivalent to that of attorneys representing defendants in Federal capital cases under section 408(q)(10)(A) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 848(q)(10)(A)).
Additional Expenses.--Fees and expenses paid for investigative, expert, and other reasonably necessary services authorized under this section shall be equivalent to fees paid in Federal capital cases under section 408(q)(10)(B) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 848(q)(10)(B)).
Public Disclosure.--The amounts paid for services under this section shall be disclosed to the public, after the disposition of the petition.
IRREBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION OF DEFICIENT PERFORMANCE.
In General.--In a proceeding in Federal court under section 2254 of title 28, United States Code, the failure to comply with the procedures of this Act shall create an irrebuttable presumption that the performance of the counsel for the petitioner was deficient.
Entitlement to Relief; Burden of Proof; Standard of Review.--A petitioner is not entitled to relief unless the petitioner shows that the result of the proceeding would have been different if the performance of the counsel for the petitioner had not been deficient.
The party opposing the petition has the burden of establishing that the standards in this section have been met.
The court shall conduct a de novo review to settle this issue.
Other Remedies.--The provisions of this section are not intended to limit any other Federal or State court from enforcing this section by any other appropriate remedy.