READING RESEARCH DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN.
Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Reading Research Dissemination and Implementation Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The National Reading Panel was convened to assess the status of research-based knowledge in the area of reading development and instruction and to evaluate the effectiveness of various approaches to teaching children to learn to read.
On April 13, 2000, the National Reading Panel issued its report, ``Teaching Children to Read: An Evidence-Based Assessment of the Scientific Research Literature on Reading and its Implications for Reading Instruction''.
The National Reading Panel was to assess the extent to which instructional approaches found to be effective are ready for application in the classroom, and to develop a strategy for rapidly disseminating the information on those approaches to schools to facilitate effective reading instruction in the schools.
The National Reading Panel has completed its assessment of the objective research-based knowledge in the area of reading development and reading instruction and has identified several instructional strategies that have been clearly documented by research to be effective for teaching the range of reading skills to children of varying reading abilities.
The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development has developed an initial dissemination strategy to provide all Members of Congress, all colleges of education, all State departments of education, and all public libraries in the Nation with copies of the National Reading Panel's report.
A dissemination of findings, although helpful, does not typically lead to systematic and genuine implementation of the critical research findings that inform teacher preparation practices, classroom instructional practices, and educational policies.
To ensure that research findings on effective reading instructional approaches are fully implemented for the improvement of the education of our Nation's children, a strategic plan for the dissemination and implementation of the findings is necessary.
Establishment of Strategic Planning Team.--The Assistant Secretary of Education for Educational Research and Improvement and the Director of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the Department of Health and Human Services shall jointly convene a strategic planning team to develop the plan required under subsection (d).
The team shall be composed of the following: (1) The Chairman of the National Reading Panel.
Persons jointly appointed by the convening officials from among persons who are representative of each of the following: (A) The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
The Department of Education.
Presidents of institutions of higher education.
The teacher education colleges or departments within institutions of higher education.
State boards of education.
State directors of special education.
The Governors of States.
Publishers of reading textbooks.
Plan.--The Strategic Planning Team shall develop and, not later than December 31, 2000, submit to the Secretary of Education a plan-- (1) to determine-- (A) the extent to which current teacher preparation for both preservice and inservice training incorporates the findings of the National Reading Panel; and (B) how any barriers to the incorporation of those findings can be changed in order to integrate the findings into programs to educate and certify teachers; (2) to identify the deficiencies in instructional materials, including textbooks and supplementary materials, and to determine how materials might be designed to correct the deficiencies in ways that reflect the findings of the National Reading Panel; (3) to determine whether there are any barriers in Federal and State policies that would preclude appropriate adoption of the National Reading Panel findings; and (4) to identify specific strategies for collaboration among businesses, public schools, teacher education programs, university and college administrators, and teacher-parent collaborations to guide and ensure that evidence-based instructional practices are implemented in teacher preparation, classroom instruction, and Federal and State policies.
Implementation of Plan.--Upon receiving the plan under subsection (d), the Secretary of Education shall immediately take the actions necessary to implement the plan.