This Act may be cited as the ``Tribal Government Tax-Exempt Bond Authority Amendments Act of 1995''.
MODIFICATIONS OF AUTHORITY OF INDIAN TRIBAL GOVERNMENTS TO ISSUE TAX-EXEMPT BONDS.
General Provision.--Subsection (c) of section 7871 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Indian tribal governments treated as States for certain purposes) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Additional Requirements for Tax-Exempt Bonds.-- ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 103 shall apply to any obligation issued by an Indian tribal government (or subdivision thereof) only if such obligation is part of an issue 95 percent or more of the net proceeds of which are to be used to finance facilities located on land within or in close proximity to the exterior boundaries of an Indian reservation.
Private activity bonds.--Any private activity bond (as defined in section 141(a)) issued by an Indian tribal government (or subdivision thereof) shall be treated as a qualified bond for purposes of section 103(b)(1) to which section 146 does not apply if-- ``(A) General restrictions.--The requirements of section 144(a)(8)(B) and section 147 are met with respect to the issue.
Specific restrictions.-- ``(i) Ownership.--In the case of an issue the net proceeds of which exceed $500,000, 50 percent or more of the profits or capital interests in the facilities to be financed thereby (or in the entity owning the facilities) are owned either by an Indian tribe, a subdivision thereof, a corporation chartered under section 17 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 (25 United States Code 477) or section 3 of the Oklahoma Welfare Act (25 United States Code 503), individual enrolled members of an Indian Tribe, an entity wholly-owned by any of the foregoing, or any combination thereof.
Employment test.--It is reasonably expected (at the time of issuance of the obligations) that for each $100,000 of net proceeds of the issue at least 1 employee rendering services at the financed facilities is an enrolled member of an Indian tribe or the spouse of an enrolled member of an Indian tribe.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, pueblo, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village, or regional or village corporation, as defined in, or established pursuant to, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes) which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians.
Indian reservation.--The term `Indian reservation' means a reservation, as defined in-- ``(i) section 3(d) of the Indian Financing Act of 1974 (25 United States Code 1452(d)); or ``(ii) section 4(10) of the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 (25 United States Code 1903(10)).
In close proximity to.--The term `in close proximity to' means-- ``(i) in the case of an Indian reservation, or portion thereof, located within a metropolitan statistical area (within the meaning of section 143(k)(2)(B)), within 1 mile of the boundaries of such reservation, or portion thereof; and ``(ii) in the case of an Indian reservation, or portion thereof, located within a nonmetropolitan area (as defined in section 42(d)(5)(C)(iv)(IV)), within 15 miles of the boundaries of such reservation, or portion thereof.
Net proceeds.--The term `net proceeds' has the meaning given such term by section 150(a)(3).''.
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (3) of section 149(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to federally guaranteed bond is not exempt) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E) and by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Exception for bonds issued by indian tribal governments.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any bond issued by an Indian tribal government (or subdivision thereof) unless it is federally guaranteed within the meaning of paragraph (2)(B)(ii).''.
EXEMPTION FROM REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
The first sentence of section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 United States Code 77c(a)(2)) is amended by inserting ``or by any Indian tribal government or subdivision thereof (within the meaning of section 7871 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986),'' after ``or territories,''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply to obligations issued after the date of the enactment of this Act.