This Act may be cited as the ``Marine Mammal Rescue Assistance Act of 1999''.
JOHN H. PRESCOTT MARINE MAMMAL RESCUE ASSISTANCE GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--Title IV of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1371 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 408 and 409 as sections 409 and 410, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 407 the following: ``SEC.
JOHN H. PRESCOTT MARINE MAMMAL RESCUE ASSISTANCE GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--(1) Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary shall conduct a grant program to be known as the John H. Prescott Marine Mammal Rescue Assistance Grant Program, to provide grants to eligible stranding network participants for the recovery or treatment of marine mammals, the collection of data from living or dead marine mammals for scientific research regarding marine mammal health, and facility operation costs that are directly related to those purposes.
(A) The Secretary shall ensure that, to the greatest extent practicable, funds provided as grants under this subsection are distributed equitably among the designated stranding regions.
In determining priorities among such regions, the Secretary may consider-- ``(i) any episodic stranding or any mortality event other than an event described in section 410(6), that occurred in any region in the preceding year; and ``(ii) data regarding average annual strandings and mortality events per region.
Application.--To receive a grant under this section, a stranding network participant shall submit an application in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe.
Advisory Group.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Marine Mammal Commission, shall establish an advisory group in accordance with this subsection to advise the Secretary regarding the implementation of this section, including the award of grants under this section.
Membership.--The advisory group shall consist of a representative from each of the designated stranding regions and other individuals who represent public and private organizations that are actively involved in rescue, rehabilitation, release, scientific research, marine conservation, and forensic science regarding stranded marine mammals.
Public participation.-- ``(A) Meetings.--The advisory group shall-- ``(i) ensure that each meeting of the advisory group is open to the public; and ``(ii) provide, at each meeting of the advisory group, an opportunity for interested persons to present oral or written statements concerning items on the agenda for the meeting.
Notice.--The Secretary shall provide to the public timely notice of each meeting of the advisory group.
Minutes.--The Secretary shall keep and make available to the public minutes of each meeting of the advisory group.
Exemption.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the establishment and activities of an advisory group in accordance with this subsection.
Limitation.--The amount of a grant under this section shall not exceed $100,000.
Matching Requirement.-- ``(1) In general.--The non-Federal share of the costs of an activity conducted with a grant under this section shall be 25 percent of such costs.
In-kind contributions.--The Secretary may apply to the non-Federal share of an activity conducted with a grant under this section the amount of funds, and the fair market value of property and services, provided by non-Federal sources and used for the activity.
Administrative Expenses.--Of amounts available each fiscal year to carry out this section, the Secretary may expend not more than 6 percent to pay the administrative expenses necessary to carry out this section.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Designated stranding region.--The term `designated stranding region' means a geographic region designated by the Secretary for purposes of administration of this title.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' has the meaning given that term in section 3(12)(A).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2003, to remain available until expended.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 3(12)(B) of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1362(12)(B)) is amended by inserting ``(other than section 408)'' after ``title IV''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in the first section of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (86 United States Statutes at Large 1027) is amended by striking the items relating to sections 408 and 409 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
John H. Prescott Marine Mammal Rescue Assistance Grant Program.
Passed the House of Representatives September 27, 1999.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.