This Act may be cited as the ``Restore American Dream Act of 2007''.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter I of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 224 as section 225, and by inserting after section 223 the following new section: ``SEC.
Allowance of Deduction.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction the amounts paid in cash for the taxable year by or on behalf of such individual to a homeownership plan established for the benefit of the individual.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum deduction.--The deduction allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed the limitation of section 415(c) (relating to limitation for defined contribution plans).
Deduction not to exceed compensation.--The deduction allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed an amount equal to the compensation includible in the individual's gross income for such taxable year.
Period for deductions.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any contribution made to a homeownership plan after the contribution period.
Number of plans.--If an individual is the beneficiary of more than 1 homeownership plan during any taxable year, no deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any amount paid for such taxable year to any homeownership plan established for the benefit of such individual.
Married individuals.--For purposes of this section-- ``(A) Treatment.--Married individuals filing either a joint return or separate returns shall be considered to be 1 individual.
Establishment of plan.--A homeownership plan established for the benefit of any married individual shall be deemed to be established for the exclusive benefit of the individual and such individual's spouse.
Merger of plans.--In the event that 2 individuals for each of whose benefit a homeownership plan has been established should marry, the 2 plans shall be deemed to be merged into 1 plan.
Thereafter, subject to paragraph (1), each individual may make contributions during the remainder of the contribution period applicable to that individual.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Homeownership plan.--The term `homeownership plan' means a trust created or organized in the United States exclusively for the purpose of paying qualified principal residence acquisition expenses of the account holder, but only if such account holder meets the ownership limitations specified in paragraph (3) and only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted unless it is in cash.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which the person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The assets of the trust shall be invested in accordance with the direction of the account holder.
The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
The interest of an individual in the balance in his account is nonforfeitable.
The entire interest of an individual for whose benefit the trust is maintained will be distributed to such individual at the end of the contribution period.
Qualified principal residence acquisition expenses.-- The term `qualified principal residence acquisition expense' means an expense incurred by the taxpayer with respect to acquiring a principal residence, including expenses for a downpayment, interest, points, homeowners and mortgage insurance, other closing costs, and other related items.
Ownership limitations.--The account holder shall be an individual who, after attaining the age of 19 (or in the case of a student has not attained the age of 24), has never had a present ownership interest in a principal residence.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 121.
Contribution period.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `contribution period' means the 9-year period beginning on the date on which the homeownership plan is established.
After death or divorce.--In the case of plan treated as a homeownership plan under paragraph (4) or (5) of subsection (d), the contribution period shall be the remaining portion of the 9-year period described in subparagraph (A), determined by taking into account only the employment and enrollment of the account holder.
In no event may the contribution period exceed 14 years.
Time when contributions deemed made.--A taxpayer shall be deemed to have made a contribution to a homeownership plan on the last day of the preceding taxable year if the contribution is made on account of such taxable year and is made not later than the time prescribed by law for filing the return for such taxable year (not including extensions thereof).
Financial hardship.--The term `financial hardship' means an individual can withdraw from the homeownership plan if-- ``(A) the withdrawal is due to an immediate and heavy financial need, ``(B) the withdrawal is necessary to satisfy the heavy financial need, and ``(C) the withdrawal does not exceed the amount that is needed to relieve the heavy financial need.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) Amounts used for qualified principal residence acquisition expenses.--Any amount paid or distributed out of a homeownership plan which is used exclusively to pay qualified principal residence acquisition expenses of the account holder shall not be includible in gross income.
Inclusion of amounts not used for qualified principal residence acquisition expenses.--Any amount paid or distributed out of a homeownership plan which is not used exclusively to pay the qualified principal residence acquisition expenses of the account holder shall be included in the gross income of such holder.
Excess contributions returned before due date of return.--Paragraph (2) shall not apply to the distribution of any contribution made during a taxable year to a homeownership plan to the extent that such contribution exceeds the amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (a) if-- ``(A) such distribution is received on or before the day prescribed by law (including extensions of time) for filing such individual's return for such taxable year, ``(B) such distribution is accompanied by the amount of net income attributable to such excess contribution.
Any net income described in subparagraph (B) shall be included in the gross income of the individual for the taxable year in which such excess contribution was made.
Transfer of plan incident to divorce.--The transfer to an individual's spouse or former spouse under a divorce or separation instrument described in subparagraph (A) of section 71(b)(2) shall not be considered a taxable transfer made by such individual notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle, and such interest at the time of the transfer shall be treated as a homeownership plan of such spouse with respect to which such spouse is the account holder.
For purposes of subsection (c)(1)(G), the spouse shall take into account the period such plan was held by the individual transferring the interest.
Transfer of plan incident to death.--The transfer of a decedent's interest in a homeownership plan to such decedent's spouse shall not be considered a taxable transfer made by such decedent notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle, and such interest at the time of the transfer shall be treated as a homeownership plan of the surviving spouse with respect to which such spouse is the account holder.
For purposes of subsection (c)(1)(G), the surviving spouse shall take into account the period such plan was held by the decedent transferring the interest.
Tax Treatment of Plans.-- ``(1) Exemption from tax.--A homeownership plan shall be exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such plan has ceased to be a homeownership plan.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such plan shall be subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc.
Loss of exemption of plan where individual engages in prohibited transactions.-- ``(A) In general.--If, during any taxable year of the individual for whose benefit the homeownership plan is established, the individual engages in any transaction prohibited by section 4975 with respect to the plan, the plan shall cease to be a homeownership plan as of the first day of such taxable year.
Financial hardship exception.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply if such individual experiences financial hardship and engaged in such transaction-- ``(i) to pay medical expenses; or ``(ii) to cover funeral expenses for a family member.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the individual for whose benefit any plan was established is treated as the creator of the plan.
Plan treated as distributing all its assets.--In any case in which any plan ceases to be a homeownership plan by reason of subparagraph (A), on the first day of any taxable year, subsection (d)(1) shall be applied as if there were a distribution on such first day in an amount equal to the fair market value (on such first day) of all assets in the plan (on such first day).
Effect of pledging plan as security.--If, during any taxable year, an individual for whose benefit a homeownership plan is established uses the plan or any portion thereof as security for a loan, the portion so used shall be treated as distributed to such individual.
Effect of acquisition of principal residence.-- ``(A) In general.--In the event that the individual for whose benefit a homeownership plan is established acquires a principal residence in any taxable year, such plan shall cease to be a homeownership plan and all assets in the plan shall be treated as distributed to such individual on the first day of such taxable year.
Special rules upon marriage.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), an individual for whose benefit a homeownership plan is established shall not be treated as having acquired a principal residence if, after the establishment of such plan, such individual-- ``(i) marries an individual who owns a principal residence, but ``(ii) does not obtain an ownership interest in such residence.
Additional Tax on Certain Amounts Included in Gross Income.-- ``(1) Distribution not used for purchase of principal residence.--The tax imposed by this chapter on the account holder for any taxable year in which there is a payment or distribution from a homeownership plan of such holder which is includible in gross income under subsection (d)(2) shall be increased by 10 percent of the amount which is so includible.
Disability or death cases.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the distribution is made after the individual for whose benefit the homeownership plan is established becomes disabled within the meaning of section 72(m)(7) or dies.
Custodial Accounts.--For purposes of this section, a custodial account shall be treated as a trust if the assets of such account are held by a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that the manner in which he will administer the account will be consistent with the requirements of this section, and if the custodial account would, except for the fact that it is not a trust, constitute a homeownership plan described in subsection (c).
For purposes of this title, in the case of a custodial account treated as a trust by reason of the preceding sentence, the custodian of such account shall be treated as the trustee thereof.
Reports.--The trustee of a homeownership plan shall make such reports regarding such plan to the Secretary and to the individual for whose benefit the plan is maintained with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require under regulations.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by those regulations.
Plans Established by Employers.--A trust created or organized in the United States by an employer for the exclusive benefit of the employees of the employer shall be treated as a homeownership plan, but only if the written governing instrument creating the plan meets the following requirements: ``(1) General requirements for homeownership plans.--The plan satisfies the requirements of subparagraphs (A) through (G) of subsection (c)(1).
Separate accounting.--There is a separate accounting for the interest of each employee.
The assets of the trust may be held in a common fund for the account of all employees who have an interest in the trust.
Additional requirements.--The plan satisfies requirements, established in regulations issued by the Secretary, similar to the requirements set forth in paragraphs (2) through (8) of section 408(k) (other than paragraph (2)(B)).''
Allowance of Deduction in Arriving at Adjusted Gross Income.-- Paragraph (7) of section 62(a) of such Code (relating to retirement savings) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or housing'' after ``retirement'' in the heading of such paragraph; and (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``and the deduction allowed by section 224 (relating to deduction of certain payments to homeownership plans)''.
Tax on Excess Contributions.--Section 4973 of such Code (relating to tax on excess contributions to certain tax-favored accounts and annuities) is amended-- (1) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following: ``(6) a homeownership plan (within the meaning of section 224(c)),''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Excess Contributions to Homeownership Plans.--For purposes of this section, in the case of a homeownership plan (within the meaning of section 224(c)(1)), the term `excess contributions' means the amount by which the amount contributed for the taxable year to the plan exceeds the amount allowable as a deduction under section 224 for such taxable year.''.
Tax on Prohibited Transactions.--Section 4975 of such Code (relating to tax on prohibited transactions) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of subsection (c) the following new paragraph: ``(7) Special rule for homeownership plans.--An individual for whose benefit a homeownership plan is established shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such plan (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if, with respect to such transaction, the plan ceases to be a homeownership plan by reason of the application of section 222(e)(2)(A) or if section 222(e)(3) applies to such plan.
''; and (2) in subsection (e)(1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (F), by redesignating subparagraph (G) as subparagraph (H) and inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraph: ``(G) a homeownership plan described in section 224(c), or''.
Failure To Provide Reports on Homeownership Plans.--Paragraph (2) of section 6693(a) of such Code (relating to failure to provide reports on certain tax-favored accounts or annuities; penalties relating to designated nondeductible contributions) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (E) and inserting ``, and'', and by inserting after subparagraph (E) to following new subparagraph: ``(F) section 224(i) (relating to homeownership plans).''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 224 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.