This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Educational Readiness Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to promote and improve the quality of preschool skills development by coordinating efforts on behalf of public and private organizations to improve and enhance systems of care for children and their families.
NATIONAL COMMISSION ON EDUCATIONAL READINESS.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a National Commission on Educational Readiness (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership and Administration of the Commission.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall consist of 11 members, of whom-- (A) 2 members shall be appointed by the Secretary of Education; (B) 2 members shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services; (C) 2 members shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate in consultation with the Minority Leader of the Senate; (D) 2 members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives in consultation with the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives; and (E) 3 members shall be jointly selected by the Majority Leader of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among individuals who have demonstrated expertise in areas such as early childhood development, comprehensive services delivery for pregnant women, infants, toddlers, and preschool children, professional teaching, or nonprofit organizations or foundations which work to expand educational opportunities for preschool children, such individuals may include State or local officials responsible for health and education policy, parents or representatives of parent organizations.
Chairman and vice chairman.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet on a regular basis, as necessary, at the call of the Chairperson of the Commission or a majority of the Commission's members.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Terms.--(A) Members of the Commission shall be appointed to serve for terms of 3 years, except that of the members first appointed-- (i) 4 members shall serve for terms of 1 year; (ii) 4 members shall serve for terms of 2 years; and (iii) 3 members shall serve for terms of 3 years.
Members may be reappointed to the Commission.
Contracts.--To carry out this Act, the Commission may enter into such contracts and other arrangements to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, and without regard to the provisions of section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Contracts and other arrangements may be entered into under this paragraph with or without consideration or bond.
Compensation.--Each member of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be allowed travel expenses including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, when engaged in the performance of Commission duties.
Activity of the commission.--The Commission may begin to carry out its duties under this Act when at least 6 members of the Commission have been appointed pursuant to paragraph (1).
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall-- (1) recommend a national policy designed to prepare the Nation's children for formal learning, including recommendations concerning appropriate roles for the Federal Government, States, local governments and the private sector; (2) recommend to the President and the Congress the specific changes needed within Federal laws and policies to achieve an effective Federal role in such preparation; (3) encourage State and local initiatives on behalf of children (including legislative and policy changes as the Commission determines necessary) and monitor progress toward school readiness; (4) sponsor national, State and regional conferences on ready to learn activities; (5) establish and operate a national clearinghouse for the dissemination of information and materials on readiness to learn; (6) establish an advisory council in accordance with section 10; (7) collaborate with specific entities involved with ready to learn issues or activities such as the National Ready to Learn Council, the National Education Goals Panel and appropriate State ready to learn activities; (8) develop and maintain collaborative arrangements with public agencies and professional and voluntary organizations that are involved in ready to learn issues; and (9) provide consultation and technical assistance, or arrange for the provision of such consultation and technical assistance, to State and community entities providing or preparing to provide integrated comprehensive health or child development services or educational services to pregnant women, infants, toddlers, and preschool children.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which all members of the Commission are appointed in accordance with section 3(b), the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and to the appropriate committees of the Congress a comprehensive report on the activities of the Commission.
Contents.--The report submitted pursuant to subsection (a) shall include such findings and recommendations for legislation and administrative action as the Commission considers appropriate based on the activities of the Commission.
Other Reports.--The Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and the Congress such other reports as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency such information, relevant to the Commission's functions, as may be necessary to enable the Commission to carry out the Commission's duties.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of the agency shall, to the extent permitted by law, furnish such information to the Commission.
The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts and donations of money, services, or property, for the purpose of aiding the activities of the Commission.
The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as the departments and agencies of the United States.
Executive Director.--The Commission shall appoint an executive director, who shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate of basic pay under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code, and such professional and clerical personnel as may be reasonable and necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its functions without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, or of any other provision of law, relating to the number, classification and General Schedule rates, except that no employee, other than the staff director, may be compensated at a rate to exceed the maximum rate applicable to level 15 of the General Schedule set forth in section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Other Federal Personnel.--Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, without reimbursement, any personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege set forth in section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Establishment.--The Commission shall establish an advisory council (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Council'') composed of representatives of professional and voluntary organizations, and recognized scholars and experts in early childhood development, education, health, child advocacy and other relevant fields.
Functions.-- (1) In general.--The Council shall-- (A) advise the Commission regarding-- (i) readiness to learn; (ii) the design, development and execution of the strategies assisted under this Act; and (iii) the coordination of activities assisted under this Act, including procedures to assure compliance with the provisions of this Act; and (B) make recommendations to the Commission in accordance with paragraph (2).
Recommendations.--The Council shall make recommendations to the Commission regarding how best to-- (A) promote collaboration and joint activities to assist communities in assuring the Nation's children receive the variety of supports such children require to be ready for school; (B) report on and promote innovative and exemplary projects and programs that highlight integrated, comprehensive services, including how such projects and programs may be used as models for replication in other communities; (C) encourage and support the development of State and community ready to learn activities; (D) monitor national progress toward the National Education Goal regarding school readiness; and (E) develop, exchange and disseminate information regarding readiness to learn.
APPLICABILITY OF FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT.
The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to the Commission established under this Act.
Subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the Commission, the Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, as rates for individuals, not to exceed the daily rate payable for level GS-15 of the General Schedule set forth in section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated $1,500,000 for fiscal year 1994 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996 to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authority of subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.