This Act may be cited as the ``Renewable Energy Environmental Research Act of 2014''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish an integrated and comprehensive ocean, coastal, Great Lakes, and atmospheric research and environmental information sharing program to support renewable energy.
In this Act: (1) Administration.--The term ``Administration'' means the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere in the Under Secretary's capacity as Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Renewable energy.--The term ``renewable energy'' means any form of renewable energy, including traditional hydropower, terrestrial renewable energy, and renewable energy derived from the sea, such as wave energy, tidal energy, ocean current energy, offshore wind energy, salinity gradient energy, ocean thermal gradient energy, and ocean thermal energy conversion.
RENEWABLE ENERGY RESEARCH PLAN.
In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall develop a plan-- (1) to define requirements for a comprehensive and integrated ocean, coastal, Great Lakes, and atmosphere science program to support renewable energy development in the United States based on a review of scientific and industry information; (2) to identify and describe current climate, weather, and water data programs, products, services, and authorities within the Administration relevant to renewable energy development; (3) to provide targeted research, data, monitoring, observation, and other information, products, and services concerning climate, weather, and water in support of renewable energy and ``smart grid'' technology, including research to accurately quantify the downstream micro-climate impacts of wind-power turbines; (4) to reduce duplication and leverage the resources of existing Administration programs through coordination with-- (A) other offices and programs within the Administration, including the atmospheric, ocean, and coastal observation systems; (B) Federal, State, tribal, and local observation systems; and (C) other entities, including the private sector organizations and institutions of higher education; (5) to facilitate public-private cooperation, including identification and assessment of current private sector capabilities; and (6) to inform and educate the public and the private sector about the progress and findings of the renewable research and development carried out pursuant to the plan.
Public Hearings.--In developing the plan, the Administrator shall provide public notice and opportunity for 1 or more public hearings and shall seek comments from Federal and State agencies, tribes, local governments, representatives of the private sector, and other parties interested in renewable energy observations, data, and use in order to improve Administration climate, weather, and water observation data products and services to more effectively support renewable energy development.
ESTABLISHMENT OF RESEARCH, PREDICTION, AND ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION PROGRAM.
In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall establish a program to develop and implement an integrated and comprehensive ocean, coastal, Great Lakes, and atmosphere research and operations program, based on the plan required by section 4, to support renewable energy development in the United States.
Program Components.--At a minimum, the program required by subsection (a) shall include the following: (1) Improvements in coordinated climate, weather, water research, biological and technological research monitoring, and observations to support renewable energy siting and development.
Coordinated weather, water, and climate prediction capability focused on renewable energy and ``smart grid'' technology to provide information and decision services in support of renewable energy development.
Support for the transition to, and reliable delivery of, sustained operational weather, water, and climate products from research, observation, and prediction outputs.
Means of identifying biological and ecological effects of marine renewable energy development on living marine resources, the marine and coastal environment, marine-dependent industries, and coastal communities.
Baseline ecological characterization, including research, data collection, and mapping, of the coastal and marine environment and living marine resources for marine renewable energy development.
Avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies to address the potential impacts of renewable energy on the marine, coastal, and Great Lakes habitats resources and communities, including developing effective monitoring protocols, use of adaptive management, informed engineering design and operating parameters, and the establishment of protocols for minimizing the environmental impacts of testing, developing, and deploying marine renewable energy devices.
Support for the development of marine special area management plans by states as defined by the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1451 et sequentes) that would support renewable energy development consistent with natural resource protection and other coastal-dependent economic growth.
Coordination of comprehensive digital mapping, modeling, and other geospatial information and services to support planning for renewable energy and stewardship of ecosystem and living marine ecosystems, including protected species, in ocean, Great Lakes, and coastal areas.
A coordinated approach for examining and quantifying the micro-climate impacts of wind-power farms on soil transpiration and drying.
Provision for outreach to the public and private sector about program research, information, and products, including making non-proprietary information and best management practices developed under this program available to the public.
Use in Agency Decisions.--The program established under subsection (a) shall be designed to collect, synthesize, and distribute data in a manner that can be used by resource managers responsible for making decisions about renewable energy projects.
The Army Corps of Engineers, Department of Commerce, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and Department of Energy shall consider this information when making planning, siting, and permitting decisions for renewable energy.
Support for Public-Private Cooperation.--To the extent practicable, in implementing the program established under this section, the Administrator shall seek appropriate opportunities to facilitate and expand cooperation with private sector entities to develop and expand information services that serve the renewable energy industry.
In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date on which the Administrator establishes the program under section 5(a) and not less frequently than once every 2 years thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on Science and Technology of the House of Representatives a report on progress made in implementing this Act.
Contents.--Each report submitted under subsection (a) shall include the following: (1) A description of activities carried out under this Act.
Recommendations for prioritization of activities under this Act for fiscal years beginning after the date on which the report is submitted.
Funding levels for activities under this Act in those fiscal years.
In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator, in consultation with relevant Federal agencies, shall establish and maintain a renewable energy information library and data portal to function as a common, cross agency repository of data pertinent to renewable energy development.
Elements.--The library required by subsection (a) shall include, at a minimum, the following: (1) Links to data and information products for use in renewable energy development.
Links to planning and decision support tools for use in renewable energy development.
Data about the baseline condition of ocean and coastal resources.
Links to digital mapping and geospatial information, products, and services described in section 4(b).
The Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Transportation, the Secretary of Defense, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating, and the heads of other relevant Federal agencies shall cooperate with the Administrator in carrying out this Act.
The Administrator may enter into and perform such contracts, leases, grants, cooperative agreements, or other agreements and transactions with any agency or instrumentality of the United States, or with any State, local, tribal, territorial or foreign government, or with any person, corporation, firm, partnership, educational institution, nonprofit organization, or international organization as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
AUTHORITY TO RECEIVE FUNDS.
The Administrator may accept, retain, and use funds received from any party pursuant to an agreement entered into under section 9 for activities furthering the purposes of this Act.
USE OF OCEAN OBSERVING OFFSHORE INFRASTRUCTURE.
In General.--Any offshore exploration and production facility, at the discretion of the Administrator, may execute a memorandum of understanding authorizing the use of offshore platforms and infrastructure for the placement of meteorological and oceanographic observation sensors of a type to be designated by the Administrator in support of the Integrated Ocean Observing System.
Availability of Information.--All information collected by such sensors shall be managed by Administration and be readily available for use in spill and other hazard response as well as available to the National Weather Service, other Administration programs, and the general public.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to supersede or modify the jurisdiction, responsibilities, or authority of any Federal or State agency under any provision of law in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.