This Act may be cited as the ``Preexisting Condition Exclusion Patient Protection Act of 2007''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS UNDER GROUP HEALTH PLANS.
Amendments to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.-- (1) Reduction in look-back period.--Section 701(a)(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1181(a)(1)) is amended by striking ``6-month period'' and inserting ``30-day period''.
Reduction in permitted preexisting condition limitation period.--Section 701(a)(2) of such Act (29 United States Code 1181(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``12 months'' and inserting ``3 months'', and by striking ``18 months'' and inserting ``9 months''.
Amendments to the Public Health Service Act.-- (1) Reduction in look-back period.--Section 2701(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg(a)(1)) is amended by striking ``6-month period'' and inserting ``30-day period''.
Reduction in permitted preexisting condition limitation period.--Section 2701(a)(2) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``12 months'' and inserting ``3 months'', and by striking ``18 months'' and inserting ``9 months''.
Amendments to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.-- (1) Reduction in look-back period.--Paragraph (1) of section 9801(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to limitation on preexisting condition exclusion period and crediting for periods of previous coverage) is amended by striking ``6-month period'' and inserting ``30-day period''.
Reduction in permitted preexisting condition limitation period.--Paragraph (2) of section 9801(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``12 months'' and inserting ``3 months'', and by striking ``18 months'' and inserting ``9 months''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning after the end of the 12th calendar month following the date of the enactment of this Act.
Special rule for collective bargaining agreements.--In the case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to one or more collective bargaining agreements between employee representatives and one or more employers ratified before the date of the enactment of this Act, the amendments made by this section shall not apply to plan years beginning before the earlier of-- (A) the date on which the last of the collective bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the date of the enactment of this Act), or (B) 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), any plan amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to any requirement added by the amendments made by this section shall not be treated as a termination of such collective bargaining agreement.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS IN HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE IN THE INDIVIDUAL MARKET.
Applicability of Group Health Insurance Limitations on Imposition of Preexisting Condition Exclusions.-- (1) In general.--Section 2741 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-41) is amended-- (A) by redesignating the second subsection (e) (relating to market requirements) and subsection (f) as subsections (f) and (g), respectively; and (B) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Application of Group Health Insurance Limitations on Imposition of Preexisting Condition Exclusions.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a health insurance issuer that provides individual health insurance coverage may not impose a preexisting condition exclusion (as defined in subsection (b)(1)(A) of section 2701) with respect to such coverage except to the extent that such exclusion could be imposed consistent with such section if such coverage were group health insurance coverage.
Limitation.--In the case of an individual who-- ``(A) is enrolled in individual health insurance coverage; ``(B) during the period of such enrollment has a condition for which no medical advice, diagnosis, care, or treatment had been recommended or received as of the enrollment date; and ``(C) seeks to enroll under other individual health insurance coverage which provides benefits different from those provided under the coverage referred to in subparagraph (A) with respect to such condition, the issuer of the individual health insurance coverage described in subparagraph (C) may impose a preexisting condition exclusion with respect to such condition and any benefits in addition to those provided under the coverage referred to in subparagraph (A), but such exclusion may not extend for a period of more than 3 months.''.
Elimination of cobra requirement.--Subsection (b) of such section is amended-- (A) by adding ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2); (B) by striking the semicolon at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting a period; and (C) by striking paragraphs (4) and (5).
Conforming amendment.--Section 2744(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-44(a)(1)) is amended by inserting ``(other than subsection (h))'' after ``section 2741'' .
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the individual market after the end of the 12th calendar month following the date of the enactment of this Act.