This Act may be cited as the ``False Claims Amendments Act of 1993''.
GOVERNMENT RIGHT TO DISMISS CERTAIN ACTIONS.
Section 3730(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6)(A) No later than 60 days after the date of service under paragraph (2), the Government may move to dismiss from the action the person bringing the action if-- ``(i) such person first learned all the necessary and specific facts underlying the material allegations contained in the action from-- ``(I) a fraud investigation that the executive branch of the Government is actively pursuing, or ``(II) a news media report or a congressional hearing or report, if the executive branch of the Government, before such person filed the complaint in the action, commenced a fraud investigation of such allegations on the basis of such facts, and if the executive branch is actively pursuing such investigation; or ``(ii) such person learned of the information that underlies the alleged violation of section 3729 that is the basis of the action in the course of the person's employment by the United States, and none of the following has occurred: ``(I) In a case in which the employing agency has an inspector general, such person, before bringing the action-- ``(aa) disclosed in writing substantially all material evidence and information that relates to the alleged violation that the person possessed to such inspector general; and ``(bb) notified in writing the person's supervisor and the Attorney General of the disclosure under division (aa).
In a case in which the employing agency does not have an inspector general, such person, before bringing the action-- ``(aa) disclosed in writing substantially all material evidence and information that relates to the alleged violation that the person possessed, to the Attorney General; and ``(bb) notified in writing the person's supervisor of the disclosure under division (aa).
Twelve months (and any period of extension as provided for under subparagraph (B)) have elapsed since the disclosure of information and notification under either subclause (I) or (II) were made and the Attorney General has not filed an action based on such information.
Prior to the expiration of the 12-month period described under subparagraph (A)(ii)(III) and upon notice to the person who has disclosed information and provided notice under subparagraph (A)(ii) (I) or (II), the Attorney General may file a motion seeking an extension of such 12-month period.
Such 12-month period may be extended by a court for not more than an additional 12-month period upon a showing by the Government that the additional period is necessary for the Government to decide whether or not to file such action.
Any such motion may be filed in camera and may be supported by affidavits or other submissions in camera.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), a person's supervisor is the officer or employee who-- ``(i) is in a position of the next highest classification to the position of such person; ``(ii) has supervisory authority over such person; and ``(iii) such person believes is not culpable of the violation upon which the action under this subsection is brought by such person.
A motion to dismiss under this paragraph shall set forth documentation of the allegations, evidence, and information in support of the motion.
Any person bringing a civil action under paragraph (1) shall be provided an opportunity to contest a motion to dismiss under this paragraph.
The court may restrict access to the evidentiary materials filed in support of the motion to dismiss, as the interests of justice require.
A motion to dismiss and papers filed in support or opposition of such motion shall not be-- ``(i) made public without the prior written consent of the person bringing the civil action; or ``(ii) subject to discovery by the defendant.
If the motion to dismiss under this paragraph is granted, the matter shall remain under seal.
No later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, and every 6 months thereafter, the Department of Justice shall report to the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives relating to-- ``(i) the cases in which the Department of Justice has filed a motion to dismiss under this paragraph; ``(ii) the outcome of such motions; and ``(iii) the status of false claims civil actions in which such motions were filed.''.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO ACTIONS BARRED AND QUI TAM AWARDS.
Section 3730 of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1) by adding at the end thereof ``A right of action for a violation of section 3729 may not be waived or released by any person, except as part of a court approved settlement of a civil action brought under this section.
''; (2) in subsection (d)(1)-- (A) in the first sentence-- (i) by striking out ``, subject to the second sentence of this paragraph,''; and (ii) by inserting after ``proceeds of the action or settlement of the claim,'' the following: ``including all proceeds or settlement amounts attributable to allegations developed as a result of information provided to the Government by such person,''; (B) in the third sentence by striking out ``or the second sentence''; and (C) by striking out the second sentence; and (3) in subsection (e) by striking out paragraph (4).
Section 3730(h) of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking out ``(h)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(h) Whistleblower Protection.--(1)''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(2)(A) In any action brought by an employee under paragraph (1), the employee shall be entitled to relief if, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, the employee demonstrates that a lawful act described under paragraph (1) was a contributing factor in the action by the employer against the employee that is alleged in the complaint.
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), an employee who brings an action under paragraph (1) shall not be entitled to relief if the employer demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that the employer would have taken the same action against the employee in the absence of the lawful act that was a contributing factor described in subparagraph (A).''.
Section 3730 of title 31, United States Code, is further amended by inserting at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(i) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `person' means any natural person, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity, including any State or political subdivision of a State.''.
Section 3731(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1) A civil action under section 3730 may not be brought more than 6 years after the date on which the violation of section 3729 is committed.
For the purpose of computing the period described under paragraph (1), there shall be excluded all periods during which facts material to the right of action are not known and reasonably could not be known by the official of the United States with authority to act in the circumstances.''.
AUTHORITY TO ISSUE INVESTIGATIVE DEMANDS.
Section 3733 of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1)-- (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by inserting ``or an Assistant Attorney General'' after ``Attorney General'' each place it appears; and (B) in the matter following subparagraph (D)-- (i) in the first sentence by inserting ``or an Assistant Attorney General'' after ``Attorney General''; and (ii) in the second sentence by striking out ``, the Deputy Attorney General,''; (2) in subsection (a)(2)-- (A) in subparagraph (F) by striking out ``designated by the Attorney General''; and (B) in subparagraph (G) by inserting ``or an Assistant Attorney General'' after ``Attorney General'' each place it appears; (3) in subsection (h)(6) by striking out ``, the Deputy Attorney General,''; (4) in subsection (i) by inserting ``or an Assistant Attorney General'' after ``Attorney General'' each place it appears; and (5) in subsection (l)(6) by inserting ``or an Assistant Attorney General'' after ``Attorney General''.
APPLICABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
In General.--(1) The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to cases filed on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
The provisions of section 3730(b)(6)(A)(i) of title 31, United States Code (as added by section 2 of this Act), and section 3730 (d) and (e) of such title (as amended by section 3 (2) and (3) of this Act), shall apply to cases pending on the date of the enactment of this Act.
In any case that is pending on the date of the enactment of this Act in which the Government has elected to proceed with the action under section 3730(b)(4) of title 31, United States Code, the Government may file a motion to dismiss a qui tam relator under section 3730(b)(6)(A)(i) of such title (as added by section 2 of this Act), no later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Prior Laws.--(1) The amendments made by the False Claims Amendments Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-562) shall apply to cases filed on or after the date of the enactment of such Act, and to cases pending on such date that are still pending on the date of the enactment of this Act.
The amendments made by section 9 of the Major Fraud Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-700) shall apply to cases filed on or after the date of the enactment of such Act, and to cases pending on such date that are still pending on the date of enactment of this Act.