This Act may be cited as the ``Immigrant Labor Policy Review Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The unemployment rate in the United States is at a record low.
Many industries in the United States, including agriculture, tourism, construction, nursing, information technology, and other portions of the service sector, are experiencing labor shortages.
The inability to secure sufficient workers is having a detrimental impact on the economy of the United States and the standard of living for all people in the United States.
There is established a commission to be known as the High Level Commission on Immigrant Labor Policy (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall study the interactions between Federal immigration policy and the labor markets for aliens in the United States, including the following subjects: (1) The adequacy of the supply of labor in the United States and whether this supply needs to be further supplemented with alien workers.
The extent to which employers in the United States rely upon the employment of a temporary workforce.
The economic impact and desirability of maintaining statutory caps on nonimmigrant workers.
The extent to which employers in the United States rely upon the employment of a workforce that includes or consists of aliens who unlawfully enter or remain in the United States.
The extent of unemployment and underemployment of workers who are United States citizens or aliens lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence.
The effectiveness of United States labor policies in stopping the flow into the United States of illegal immigrants.
Any other subject necessary to permit the Commission to prepare the reports required under section 8.
Consultation.--In conducting the study, the Commission shall consult with migrant labor groups, nonprofit organizations, labor unions, pertinent business and agriculture associations and organizations, State Governors, law enforcement associations and organizations, and relevant executive branch agencies and congressional committees.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall consist of 10 members, to be appointed as follows: (1) 4 to be appointed by the President.
2 to be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
1 to be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
2 to be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate.
1 to be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Consultations.--In making appointments under subsection (a)(1), the President shall consult with-- (1) the Attorney General in appointing 1 member; (2) the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in appointing 1 member; (3) the Secretary of Commerce in appointing 1 member; and (4) the Secretary of Agriculture in appointing 1 member.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Chairperson.--The Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board (or the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board's designee) shall serve as the chairperson of the Commission until such time as the members of the Commission can elect a chairperson.
Basic Pay.--Each member shall serve without pay.
Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall have a director who shall be appointed by the chairperson subject to rules prescribed by the Commission.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of such additional personnel as the chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the requirements of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Experts and Consultants.--The chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the chairperson, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties.
Obtaining Official Data.--The chairperson may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties.
Upon request of the chairperson, the head of the agency shall furnish such information to the Commission to the extent such information is not prohibited from disclosure by law.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the chairperson, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties.
Contract Authority.--The chairperson may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for the purpose of conducting research, surveys, and other services necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties.
Interim Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and the Congress an interim report on the following: (1) The overall effectiveness of Federal immigration and labor laws and policies in-- (A) protecting jobs held by citizens and nationals of the United States, aliens who are lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence, aliens who are admitted as refugees or are granted asylum, and other immigrants otherwise authorized to be employed in the United States; (B) preventing exploitation of alien immigrant and nonimmigrant workers; (C) reducing the number of illegal border crossings into the United States; and (D) reducing the numbers of aliens unlawfully employed in the United States.
The impact of statutory numerical limitations on the entry of immigrants and nonimmigrants into the United States on the achievement of the goals described in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of paragraph (1).
The impact of recent measures undertaken in border areas to deter illegal border crossings on the achievement of such goals.
The impact of Federal alien labor laws and policies on the overall economic performance within the United States and economic performance within the following sectors: (A) Agriculture.
Nursing and health care.
Final Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and the Congress a final report that contains at least the following: (1) Information that updates the findings reported in the interim report on each of the issues described in paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a).
Recommendations for actions that the Commission considers necessary-- (A) to curb illegal border crossings into the United States; (B) to curb unlawful employment of aliens in the United States; (C) to ensure adequate protection of the workers described in subsection (a)(1)(A); and (D) to ensure a stable and steady workforce for industry in the United States.
The viability of expanding the agricultural guest worker program established under section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(a)) and section 218 of such Act (8 United States Code 1188) to any or all of the following United States industries: (A) Tourism and service.
Nursing and health care.
Recommendations for any additional actions that the Commission determines would improve Federal immigration or labor laws or policies.
Any other related information that the Commission considers to be appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate 6 months after the date on which the Commission submits its final report under section 8(b).
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act, which sums shall remain available until expended.