This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Fairness Act of 1999.''
Test for Positive Adjustment to Import Competition.--Section 201(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2251(a)) is amended by striking ``substantial''.
Investigations and Determinations.--Section 202 of such Act (19 United States Code 2252) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)(A), by striking ``substantial''; (2) by amending subsection (b)(1)(B) to read as follows: ``(B) Imports shall be considered to be a `cause of serious injury, or the threat thereof,' if a causal link is established between imports and injury to the domestic industry.
''; (3) by amending subsection (c)(1)(A) to read as follows: ``(A) with respect to serious injury-- ``(i) the rate and amount of the increase in imports of the product concerned in absolute and relative terms; ``(ii) the share of the domestic market taken by increased imports; ``(iii) changes in the level of sales; ``(iv) production; ``(v) productivity; ``(vi) capacity utilization; ``(vii) profits and losses; and ``(viii) employment.
''; (4) in subsection (c)(1)(C), by striking ``with respect to substantial cause'' and inserting ``with respect to whether there is a causal link between imports and serious injury''; and (5) in subsection (c)(3), by striking ``substantial''.
Action Regarding ITC Investigation of Injury.--Section 264(c) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2354(c)) is amended by striking ``substantial''.
STEEL IMPORT PERMIT AND MONITORING PROGRAM.
In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall establish and implement a steel import permit and monitoring program.
The program shall include a requirement that any person importing a product classified under chapter 72 or 73 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States obtain an import permit before such products are entered into the United States.
Steel Import Permits.-- (1) In general.--In order to obtain a steel import permit, an importer shall submit to the Secretary of Commerce an application containing-- (A) the importer's name and address; (B) the name and address of the supplier of the goods to be imported; (C) the name and address of the producer of the goods to be imported; (D) the country of origin of the goods; (E) the country from which the goods are to be imported; (F) the United States Customs port of entry where the goods will be entered; (G) the expected date of entry of the goods into the United States; (H) a description of the goods, including the classification of such goods under the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States; (I) the quantity (in kilograms and net tons) of the goods to be imported; (J) the cost insurance freight (CIF) and free alongside ship (FAS) values of the goods to be entered; (K) whether the goods are being entered for consumption or for entry into a bonded warehouse or foreign trade zone; (L) a certification that the information furnished in the permit application is correct; and (M) any other information the Secretary of Commerce determines to be necessary and appropriate.
Entry into customs territory.--In the case of merchandise classified under chapter 72 or 73 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States that is initially entered into a bonded warehouse or foreign trade zone, a steel import permit shall be required before the merchandise is entered into the customs territory of the United States.
Issuance of permit.--The Secretary of Commerce shall issue a steel import permit to any person who files an application that meets the requirements of this section.
Such permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of issuance.
Statistical Information.-- (1) In general.-- The Secretary of Commerce shall compile and publish on a weekly basis information described in paragraph (2).
Information described.--Information described in this paragraph means information obtained from steel import permit applications concerning steel imported into the United States and includes with respect to such imports the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States classification (to the tenth digit), the country of origin, the port of entry, quantity, value of steel imported, and whether the imports are entered for consumption or are entered into a bonded warehouse or foreign trade zone.
Such information shall also be compiled in aggregate form and made publicly available by the Secretary of Commerce on a weekly basis by public posting through an Internet website.
The information provided under this section shall be in addition to any information otherwise required by law.
Fees.--The Secretary of Commerce may prescribe reasonable fees and charges to defray the costs of carrying out the provisions of this section, including a fee for issuing a permit under this section.
Single Producer and Exporter Countries.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Commerce shall make publicly available all information required to be released pursuant to subsection (c), including information obtained regarding imports from a foreign producer or exporter that is the only producer or exporter of goods subject to this section from a foreign country.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Commerce may prescribe such rules and regulations relating to the steel import permit and monitoring program as may be necessary to carry the provisions of this section.