TAX ON OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to income taxes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART VIII--OUTDOOR ADVERTISING ``Sec.
Imposition of Tax.--There is hereby imposed a tax equal to 15 percent of the gross income received or accrued by any person from the lease of any taxable outdoor advertising display.
Such tax shall be in addition to any other tax imposed by this subtitle.
Taxable Outdoor Advertising Display.--For purposes of this section, the term `taxable outdoor advertising display' means any outdoor advertising display (as defined by section 1033(g)(3)(C)) other than such a display having 32 square feet or less of advertising space.''.
Technical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Part VIII.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING PROGRAM TRUST FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Trust Fund Code) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING PROGRAM TRUST FUND.
Establishment of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Outdoor Advertising Program Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the trust fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are appropriated to the Outdoor Advertising Program Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the revenues received in the Treasury from the tax imposed by section 59B.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer from the Outdoor Advertising Program Trust Fund to the Secretary of Transportation such amounts as the Secretary of Transportation determines are necessary to carry out section 131 of title 23, United States Code.''.
Technical Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Outdoor Advertising Program Trust Fund.''.
CONTROL OF OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.
Section 131 of title 23, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (d)-- (A) by striking ``(d) In'' and inserting the following: ``(d) Industrial and Commercial Areas.-- ``(1) In general.--In''; (B) in the first sentence of paragraph (1) (as so designated), by striking ``, or in unzoned'' and all that follows through ``Secretary''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Limitation on new signs.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to this paragraph, no new sign, display, or device may be erected under paragraph (1) after the date of enactment of this paragraph.
Applicability of just compensation requirements.--Except as provided in subparagraph (C), just compensation under subsection (g) shall not be paid upon the removal of any sign, display, or device lawfully erected under State law after the date of enactment of this paragraph.
Exception.-- ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), a State may permit a person, at the person's option, to erect in the State a sign, display, or device in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (1) upon removal without payment of just compensation under subsection (g) of a sign, display, or device lawfully erected under this subsection.
Statewide limitation.--The total number of signs, displays, and devices erected and maintained under this subsection in a State shall not exceed the total number of signs, displays, and devices lawfully erected before the date of enactment of this paragraph under this subsection in the State and in existence on that date.
''; (2) in the first sentence of subsection (g), by striking ``and not permitted under subsection (c) of this section, whether or not removed pursuant to or because of this section'' and inserting ``and removed under this section''; (3) in subsection (k), by striking ``Subject to compliance with subsection (g) of this section for the payment of just compensation, nothing'' and inserting ``Nothing''; (4) in subsection (m), by striking the first and second sentences and inserting the following: ``There are appropriated from the Outdoor Advertising Program Trust Fund established by section 9512 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.
''; (5) by redesignating subsection (t) as subsection (v); and (6) by inserting after subsection (s) the following: ``(t) State Inventory of Outdoor Advertising Signs, Displays, and Devices.-- ``(1) Requirement.--For the purpose of subsection (b), a State shall not be considered to have made provision for effective control of the erection and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs, displays, and devices unless the State maintains, and annually submits to the Secretary, an inventory of all outdoor advertising signs, displays, and devices in the State for which the effective control is required under this section, including a specification of whether each sign, display, or device is illegal, nonconforming, or conforming under State law.
State scenic byways.--The State inventory required by paragraph (1) shall identify each sign, display, or device described in paragraph (1) that is located along a highway on the Interstate System or Federal-aid primary system designated as a scenic byway under a program of the State described in subsection (s).
Use of state inventories.--The Secretary shall use the State inventories submitted under this subsection to ensure compliance with subsection (d)(2)(C)(ii) and to carry out this section.
Limitation on Vegetation Removal.--For the purpose of subsection (b), a State shall not be considered to have made provision for effective control of the erection and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs, displays, and devices if the State carries out or permits the removal of vegetation in, or other alteration of, a right- of-way referred to in subsection (b) for the purpose of improving the visibility of any outdoor advertising sign, display, or device located outside the right-of-way.