This Act may be cited as the ``Multilateral Bosnia and Herzegovina Self-Defense Fund Act''.
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SELF-DEFENSE FUND.
Authority for Establishment.--(1) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the President is authorized to enter into an international agreement with eligible countries for the establishment of a fund to assist the self-defense of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which may be known as the ``Multilateral Bosnia and Herzegovina Self-Defense Fund''.
The Secretary of State is authorized-- (A) to pay the United States contribution to the Fund out of amounts made available pursuant to section 3; and (B) to transfer to the custody of the international board having responsibility for the Fund military equipment that has been drawn down in accordance with section 4.
Purpose.--The purpose of the Fund shall be to provide an international mechanism for the procurement of military equipment and training for transfer to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the exercise of its right to self defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, and to facilitate the achievement of a just and equitable peace settlement by enabling the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to protect its population and territory.
Requirements.--An agreement referred to in subsection (a) shall meet the following requirements: (1) United states representation.--The United States will chair any international board having responsibility for the Fund.
Membership of the international board.--Membership of any international board having responsibility for the Fund will include, at a minimum, one representative of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and one representative from the Government of Croatia.
Control of military equipment.--The agreement will provide procedures for the control of military equipment received by the international board having responsibility for the Fund.
Commitment by the government of bosnia and herzegovina.--Before any military equipment or training purchased or otherwise acquired through the Fund, or held by the international board responsible for the Fund, may be transferred to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina that Government will provide written assurances that the equipment or training will not be used to take reprisals against any civilians in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Implementation.--No military equipment or training purchased or otherwise acquired through the Fund, or held by the international board responsible for the Fund, will be transferred to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina before the date of termination of the United States arms embargo against the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina if such a transfer would violate the embargo.
Definitions.--As used in this section: (1) Eligible countries.--The term ``eligible countries'' includes any foreign country other than a country the government of which the Secretary of State has determined, in accordance with section 6(j)(1)(A) of the Export Administration Act of 1979, repeatedly provides support for acts of international terrorism.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the fund established as provided in section 2(a).
Government of bosnia and herzegovina.--The term ``Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina'' includes any agency, instrumentality, or forces of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
United states arms embargo of the government of bosnia and herzegovina.--The term ``United States arms embargo of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina means the application to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina of-- (A) the policy adopted July 10, 1991, and published in the Federal Register of July 19, 1991 (58 FR 33322) under the heading ``Suspension of Munitions Export Licenses to Yugoslavia''; and (B) any similar policy being applied by the United States Government as of the date of completion of withdrawal of UNPROFOR personnel from Bosnia and Herzegovina, pursuant to which approval is denied for transfers of defense articles and defense services to the former Yugoslavia.
UNITED STATES CONTRIBUTION TO THE FUND.
Of the amounts made available for fiscal year 1996 to carry out the Foreign Military Financing Program under section 23 of the Arms Export Control Act, $50,000,000 shall be available only for payment to the Fund of the United States contribution authorized by section 2(a)(2)(A).
Authority.--The President is authorized to transfer, subject to the regular notification procedures of the Committees on Appropriations of the House and the Senate, to the custody of the international board having responsibility for the Fund, without reimbursement, defense articles from the stocks of the Department of Defense and defense services of the Department of Defense of an aggregate value not to exceed $50,000,000 in fiscal year 1996.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the President such sums as may be necessary to reimburse the applicable appropriation, fund, or account for defense articles provided under this section.
Sixty days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall submit a report to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives on what steps the President and the Secretary of State have taken to carry out section 2(a).
Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted as authorization for deployment of United States forces in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina for any purpose, including training, support, or delivery of military equipment.