This Act may be cited as the ``Lyme Disease Prevention, Control, and Research Amendments of 1993''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAMS FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF LYME DISEASE.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes), as amended by section 308 of Public Law 102-531 (106 United States Statutes at Large 3495), is amended by inserting after section 317D the following section: ``prevention and control of lyme disease ``Sec.
General Program.-- ``(1) Program of grants.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for the purpose of carrying out programs for the prevention, control, and treatment of Lyme disease.
Preferences in making grants.--In making grants under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give preference to public and nonprofit private entities that agree to carry out the purposes for which the grant is made in 1 or more States for which, as of calendar year 1990-- ``(A) a cumulative total of not less than 500 cases of Lyme disease was reported to and confirmed by the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; or ``(B) the cumulative per capita incidence of cases of such disease (reported to and confirmed by such Director) was not less than 5 cases per 100,000 individuals.
Priorities among authorized purposes.--In making grants under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give priority to making grants for the following: ``(A) The development and evaluation of strategies for the prevention and control of Lyme disease (including, with respect to the tick that carries the etiologic agent for the disease, strategies to manage deer and other means through which the tick is introduced into areas frequented by humans).
Demonstration projects (administered by State or local departments of health) to improve methods of estimating the incidence and prevalence of such disease, including projects involving the reporting by physicians of cases of the disease.
Demonstration projects for the control of the disease in communities with a substantial incidence or prevalence of the disease.
Studies to determine the effects of the disease on the individual and on society, including the economic costs of the disease.
The improvement of diagnostic tests for the disease.
The provision of information and education to health care professionals and the public.
Demonstration projects for treating children for such disease.
National Research Centers for Prevention, Control, and Treatment.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may make awards of grants or contracts to public and nonprofit private entities for the establishment or operation (or both) of not more than 5 centers to carry out basic and clinical research on the prevention, control, and treatment of Lyme disease.
Preferences in making awards.--In making awards under paragraph (1) for a center, the Secretary shall give preference to an applicant according to the extent to which the following applies to the applicant: ``(A) The applicant is experienced in conducting research on the prevention, control, and treatment of Lyme disease.
The center is or will be located in a State described in subsection (a)(2).
The center is or will be located in a geographic area in which individuals are employed in occupations involving a significant risk of contracting Lyme disease.
The applicant has diagnosed not less than 150 cases of such disease.
The applicant has cultured the etiologic agent for Lyme disease in mediums from vectors, from animals, and from humans.
Priorities among activities of centers.--The Secretary may make an award under paragraph (1) only if the applicant involved agrees that the center for which the award is made will give priority to the following: ``(A) Conducting research on new treatments for Lyme disease.
Conducting research on the development of a vaccine to immunize individuals against the disease.
Conducting studies of the latter stages of such disease.
Conducting epidemiological studies of such disease in particular populations of individuals.
Amount of award.--The Secretary may not make an award under paragraph (1) in an amount less than $500,000.
Application for Assistance.--The Secretary may make an award of a grant or contract under subsection (a) or (b) only if an application for the award is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out such subsection.
Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996.
Such authorization of appropriations is in addition to any other authorization of appropriations that is available for such purpose.
Allocations.--Of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall make available 40 percent for carrying out subsection (a) and 60 percent for carrying out subsection (b).