REDUCTION IN FEDERAL INVESTMENT.
Amount of Reduction.--The total amount of Federal spending at or through Department of Energy facilities-- (1) for fiscal year 1995 shall not exceed the amount which is the greater of-- (A) $450,000,000; or (B) 5 percent of the amount appropriated for use at or through Department of Energy facilities for fiscal year 1993, less than the amount appropriated for the use at or through Department of Energy facilities for fiscal year 1993; (2) for fiscal year 1996 shall not exceed the amount which is the greater of-- (A) $900,000,000; or (B) 10 percent of the amount appropriated for use at or through Department of Energy facilities for fiscal year 1993, less than the amount appropriated for use at or through Department of Energy facilities for fiscal year 1993; (3) for fiscal year 1997 shall not exceed the amount which is the greater of-- (A) $1,350,000,000; or (B) 15 percent of the amount appropriated for use at or through Department of Energy facilities for fiscal year 1993, less than the amount appropriated for use at or through Department of Energy facilities for fiscal year 1993; and (4) for each fiscal year after fiscal year 1997 shall not exceed the amount described in paragraph (3), adjusted annually for inflation.
Reduction in Department of Energy Facility Funding Commission.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established an independent commission to be known as the ``Reduction in Department of Energy Facility Funding Commission''.
Duties.--(A) The Commission shall prepare and, within 8 months after the date of enactment of this title, submit to the Secretary a plan for implementing the funding reductions required under subsection (a).
The Commission shall propose achieving such funding reductions first through-- (i) contractor reforms, improved account-ability, or reduced overhead at Department of Energy facilities; (ii) private investment to reduce the amount of public investment required; and (iii) elimination of any unnecessary redundancies between Department of Energy facilities.
If the funding reductions cannot be fully achieved under subparagraph (A), the Commission may propose cutbacks in programs.
In doing so, the Commission shall-- (i) evaluate programs based on their relevance to current missions and priorities, and focus reductions toward those programs that are no longer relevant; (ii) maintain the Department of Energy facilities' abilities to perform their assigned missions; and (iii) where appropriate, maintain a process of peer review.
Appointment.-- (A) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 8 members appointed by the President, by and with the advise and consent of the Senate, from among individuals-- (i) with technical expertise in Department of Energy facility research; (ii) representing communities affected by programs at Department of Energy facilities; or (iii) with expertise in management issues.
The President shall transmit to the Senate the nominations for appointment to the Commission not later than 2 months after the date of the enactment of this title.
Consultation.--In selecting individuals for nominations for appointments to the Commission, the President should consult with-- (i) the Speaker of the House of Representatives concerning the appointment of 1 member; (ii) the majority leader of the Senate concerning the appointment of 1 member; (iii) the minority leader of the House of Representatives concerning the appointment of 1 member; and (iv) the minority leader of the Senate concerning the appointment of 1 member.
Chairperson.--At the time the President nominates individuals for appointment to the Commission, the President shall designate one such individual who shall serve as Chairperson of the Commission.
Terms.--The term of each member of the Commission shall expire upon the termination of the Commission under paragraph (12).
Meetings.--Each meeting of the Commission, other than meetings in which classified information is to be discussed, shall be open to the public.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Pay and travel expenses.-- (A) In general.-- (i) Basic pay.--Each member, other than the Chairperson, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Pay of chairperson.--The Chairperson shall be paid for each day referred to in clause (i) at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Travel expenses.--Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Director.-- (A) In general.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint a Director who has not served as a civilian employee of the Department of Energy during the one-year period preceding the date of such appointment.
Pay.--The Director shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.-- (A) Appointment by director.--Subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C), the Director, with the approval of the Commission, may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel.
Applicability of certain civil service laws.-- The Director may make such appointments without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Limitation.--Not more than one-fifth of the personnel employed by or detailed to the Commission may be on detail from the Department of Energy.
Support from other agencies.--Upon request of the Director, the head of a Federal agency may detail any of the personnel of that agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this subsection.
Support from comptroller general.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall provide assistance, including the detailing of employees, to the Commission in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Commission.
Other authority.-- (A) Temporary and intermittent services.--The Commission may procure by contract, to the extent funds are available, the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
Authority to lease space and acquire certain property.--The Commission may lease space and acquire personal property to the extent funds are available.
To the extent practicable, the Commission shall use suitable real property available under the most recent inventory of real property assets published by the Resolution Trust Corporation under section 21A(b)(11)(F) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 United States Code 1441a(b)(12)(F)).
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such funds as are necessary to carry out its duties under this subsection.
Such funds shall remain available until expended.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate not later than 14 months after the date of the enactment of this title.
Report to congress.--If the Secretary determines that the recommendations of the Commission under this subsection should not be followed in any respect, the Secretary shall, within 45 days after receipt of such recommendations, submit a report to the Congress identifying any points of disagreement and justifying the Secretary's position.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Commission'' means the Reduction in Department of Energy Facility Funding Commission established under section 1(b)(1); (2) the term ``Department of Energy facility'' means a Department of Energy research and development laboratory, and its related research and commercialization facilities, including commercialization facilities that enhance the replication of technology in the marketplace; and (3) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
It is the sense of the Congress that the savings achieved pursuant to section 1(a) should be deposited in the Treasury of the United States.