This Act may be cited as the ``Community College Emergency Stabilization Fund Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Since October 2007, the national unemployment rate has increased from 4.8 percent to 10.2 percent.
There are nearly 1,200 community colleges in the United States, educating over 11,700,000 students.
Community colleges provide access to affordable, quality education, and training opportunities.
Over the past year enrollment has increased at unprecedented levels at community colleges across the country.
Over the past year community colleges have either had to forestall hiring new staff or reduce staff because of budget shortfalls despite increased demand.
Due to increased enrollment and insufficient staffing, many individuals are not able to access the training they need to re-enter the workforce.
EMERGENCY FUNDING FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGES.
In General.--From the amounts appropriated under section 7 to carry out this section for a fiscal year, the Secretary of Education shall provide temporary emergency funding to States for such fiscal year in accordance with the formula described in subsection (b) to assist community colleges in maintaining, or hiring additional, faculty and staff.
Formula.--Of the amount appropriated under section 7-- (1) 66\2/3\ percent shall be allotted on the basis of the relative increase in unemployed individuals in each State compared to the total increase in unemployed individuals in all States; and (2) 33\1/3\ percent shall be allotted on the basis of the relative excess number of unemployed individuals in each State, compared to the total excess number of unemployed individuals in all States.
Maintenance of Effort.-- (1) In general.--Each State shall maintain State support for community colleges in the State at least at the level of such support for the fiscal year immediately preceding the first fiscal year the State received funds under this section.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirements of this paragraph (1), if the Secretary determines that a waiver would be equitable due to exceptional or uncontrollable circumstances, such as a natural disaster or an unforeseen and precipitous decline in the financial resources of the State.
Supplement, Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this section shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, other Federal and State funds that would otherwise be expended for assisting community colleges in maintaining, or hiring additional, faculty and staff.
Grants to Community Colleges.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after receiving funds under this section, each State shall use such funds to award grants, on a competitive basis, to community colleges located in the State to assist such colleges in maintaining current staff, or hiring additional, faculty and staff.
Grant amount.--In determining the amount of a grant to award to a community college under this section, a State shall take into account-- (A) the total number of students enrolled at the college; (B) the increase in the number of students enrolled at the college relative to the preceding academic year; and (C) the most recent monthly unemployment rate of the local area, as determined by the Secretary (in consultation with the Secretary of Labor), in which the college is located.
Application.--A community college desiring to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the State at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the State may require, which shall include, at a minimum, information with respect to-- (A) the total number of students enrolled at the college; and (B) the increase in the number of students enrolled at the college relative to the preceding academic year.
Reports by States.--Each State shall, not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for each fiscal year in which the State expends funds received under this section, submit to the Secretary a report that includes-- (1) a list of the community colleges that have received assistance from the funds; (2) the number of students served at such community colleges as a result of such assistance; (3) the number of faculty and staff maintained or hired at such community colleges as a result of such assistance; and (4) the amount of State support for community colleges in the State for the-- (A) fiscal year immediately preceding the first fiscal year the State received funds under this section; and (B) most recent fiscal year in which the State expended funds received under this section.
Report by the Secretary.--The Secretary shall submit to the authorizing committees an annual report that includes the information described in subsection (f).
GRANTS TO CAREER AND TECHNICAL COLLEGES.
In General.--From the amounts appropriated under section 7 to carry out this section, the Secretary shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to career and technical colleges located in any State to assist such colleges in maintaining, or hiring additional, faculty and staff.
Grant Amount.--In determining the amount of a grant to award to a career and technical college under this section, the Secretary shall take into account-- (1) the total number of students enrolled at the college; (2) the increase in the number of students enrolled at the college relative to the preceding academic year; and (3) the most recent monthly unemployment rate of the local area, as determined by the Secretary (in consultation with the Secretary of Labor), in which the college is located.
Application.--A career and technical college desiring to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, which shall include, at a minimum, information with respect to-- (1) the total number of students enrolled at the college; and (2) the increase in the number of students enrolled at the college relative to the preceding academic year.
Each community college and career and technical college receiving a grant under this Act shall use the grant funds within 18 months of receipt of such funds to cover costs related to maintaining, or hiring additional, faculty and staff, including-- (1) faculty; (2) counselors; and (3) other staff to assist students in training to enter the workforce, as defined by the Secretary.
Evaluation.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an evaluation of the grant programs carried out under sections 3 and 4, which shall include an evaluation of-- (1) the criteria the State or the Secretary used in awarding grants to community colleges and career and technical colleges; (2) the grant amounts awarded to community colleges and career and technical colleges; (3) the number of students served at such colleges as a result of such assistance; (4) the number of faculty and staff maintained or hired at such colleges as a result of such assistance; and (5) the amount of State support for community colleges in each State for the-- (A) fiscal year immediately preceding the first fiscal year the State received funds under this section; and (B) most recent fiscal year in which the State expended funds received under this section.
Report.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall report the results of the evaluation conducted under subsection (a) to the authorizing committees.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; LIMITATION ON AUTHORITY.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $750,000,000 to carry out this Act, of which $50,000,000 shall be made available to carry out section 4.
Limitation on Authority.--Any new spending authority or new authority to enter into contracts provided by this Act and under which the United States is obligated to make outlays shall be effective only to the extent, and in such amounts, as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
In this Act: (1) Authorizing committees.--The term ``authorizing committees'' has the meaning given such term in section 103(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1003(1)).
Community college.--The term ``community college'' means a public institution of higher education at which the highest degree that is predominantly awarded to students is an associate's degree.
Increased unemployment.--The term ``increase in unemployed individuals'' means the increase in the number of unemployed individuals over the most recent 12-month period for which data are available.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such term in section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1002).
Excess unemployment.--The term ``excess unemployment'' means the number of unemployed individuals in excess of the national unemployment rate.
Freely associated states.--The term ``Freely Associated States'' means the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau.
National unemployment rate.--The term ``national unemployment rate'' means the most recent national unemployment rate published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor.
State.--The term ``State'' includes, in addition to the several States of the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Freely Associated States.
Career and technical college.-- (A) Definition.--The term ``career and technical college''-- (i) has the meaning given the term ``area career and technical school'' in section 3(3) of the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 United States Code 2302(3)); and (ii) means a private institution of higher education at which the highest degree that is predominantly awarded to students is an associate's degree.
Location of colleges.--Such term shall only include career and technical colleges (as defined in subparagraph A) located in a State.