MENTAL HEALTH AND STUDENT SERVICE PROVIDERS.
Title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8001 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART L--MENTAL HEALTH AND STUDENT SERVICE PROVIDERS ``SEC.
``Congress finds the following: ``(1) Although 7,500,000 children under the age of 18 require mental health services, fewer than 1 in 5 of these children receive the services.
Across the United States, counseling professionals are stretched thin, and often students do not get the help the students need.
The current national average ratio of students to counselors in elementary and secondary schools is 513:1.
United States schools need more mental health professionals, and the flexibility to hire the professionals that will best serve their students.
The maximum recommended ratio of-- ``(A) students to counselors is 250:1; ``(B) students to psychologists is 1,000:1; and ``(C) students to social workers is 800:1.
In States like California or Minnesota, 1 counselor typically serves more than 1,000 students.
In some schools, no counselor is available to assist students in times of crisis, or at any other time.
In Colorado, the average student-to- counselor ratio is 645:1.
The number of students is expected to grow significantly over the next few years.
During this time, many school-based mental health professionals who currently serve our Nation's youth will retire.
Not counting these retirements, over 100,000 new school counselors will be needed to decrease the student-to-counselor ratio to 250:1 by the year 2005.
The Federal support for reducing the student-to- counselor ratio would pay for itself, through reduced incidences of death, violence, and substance abuse, and through improvements in students' academic achievement, graduation rates, college attendance, and employment.
``The purpose of this part is to help States and local educational agencies recruit, train, and hire 141,000 additional school-based mental health personnel, including 100,000 additional counselors, 21,000 additional school psychologists, and 20,000 additional school social workers over a 5-year period-- ``(1) to reduce the student-to-counselor ratios nationally, in elementary and secondary schools, to an average of-- ``(A) 1 school counselor for every 250 students ``(B) 1 school psychologist for every 1,000 students; and ``(C) 1 social worker for every 800 students; as recommended in a report by the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences relating to schools and health, issued in 1997; ``(2) to help adequately address the mental, emotional, and developmental needs of elementary and secondary school students; ``(3) to remove the emotional, behavioral, and psycho- social barriers to learning so as to enhance the classroom preparedness and ability to learn of students; ``(4) to support school staff and teachers in improving classroom management, conducting behavioral interventions to improve school discipline, and developing the awareness and skills to identify early warning signs of violence and the need for mental health services; and ``(5) to support parents in improving the school behavior and academic success of their children.
``In this part: ``(1) Mental health and student service provider.--The term `mental health and student service provider' includes a qualified school counselor, school psychologist, or school social worker.
Mental health and student services.--The term `mental health and student services' includes direct, individual, and group services provided to students, parents, and school personnel by mental health and student service providers, or the coordination of prevention strategies in schools or community-based programs.
Poverty line.--The term ``poverty line'' means the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)) applicable to a family of the size involved.
School counselor.--The term `school counselor' means an individual who has documented competence in counseling children and adolescents in a school setting and who-- ``(A) possesses State licensure or certification granted by an independent professional regulatory authority; ``(B) in the absence of such State licensure or certification, possesses national certification in school counseling or a specialty of counseling granted by an independent professional organization; or ``(C) holds a minimum of a master's degree in school counseling from a program accredited by the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs or the equivalent.
School psychologist.--The term `school psychologist' means an individual who-- ``(A) possesses a minimum of 60 graduate semester hours in school psychology from an institution of higher education and has completed 1,200 clock hours in a supervised school psychology internship, of which 600 hours shall be in the school setting; ``(B) possesses State licensure or certification in the State in which the individual works; or ``(C) in the absence of such State licensure or certification, possesses national certification by the National School Psychology Certification Board.
School social worker.--The term `school social worker' means an individual who holds a master's degree in social work and is licensed or certified by the State in which services are provided or holds a school social work specialist credential.
State.--The term `State' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
Allotments.--From the amount appropriated under section 10993H for a fiscal year, the Secretary-- ``(1) shall make a total of 1 percent available to the Secretary of the Interior (on behalf of the Bureau of Indian Affairs) and the outlying areas for activities that achieve the purposes of this part; and ``(2) shall allot to each eligible State the same percentage of the remaining funds as the percentage the State received of funds allocated to States for the previous fiscal year under part A of title I, except that such allotments shall be ratably decreased as necessary.
State-Level Expenses.--Each State may use not more than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the amount the State receives under this part, or $50,000, whichever is greater, for a fiscal year, for the administrative costs of the State educational agency in carrying out this part.
In General.--To be eligible to receive an allotment under section 10993C, a State shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including an assurance that the State will provide the State share of the cost described in section 10993G.
Approval.--In approving the applications, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, approve applications to fund, in the aggregate, 100,000 additional counselors, 21,000 additional school psychologists, and 20,000 additional school social workers.
ALLOCATIONS TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
Within State Distribution.-- ``(1) In general.--After using funds in accordance with section 10993C(b), each State that receives an allotment under section 10993C shall allocate to eligible local educational agencies in the State the total of-- ``(A) the amount of the allotted funds that remain; and ``(B) the State share of the cost described in section 10993G for the local educational agencies.
Allocation.--From the total described in paragraph (1), the State shall allocate to each local educational agency an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(A) an amount that bears the same relationship to 80 percent of such total as the number of children in poverty who reside in the school district served by the local educational agency bears to the number of such children who reside in all the school districts in the State; and ``(B) an amount that bears the same relationship to 20 percent of such total as the number of children enrolled in public and private nonprofit elementary schools and secondary schools in the school district served by the local educational agency bears to the number of children enrolled in all such schools in the State.
Data.--For purposes of paragraph (2), the State shall use data from the most recent fiscal year for which satisfactory data are available, except that the State may adjust such data, or use alternative child poverty data, to carry out paragraph (2) if the State demonstrates to the Secretary's satisfaction that such adjusted or alternative data more accurately reflect the relative incidence of children who are living in poverty and who reside in the school districts in the State.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Child.--The term `child' means an individual who is not less than 5 and not more than 17.
Child in poverty.--The term `child in poverty' means a child from a family with an income below the poverty line.
``To be eligible to receive an allocation under section 10993E, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the State at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the State may require, including an assurance that the agency will provide the local share of the cost described in section 10993G.
In General.--A local educational agency that receives an allocation under section 10993E shall use the funds made available through the allocation to pay for the local share of the cost of recruiting, hiring, and training mental health and student service providers to provide mental health and student services, to students in elementary schools and secondary schools, for a 1-year period.
Federal, State, and Local Shares.-- ``(1) Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost shall be 33\1/3\ percent.
State share.--The State share of the cost shall be 33\1/3\ percent.
Local share.--The local share of the cost shall be 33\1/3\ percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost may be provided in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment or services.
``To carry out this part, there are authorized to be appropriated $340,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.