This Act may be cited as the ``Endangered Species Conservation Incentives Act of 1995''.
DESIGNATIONS OF OVERPAYMENTS FOR ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION.
General Rule.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS FOR ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION ``Sec.
Amounts for endangered species conservation.
AMOUNTS FOR ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION.
In General.--With respect to each taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the tax imposed by chapter 1, such taxpayer may designate that any overpayment of such tax for such taxable year be paid over for endangered species conservation.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year only at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year.
Such designation shall be made on the first page of the return.
Overpayments Treated as Refunded.--For purposes of this title, any overpayment of tax designated under subsection (a) shall be treated as being refunded to the taxpayer as of the last date prescribed for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 (determined without regard to extensions) or, if later, the date the return is filed.''
Endangered Species Conservation Trust Fund.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Endangered Species Conservation Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the Endangered Species Conservation Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfer to Endangered Species Conservation Trust Fund of Amounts Designated.--There is hereby appropriated to the Endangered Species Conservation Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6097 and received in the Treasury.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall pay, not less often than quarterly, to Secretary of the Interior from the Endangered Species Conservation Trust Fund an amount equal to the amount in such Fund as of the time of such payment less any administrative expenses of the Secretary which may be paid under paragraph (2).
Administrative expenses.--Amounts in the Endangered Species Conservation Trust Fund shall be available to pay the administrative expenses of the Department of the Treasury directly allocable to-- ``(A) modifying the individual income tax return forms to carry out section 6097, ``(B) carrying out this chapter with respect to such Fund, and ``(C) processing amounts received under section 6097 and transferring such amounts to such Fund.''
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of overpayments for endangered species conservation.''
The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Endangered Species Conservation Trust Fund.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
EXCLUSION FROM ESTATE FOR REAL PROPERTY SUBJECT TO ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION AGREEMENT.
In General.--Part IV of subchapter A of chapter 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to taxable estate) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CERTAIN REAL PROPERTY SUBJECT TO ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION AGREEMENT.
General Rule.--For purposes of the tax imposed by section 2001, the value of the taxable estate shall be determined by deducting from the value of the gross estate an amount equal to the value of any endangered species agreement property included in the gross estate.
Endangered Species Agreement Property.--For purposes of this section, the term `endangered species agreement property' means any real property if-- ``(1) each person who has an interest in such property (whether or not in possession)-- ``(A) has entered into an endangered species conservation agreement with respect to such property, and ``(B) has entered into a written agreement with the Secretary consenting to the application of subsection (d), and ``(2) the executor of the decedent's estate-- ``(A) elects the application of this section, and ``(B) files with the Secretary such endangered species conservation agreement.
Endangered Species Conservation Agreement.--For purposes of this section, the term `endangered species conservation agreement' means a written agreement, entered into with the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce-- ``(1) which commits each person who signed such agreement to carry out on such property activities or practices not otherwise required by law, or to refrain from carrying out on such property activities or practices that such person could otherwise lawfully carry out, or both, ``(2) which is certified by such Secretary as assisting in the conservation of any species which is-- ``(A) designated by such Secretary as an endangered or threatened species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, ``(B) proposed for such designation, or ``(C) officially identified by such Secretary as a candidate for possible future protection as an endangered or threatened species, and ``(3) the duration of which is at least 10 years.
Coordination With Other Benefits.--No credit shall be allowed under section 30A with respect to any endangered species conservation agreement with respect to which an election under this section is made.
Recapture of Tax Benefit in Certain Cases.-- ``(1) Disposition of interest or material breach.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (C), if, at any time during the 10-year period beginning on the date the endangered species conservation agreement is entered into with respect to any property-- ``(i) any person disposes of any interest in such property, or ``(ii) there is a material breach by any person who holds an interest in such property of any endangered species conservation agreement with respect to such property, then there is hereby imposed an additional estate tax.
Amount of tax.--The amount of the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) with respect to any interest shall be the amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(i) the adjusted tax difference attributable to such interest (determined under rules similar to the rules of section 2032A(c)(2)), or ``(ii) the amount realized with respect to the interest (or, in any case other than a sale or exchange at arm's length, the fair market value of the interest.
Exception if transferee assumes obligations of transferor.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to a disposition if the transferee enters into a binding written agreement-- ``(i) to assume the obligations imposed on the transferor under the endangered species conservation agreement; ``(ii) to assume liability for any tax imposed under subparagraph (A) with respect to any future dispositions or breaches by such transferee; and ``(iii) to notify the Secretary who entered into the endangered species conservation agreement and the Secretary that the transferee has assumed the obligations and liabilities described in clauses (i) and (ii).
Due date of additional tax.--The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall become due and payable on the day that is 6 months after the date of the disposition or breach referred to in paragraph (1)(A).
Statute of Limitations.--If a taxpayer incurs a tax liability pursuant to subsection (e)(1), then-- ``(1) the statutory period for the assessment of any additional tax imposed by subsection (e)(1) shall not expire before the expiration of 3 years from the date the Secretary is notified (in such manner as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe) of the incurring of such tax liability, and ``(2) such additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of such 3-year period notwithstanding the provisions of any other law or rule of law that would otherwise prevent such assessment.
Election and Filing of Agreement.--The election under this section shall be made on the return of the tax imposed by section 2001.
Such election, and the filing under subsection (a) of an endangered species conservation agreement, shall be made in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulation provide.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part IV of subchapter A of chapter 11 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Certain real property subject to endangered species conservation agreement.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to estates of decedents dying after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ENHANCED DEDUCTION FOR DONATION OF A CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
In General.-- Subsection (h) of section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to charitable, etc., contributions and gifts) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Enhanced valuation of easement for protection of endangered species.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this section, if the taxpayer elects the application of this paragraph, the value of any contribution of a qualified endangered species easement shall be an amount equal to the excess of-- ``(i) the value of the property burdened by the easement, determined without regard to-- ``(I) such easement, and ``(II) any restrictions imposed by the Endangered Species Act of 1973, over ``(ii) the value of such property, determined with regard to such easement and restrictions.
Qualified endangered species easement.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified endangered species easement' means any restriction referred to in paragraph (1)(C) contributed to the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Commerce, or a State agency implementing an endangered species program for the purpose described in paragraph (4)(A)(iii).
For purposes of the preceding sentence, a restriction which is granted for at least 20 years shall be treated as granted in perpetuity.''
Protection of Endangered Species as Conservation Purpose.-- (1) Subparagraph (A) of section 170(h)(4) of such Code is amended by redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) as clauses (iv) and (v), respectively, and by inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause: ``(iii) the protection of a species designated endangered by the Secretary of the Interior, or the Secretary of Commerce, under the Endangered Species Act of 1973,''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made after the date of the enactment of this Act.
CREDIT FOR COSTS OF COMPLIANCE WITH ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION AGREEMENT.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
COSTS OF COMPLIANCE WITH ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION AGREEMENT.
In General.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the endangered species conservation agreement costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Endangered Species Conservation Agreement Costs.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `endangered species conservation agreement costs' means expenses which would not have been incurred by the taxpayer but for an endangered species conservation agreement (as defined in section 2057(c) but without regard to paragraph (3) thereof) entered into by the taxpayer.
Application With Other Credits.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(1) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and sections 27, 28, 29, and 30, over ``(2) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subpart B is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Costs of compliance with endangered species conservation agreement.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.