This Act may be cited as the ``Travel and Tourism Partnership Act of 1996''.
TITLE I--NATIONAL TOURISM BOARD SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL TOURISM BOARD.
Establishment.--There is established the National Tourism Board (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Board'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Board shall be composed of 36 members, appointed by the President, in consultation with the appropriate representatives of the travel and tourism industry.
The members appointed under this subsection shall include-- (A) 1 member appointed to serve as the Chairperson of the Board, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate; (B) 1 member appointed from nominations submitted by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (C) 1 member appointed from nominations submitted by the President pro tempore of the Senate; (D) 6 members appointed from among employees of Federal and State agencies related to travel and tourism; and (E) 27 members representing the private sector and a wide range of travel and tourism industries.
Accountability of chairperson.--The Chairperson shall be accountable to the President and the Congress for the operations of the Board.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member of the Board (including the Chairperson) shall be appointed for a term of 3 years, except as provided in paragraph (2).
Terms of initial members.--As determined by the President as of the date of the first appointments, of the members first appointed-- (A) 12 members shall be appointed for a term of 1 year; (B) 12 members shall be appointed for a term of 2 years; and (C) 12 members (including the Chairperson) shall be appointed for a term of 3 years.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Board shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Board have been appointed, the Board shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson, but not less frequently than semiannually.
The Board shall provide appropriate notice of each meeting to the general public.
The meetings of the Board shall be open to the general public.
Treatment of Board.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Board shall not be considered to be a Federal agency for purposes of the civil service laws and any other provision of Federal law governing the operation of Federal agencies, including personnel or budgetary matters relating to Federal agencies.
Exemption from the federal advisory committee act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Board.
DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
Public-Private Partnership.--The Board shall-- (1) facilitate the development and use of a public-private partnership for travel and tourism policymaking; (2) develop a national travel and tourism strategy for increasing tourism to and within the United States; (3) advise the President, the Congress, and members of the travel and tourism industry concerning-- (A) the implementation of the national strategy referred to in paragraph (2); and (B) other matters that affect travel and tourism; and (4) provide guidance to the National Tourism Organization established under section 201.
Recommendations; Testimony.--The Board-- (1) shall develop such recommendations on the issues referred to in subsection (a)(3) as the Board considers to be appropriate; and (2) may present testimony concerning those issues to the Congress and to State legislatures.
Reports.--To carry out its duties, the Board may submit to the President and the Congress such reports concerning the findings and determinations of the Board as the Board determines to be appropriate.
POWERS OF THE BOARD.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Board may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Board considers necessary to carry out the duties of the Board.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Board, the head of a Federal department or agency shall furnish that information to the Board.
Contributions.--The Board may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of funds, services, or property necessary to carry out its duties.
The Board may not accept any Federal financial assistance or financial assistance from any other government.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Board who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation, except for travel expenses, as described in subsection (b).
Each member of the Board who is an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall not receive any compensation in addition to that received for that member's services as an officer or employee of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--Subject to the availability of funds from financial contributions under section 103(b), the members of the Board may be allowed travel expenses, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Board.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Board may appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Board to perform its duties.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Board may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel.
Support services.--At the request of the Chairperson of the Board, the Chairperson of the Board of the National Tourism Organization established under section 201 may provide clerical and support services to the National Tourism Board established under this title.
TITLE II--NATIONAL TOURISM ORGANIZATION SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL TOURISM ORGANIZATION.
In General.-- (1) Establishment.--The President shall, in accordance with this section, provide for the establishment of a nonprofit corporation, to be known as the National Tourism Organization (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Organization'').
The Organization shall not be an agency or establishment of the United States Government, but shall be operated in a manner consistent with the provisions of this section and any other applicable laws.
Purposes.--The purposes of the Organization are-- (A) to work toward increasing the market share of the United States in global tourism; (B) to implement the strategy developed under section 102(a)(2); (C) to operate travel and tourism promotion programs overseas in partnership with the travel and tourism industry of the United States; (D) to establish a travel-tourism data bank and, through that data bank, collect and disseminate international market data; (E) to conduct market research necessary for the effective promotion of the travel and tourism market; and (F) to promote United States travel and tourism at international trade shows.
Organization Board of Directors.--The Organization shall have a Board of Directors (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Organization Board'').
The Organization Board shall consist of 45 members, appointed by the President.
The Organization Board shall be accountable to the National Tourism Board established under title I for the operations of the Organization.
Incorporators.--The members of the initial Organization Board shall-- (1) serve as incorporators; and (2) take any action that is necessary to establish the Organization as a corporation under applicable law.
Term of Office.--The term of office of each member of the Organization Board who is appointed by the President shall be 3 years, except that any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which the predecessor of that member was appointed shall be appointed for the remainder of that term.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Organization Board shall not affect its power, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Chairperson.--The Organization Board shall be headed by a chairperson, who shall be selected by the Organization Board, from among the members of the Organization Board.
Status of Members.--Members of the Organization Board shall not, by reason of membership in the Organization Board, be considered to be officers or employees of the United States.
Officers; Staff.-- (1) Officers.--The Organization shall have a president, and such other officers as may be named and appointed by the Organization Board for terms and at rates of compensation fixed by the Organization Board.
The president shall serve as a member of the Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee established under section 2312 of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727).
The Organization Board may prescribe the duties of the officers.
All officers of the Organization shall serve at the pleasure of the Organization Board.
Staff.--The Organization Board shall hire the staff necessary to carry out the purposes of the Organization and fix the compensation of that staff.
Financing.--Not later than 1 year after the date of incorporation of the Organization, the appropriate officers of the Organization shall cooperate with the Organization Board to develop a recommendation for the long-term financing of the Organization.
COOPERATION BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
Technical Assistance.--Upon request of the appropriate officer of the Organization or the Organization Board, the head of a Federal agency shall provide technical assistance to assist the Organization in carrying out its purposes, as specified in section 201(a)(2).
Overseas Posts.--The head of each Federal agency that maintains offices in a foreign country shall, as appropriate, incorporate in the programs and activities carried out by those offices, programs and activities that implement the recommendations of the National Tourism Board established under section 101 and the Organization.
TRADE PROMOTION COORDINATING COMMITTEE.
Section 2312 of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727) is amended-- (1) in subsection (c)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) reflect recommendations made by the National Tourism Board established under the Travel and Tourism Partnership Act of 1996.
''; and (2) in subsection (d)(1)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (L); (B) by redesignating subparagraph (M) as subparagraph (N); and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (L) the following: ``(M) the president of the National Tourism Organization established under the Travel and Tourism Partnership Act of 1996; and''.