For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``brownfield site'' means a parcel of land that was previously used for industrial purposes but is contaminated with hazardous or toxic waste and not currently used for any purpose.
Such term shall not include any of the following: (A) Any facility that is the subject of a planned or an ongoing response action under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes).
Any facility included, or proposed for inclusion, in the National Priorities List maintained by the Administrator under such Act.
Any facility with respect to which a record of decision has been issued by the President under section 104 of such Act (42 United States Code 9604).
Any facility that is subject to corrective action under section 3004(u) or 3008(h) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6924(u) or 6928(h)) at the time that an application for a grant or loan concerning the facility is submitted under this Act.
Any land disposal unit with respect to which a closure notification under subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6921 et sequentes) has been submitted and closure requirements have been specified in a closure plan or permit.
Any facility that contains polychlorinated biphenyls subject to response under section 6(e) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 United States Code 2605(e)).
Any facility with respect to which an administrative order on consent or judicial consent decree requiring cleanup has been entered into by the President under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes), the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes), the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 United States Code 2601 et sequentes) or title XIV of the Public Health Service Act, commonly known as the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 United States Code 300f et seq.).
Any facility controlled by, or to be remediated by, a department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
Any facility at which assistance for response activities may be obtained pursuant to subtitle I of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6991 et sequentes) from the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund established under section 9508 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
SET-ASIDE FOR BROWNFIELD CLEANUPS.
Amount of Set-Aside.--Notwithstanding section 111 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (Superfund) or any other provision of law, from the amounts available in the Hazardous Substance Superfund established under subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, in each fiscal year commencing after the enactment of this Act a fraction equal to 1/365 of the total amount available in the fund in that fiscal year shall be available to the Administrator for obligation or expenditure for the purpose of making grants under section 3 of this Act.
Assistance Amount.--The amount of any grants provided under this Act to a single applicant shall not exceed $10,000,000.
No funds made available under this Act may be used for any brownfield site which has previously received Federal funds for used for decontamination or remediation.
No grant funds shall be available under this Act for any project unless the State provides at least 20 percent of the total costs of the project from nonfederal funds.
Grants.--Upon the approval of an application made by any State under this section, the Administrator may approve a State brownfield program and make grants to State to be used for purposes of decontamination and remediation of brownfield sites to make such sites available for proposed new uses.
Grants under the section may also be used for technical assistance.
Applications.--Any State may submit an application to the Administrator for approval of a State program under this section.
An application shall be in such form as the Administrator determines appropriate.
At a minimum, the application shall include each of the following: (1) Assurance that adequate oversight and enforcement authorities will be available.
Evidence of active State brownfields cleanup programs.
Opportunity for public participation.
Adequate oversight to ensure that remediation complies with State laws.
Certification to owners and prospective purchaser that cleanup is completed.
Evidence of a proposed use for the site after the remediation has been completed.
Streamlined procedures to ensure expeditious brownfield remediation.
The Administrator shall approve the program if he determines that it meets the requirements of paragraphs (1) through (8).
Grants.--The Administrator may make grants under this section to any State for the purposes of decontamination and remediation of brownfield sites pursuant to an approved State program.
Cleanup Standards.--All decontamination and remediation activities carried out under an approved State brownfields cleanup program shall comply with applicable provisions of State law.
No action may be taken by the United States under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et seq.)
or under the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes) for the decontamination or remediation of any brownfield site at which decontamination or remediation is being carried out under an approved State brownfield cleanup program, and no action for recovery of costs or damages arising from a release or threatened release of hazardous substances at any brownfield site may be brought under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 against any person who is, or who has, engaged in the cleanup of such site under a State program approved under this section.
Withdrawal of Approval.--Whenever the Administrator determines after public hearing that a State is not administering and enforcing a qualified program in accordance with the requirements of this section, the Administrator shall notify the State in writing of such determination.
If appropriate corrective action is not taken by the State within 120 days after receipt of the notice, the Administrator shall withdraw the approval of the program and publish a notice of this action in the Federal Register, after which the State program shall cease to be an approved program and shall not be eligible to receive further Federal funds under this Act.
Status Reports.--States with programs approved under this section shall report to the Administrator at the end of each calendar year with regard to whether or not the program continues to meet the requirements of this section.