This Act may be cited as the ``JTTF Enhancement Act of 2001''.
JOINT TERRORISM TASK FORCES.
JTTFs Required.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall carry out a program under which the Director maintains, in such regions and localities of the United States as the Director considers appropriate, task forces of law enforcement agents to combat international terrorism (known as joint terrorism task forces).
Composition.--Each task force under the program required by subsection (a) shall be comprised of at least one law enforcement agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Each such task force shall also include such other law enforcement agents as the Director considers appropriate, selected by the Director from among those Federal, State, and local law enforcement agents that are made available to the Director for such purposes.
Training.--The Director shall make available to the law enforcement agents participating in such program such training as the Director considers appropriate to ensure that such agents are fully and properly prepared to combat international terrorism.
Funding of State and Local Agents.--For each State and local law enforcement agent participating in such program, the Director shall reimburse the agent's jurisdiction for the agent's salary during the period the agent was so participating.
Sense of Congress on Number of Task Forces.--It is the sense of Congress that the Director, in carrying out such program, should expand such program as rapidly as feasible to include at least one task force for each field division of the Bureau.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
INCREASED PARTICIPATION OF INS AGENTS ON JOINT TERRORISM TASK FORCES.
In General.--From amounts made available to carry out this section, the Attorney General shall increase the number of law enforcement agents of the Immigration and Naturalization Service available for participation in the joint terrorism task force program carried out under section 2.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
DETAIL PROGRAM FOR STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL TO THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
The Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 (50 United States Code 403a et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``detail of employees with state and local law enforcement agencies ``Sec.
Detail.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- ``(1) upon request of the head of State or local law enforcement agency, the Director of Central Intelligence may detail any employee within Central Intelligence Agency to that State or local law enforcement agency on a nonreimbursable basis; and ``(2) subject to the approval of the Director of Central Intelligence, the head of a State or local law enforcement agency may detail any employee of that State or local law enforcement agency to the Central Intelligence Agency on a reimbursable basis.
Period of Detail.--Details shall be for such periods as are agreed to between the Director and the head of the State or local agency.
Benefits, Allowances, Travel, Incentives.--An employee detailed under subsection (a) may be authorized any benefit, allowance, travel, or incentive otherwise provided to enhance staffing by the organization from which the employee is detailed.
Appropriations.--(1) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Details under subsection (a) are subject to the availability of appropriations for such purpose.''.
DETAIL PROGRAM FOR STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL TO THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND ITS ELEMENTS.
Detail.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- (1) upon request of the head of State or local law enforcement agency, the Attorney General may detail any employee within the Department of Justice, or any element of the Department, to that State or local law enforcement agency on a nonreimbursable basis; and (2) subject to the approval of the Attorney General, the head of a State or local law enforcement agency may detail any employee of that State or local law enforcement agency to the Department of Justice, or any element of the Department, on a reimbursable basis.
Period of Detail.--Details shall be for such periods as are agreed to between the Attorney General and the head of the State or local agency.
Benefits, Allowances, Travel, Incentives.--An employee detailed under subsection (a) may be authorized any benefit, allowance, travel, or incentive otherwise provided to enhance staffing by the organization from which the employee is detailed.
Appropriations.--(1) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Details under subsection (a) are subject to the availability of appropriations for such purpose.
EXPANSION OF LAW ENFORCEMENT SUPPORT CENTER.
Expansion of Center.--From amounts made available to carry out this section, the Attorney General shall expand the Law Enforcement Support Center to ensure that all Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies are able to access the Center.
Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.