This section may be cited as the ``Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act of 1996''.
As used in this Act: (1) Compact.--The term ``compact'' means a compact entered into by 2 or more States under section 4 of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act.
Compact region.--The term ``compact region'' means the area consisting of all the States that are members of the compact.
Disposal.--The term ``disposal'' means the permanent isolation of low-level radioactive waste pursuant to the requirements established by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Generate.--The term ``generate'', when used in relation to low-level radioactive waste, means to produce low-level radioactive waste.
Low-level radioactive waste.--The term ``low-level radioactive waste'' means radioactive material that-- (A) is not highly radioactive waste, spent nuclear fuel, or byproduct material (as defined in section 11e.
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2014(e)(2)))-- (i) owned or generated by the Department of Energy; (ii) owned or generated by the United States Navy as the result of the decommission of vessels of the United States Navy; or (iii) owned or generated as a result of any research, development, testing, or production of any atomic weapons; (B) the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, consistent with existing law and in accordance with subparagraph (A), classifies as low-level radioactive waste; and (C) consists of or contains class A, B, or C radioactive waste as defined by regulations published at section 61.55 of title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on January 26, 1983.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'', unless otherwise specified, means the Secretary of the Interior.
Sited compact region.--The term ``sited compact region'' means a compact region in which there is located one of the following disposal facilities: Barnwell in the State of South Carolina and Richland in the State of Washington.
A region ceases to be a sited compact region if, for any reason, the disposal facility located in the region ceases to accept waste.
State.--The term ``State'' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
DUTY TO DISPOSE OF LOW-LEVEL RADIOACTIVE WASTE.
The Secretary shall dispose of low-level radioactive waste generated within any State outside a sited compact region.
Each sited compact region shall provide for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste generated within the sited compact region.
A State outside a sited compact region may provide for the disposal within that State of any low-level radioactive waste generated within that State, except that such a State shall not be required to accept low-level radioactive waste generated outside that State, except under contract with the Secretary under section 5.
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISPOSAL FACILITY.
The Secretary shall establish a disposal facility for low-level radioactive waste on land owned by the Federal Government, and may contract with the Department of Energy for disposal of low-level radioactive waste at a disposal facility established by the Department of Energy for radioactive waste as described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 2(5)(A).
ACCEPTANCE OF LOW-LEVEL RADIOACTIVE WASTE.
Not later than January 1, 1997, the Secretary shall accept for disposal any low-level radioactive waste generated within any State outside a sited compact region.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no later than January 1, 1997, the Secretary shall contract with the Secretary of Energy for the temporary storage of low-level radioactive waste at any facility established by the Department of Energy for radioactive waste as described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 2(5)(A) and may contract with the Secretary of Energy for disposal of such waste at any such facility or may contract with any State for disposal of such waste at any licensed disposal facility operated to dispose of low-level radioactive waste generated within that State.
The Secretary shall take physical possession of low-level radioactive waste tendered consistent with this Act by a waste generator or broker or by a State official charged with regulating possession of radioactive materials beginning on January 1, 1997, whether or not a contract with the Secretary of Energy has been executed.
The Secretary shall establish by regulation rates for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste accepted for disposal.
The rates shall provide for recovery of the actual costs of disposal and the administrative costs of the Secretary to contract with the Secretary of Energy as provided in section 5.
Rates may be based upon volume or activity of waste, or a combination of the two, except that the rate shall not exceed an average rate of $500 per cubic foot of waste disposed.
Repeal.--The Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act (42 United States Code 2021b et sequentes) is repealed.
Duties of the Secretary of the Interior.--Section 441 of the Revised Statutes (43 United States Code 1457) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``14.
Commercial Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal (other than greater than Class C).