This Act may be cited as the ``Vested Worker Protection Act of 2002''.
SAFE HARBOR IN EVENT OF REDUCTION IN FUTURE BENEFIT ACCRUALS WHERE PLAN PROVIDES NOTICE AND ELECTION TO CONTINUE BENEFIT ACCRUALS UNDER FORMER PLAN INSTEAD OF AMENDED PLAN.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 411(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to defined benefit plans) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(I) Safe harbor upon reduction in future benefit accruals.-- ``(i) In general.--An applicable pension plan that adopts an amendment which has the effect of reducing the rate of future benefit accrual of 1 or more participants shall be treated as not meeting the requirements of this paragraph unless such plan provides each participant who is, as of the date of the adoption of the plan amendment, a fully vested participant with-- ``(I) written notice which meets the requirements of section 4980F, and ``(II) an election to continue to accrue benefits under such plan, determined under the terms of such plan as in effect immediately before the effective date of such plan amendment.
Protected accrued benefit.--For purposes of clause (i), an accrued benefit shall include any early retirement benefit or retirement-type subsidy (within the meaning of subsection (d)(6)(B)(i)), but only with respect to a participant who satisfies (either before or after the effective date of the amendment) the conditions for the benefit or subsidy under the terms of the plan as in effect immediately before such date.
Timing of election.--Except as provided in regulations, the election required by clause (i)(II) shall be provided at least 90 days before the effective date of the amendment.
Exemption upon showing of distress criteria.--This subparagraph shall not apply with respect to any plan amendment if the plan sponsor, prior to the date of the adoption of the amendment, demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, under regulations of the Secretary, requirements-- ``(I) applicable with respect to the adoption of the plan amendment, and ``(II) similar to the requirements of clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 4041(c)(2)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 applicable with respect to a distress termination, are met by each employer required (under the terms of the plan as in effect immediately before the adoption of the plan amendment) to make contributions under the plan.
Fully vested participant.--For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `fully vested participant' means a participant who under the plan has a nonforfeitable right to the participant's entire accrued benefit.
Applicable pension plan.--The term `applicable pension plan' means-- ``(I) a defined benefit plan, or ``(II) an individual account plan which is subject to the funding standards of section 412, which had 100 or more active participants who had accrued a benefit under the plan (whether or not vested) as of the last day of the plan year preceding the plan year in which the plan amendment becomes effective.
Such term shall not include any governmental plan (within the meaning of section 414(d)) or any church plan (within the meaning of section 414(e)) with respect to which the election provided by section 410(d) has not been made.''.
Excise Tax on Failure To Offer Election.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 43 of subtitle D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as amended by section 2 of this Act) is amended further by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
FAILURE TO OFFER ELECTION TO CONTINUE BENEFIT ACCRUALS UNDER FORMER APPLICABLE PENSION PLAN IN EVENT OF REDUCTIONS IN FUTURE BENEFIT ACCRUALS.
Imposition of Tax.--There is hereby imposed a tax on the failure of any applicable pension plan to meet the requirements of subsection (d).
Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be 50 percent of the lesser of-- ``(A) the reduction in the future employer benefit cost for the plan attributable to the plan amendment referred to in subsection (d) (determined, as provided in regulations of the Secretary, as of the date of the adoption of such plan amendment), or ``(B) the amount of the excess pension assets in such plan, determined as of the effective date of the amendment.
Future employer benefit cost.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the term `future employer benefit cost' for a plan means the present value of future accruals, by current participants and beneficiaries, of benefits derived from employer contributions (within the meaning of section 411(c)(1)).
Excess pension assets.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `excess pension assets' has the meaning given to such term by section 420(e)(2).
Liability for Tax.--The following shall be liable for the tax imposed by subsection (a): ``(1) In the case of a plan other than a multiemployer plan, the employer.
In the case of a multiemployer plan, the plan.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, all multiemployer plans of which the same trust forms a part shall be treated as 1 plan.
For purposes of this paragraph, if not all persons who are treated as a single employer for purposes of this section have the same taxable year, the taxable years taken into account shall be determined under principles similar to the principles of section 1561.
Election To Continue Benefit Accruals Under Former Applicable Pension Plan In Event of Reductions in Future Benefit Accruals.--In the case that an applicable pension plan adopts an amendment which has the effect of reducing the rate of future benefit accrual of 1 or more participants, the requirements of this subsection are met if the plan administrator provides each fully vested participant with-- ``(1) written notice which meets the requirements of section 4980F, and ``(2) an election to continue to accrue benefits under such plan, determined under the terms of such plan as in effect immediately before the effective date of such plan amendment.
Timing of Election.--Except as provided in regulations, the election required by subsection (d) shall be provided at least 90 days before the effective date of such amendment.
Protected Accrued Benefit.--For purposes of this section, an accrued benefit shall include any early retirement benefit or retirement-type subsidy (within the meaning of section 411(d)(6)(B)(i)), but only with respect to a participant who satisfies (either before or after the effective date of the amendment) the conditions for the benefit or subsidy under the terms of the plan as in effect immediately before such date.
Exemption upon Showing of Distress Criteria.--This section shall not apply with respect to any plan amendment if the plan sponsor, prior to the date of the adoption of the amendment, demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, under regulations of the Secretary, requirements-- ``(1) applicable with respect to the adoption of the plan amendment, and ``(2) similar to the requirements of clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 4041(c)(2)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 applicable with respect to a distress termination, are met by each employer required (under the terms of the plan as in effect immediately before the adoption of the plan amendment) to make contributions under the plan.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Applicable pension plan.--The term `applicable pension plan' means-- ``(A) a defined benefit plan, or ``(B) an individual account plan which is subject to the funding standards of section 412, which had 100 or more active participants who had accrued a benefit under the plan (whether or not vested) as of the last day of the plan year preceding the plan year in which the plan amendment becomes effective.
Such term shall not include any governmental plan (within the meaning of section 414(d)) or any church plan (within the meaning of section 414(e)) with respect to which the election provided by section 410(d) has not been made.
Fully vested participant.--The term `fully vested participant' means a participant who has under the plan a nonforfeitable right to the participant's entire accrued benefit.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 43 of subtitle D of such Code (as amended by section 2 of this Act) is amended further by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Failure to offer election to continue benefit accruals under former applicable pension plan in event of reductions in future benefit accruals.''.
In General.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply to plans and plan amendments taking effect after 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Special Rule.--The period for providing any notice required by the amendments made by this Act shall not end before the date which is 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.