This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security Tax Fairness Act of 1993''.
CREDIT FOR PORTION OF EMPLOYEE OASDI TAXES.
General Rule.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
35. CREDIT FOR PORTION OF EMPLOYEE OASDI TAXES.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year an amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(1) such individual's employee OASDI taxes for the taxable year, or ``(2) the tax credit limitation amount for the calendar year in which such taxable year begins.
Tax Credit Limitation Amount.--For purposes of subsection (a)-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the tax credit limitation amount for any calendar year is the amount which the Secretary estimates will result in a reduction of revenues to the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund for such calendar year equal to the increase in revenues for such year attributable to the application of-- ``(A) the tax imposed by section 3101(a) to wages in excess of the contribution and benefit base for such year, and ``(B) the last sentence of section 1402(b).
Railroad retirement.--In the case of an individual all of whose employee OASDI taxes for the taxable year are described in subparagraphs (B) and (D) of subsection (c)(1), the tax credit limitation amount for any calendar year is the amount which the Railroad Retirement Board estimates will result in a reduction of revenues to the Railroad Retirement Account for such calendar year equal to the increase in revenues for such year attributable to the application of the taxes described in such subparagraphs to compensation in excess of the contribution and benefit base for such year.
Adjustments.--The Secretary of the Treasury and the Railroad Retirement Board, as the case may be, shall make proper adjustments in the determination of the tax credit limitation amounts to the extent prior estimates were in excess of or less than the correct amounts for the purpose of ensuring that the balances of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Railroad Retirement Account are not eroded by reason of the credits allowed under this section, thereby maintaining the long-term stability of such Trust Fund and Account.
Employee OASDI Taxes.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `employee OASDI taxes' means, with respect to any taxpayer for any taxable year-- ``(A) the amount of the taxes imposed by section 3101(a) on amounts received by the taxpayer during the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, ``(B) so much of the tax imposed by section 3201(a) as is determined at a rate not greater than the rate in effect under section 3101(a) on amounts received by the taxpayer during the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, ``(C) 50 percent of the taxes imposed by section 1401(a) on the self-employment income of the taxpayer for the taxable year, and ``(D) so much of the tax imposed by section 3211(a)(1) as is determined at a rate not greater than the rate in effect under section 3101(a) on amounts received by the taxpayer during the calendar year in which the taxable year begins.
Special rule.--Any amounts paid pursuant to an agreement under section 3121(l) (relating to agreements entered into by American employers with respect to foreign affiliates) which are equivalent to the taxes referred to in paragraph (1)(A) shall be treated as taxes referred to in such paragraph.
Contribution and benefit base.--The term `contribution and benefit base' means the contribution and benefit base determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act.''
Cost of Credit Borne By Retirement Funds.-- (1) OASDI trust fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall pay, from time to time, from the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund to the general fund of the Treasury amounts equivalent to the credits allowed under section 35 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which are attributable to taxes described in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 35(c)(1) of such Code.
Railroad retirement account.--The Railroad Retirement Board shall pay, from time to time, from the Railroad Retirement Account to the general fund of the Treasury amounts equivalent to the credits allowed under section 35 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which are attributable to taxes described in subparagraphs (B) and (D) of section 35(c)(1) of such Code.
Transfers.--Such amounts shall be transferred on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury or the Railroad Retirement Board, as the case may be, and proper adjustments shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess of or less than the credits allowed.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``or from section 35 of such Code''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 35 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
35. Credit for portion of employee OASDI taxes.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
REPEAL OF DOLLAR LIMITATION ON AMOUNT OF WAGES SUBJECT TO EMPLOYEE OASDI TAX.
OASDI Tax.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining wages) is amended by inserting ``except in the case of the tax imposed by section 3101(a),'' after ``(1)''.
Paragraph (1) of section 3121(x) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``sections 3101(a) and 3111(a)'' and inserting ``section 3111(a)'', and (B) by inserting ``Employer Tax for'' before ``Old- Age'' in the heading.
Self-Employment Tax.--Subsection (b) of section 1402 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: ``Paragraph (1) shall not apply to so much of the rate applicable under section 1401(a) as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 3101(a).''
Railroad Retirement Tax.--Subparagraph (A) of section 3231(e)(2) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new clause: ``(iii) Employee oasdi taxes.--Clause (i) shall not apply to-- ``(I) so much of the rate applicable under section 3201(a) as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 3101(a), and ``(II) so much of the rate applicable under section 3211(a)(1) as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 3101(a).''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 6413(c) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``the contribution and benefit base (as determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act)'' and inserting ``the applicable contribution base determined under section 3121(x)(2)'', and (B) by striking ``section 3101 or section 3201'' and inserting ``section 3101(b) or section 3201(a) (to the extent the rate applicable under section 3201(a) as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 3101(b))''.
Subparagraphs (B) and (C) of section 6413(c)(2) of such Code are each amended by striking ``section 3101'' each place it appears and inserting ``section 3101(b)''.
Subsection (c) of section 6413 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (3).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to 1994 and later calendar years.