SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Home Health Nurse and Patient Act of 2001''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
OASIS Task Force (OTF).
Elimination of mandatory requirement to collect Outcomes Assessment and Information Set (OASIS) data from certain individuals.
Improving the claims review process for dually-eligible medicare and medicaid beneficiaries receiving home health services.
Claims Review and Audit Task Force (CRATF).
Implementation of Task Force recommendations.
The Senate makes the following findings: (1) The Outcomes Assessment and Information Set (in this section referred to as ``OASIS'') includes information regarding the health and functional status of patients of home health agencies, the use of health services by such patients, the living conditions of such patients, and the social support provided to such patients, that is necessary to assess the quality of care being provided to medicare and medicaid patients by home health agencies.
According to the Comptroller General of the United States, the average additional time that is necessary for a home health agency to comply with the OASIS requirement for a start-of-care assessment is 61 minutes more than the amount of time to comply with such requirement estimated by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Existing Federal regulations and associated paperwork requirements are excessively straining home health agencies and their clinical staff, and are often reported by nurses to be the primary contributors to their decreased job satisfaction.
Many nurses and home health aides are leaving the home health care profession and patients are staying in the hospital longer than necessary.
A 2000 national survey of home health agencies by the Hospital and Healthcare Compensation Service reported a 21 percent turnover rate for registered nurses, a 24 percent turnover rate for licensed practical nurses, and a 28 percent turnover rate for home health aides.
In its May 17, 2001 report titled ``Nursing Workforce-- Recruitment and Retention of Nurses and Nurse Aides Is a Growing Concern'', the General Accounting Office reported that the jobs for nurse aides working in home health care are projected to increase by 58 percent, from 746,000 in 1998 to 1,200,000 in 2008.
In this Act: (1) Comprehensive assessment of patients.--The term ``comprehensive assessment of patients'' means the rule published by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services that requires, as a condition of participation in the medicare program, a home health agency to provide a patient-specific comprehensive assessment that accurately reflects the patient's current status and that incorporates the Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS).
CRATF.--The term ``CRATF'' means the Claims Review and Audit Task Force established under section 7.
Home health agency.--The term ``home health agency'' has the meaning given that term under section 1861(o) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(o)).
Outcome and assessment information set; oasis.--The terms ``Outcome and Assessment Information Set'' and ``OASIS'' mean the standard provided under the rule relating to data items that must be used in conducting a comprehensive assessment of patients.
Medicaid beneficiary.--The term ``medicaid beneficiary'' means an individual who is eligible for medical assistance under a State plan under the medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes).
Medicare beneficiary.--The term ``medicare beneficiary'' means an individual who is entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395c et sequentes) or enrolled under part B of such title (42 United States Code 1395j et sequentes), including an individual who is enrolled in a Medicare+Choice plan under part C of such title (42 United States Code 1395w-21 et sequentes).
OTF.--The term ``OTF'' means the OASIS Task Force established under section 4.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
OASIS TASK FORCE (OTF).
Establishment of the OASIS Task Force.--The Secretary shall establish the OASIS Task Force (in this section referred to as the ``OTF'') in accordance with the provisions of section 1114(f) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1314(f)).
Membership.--The OTF shall be composed of 11 members appointed by the Secretary as follows: (1) 3 members shall be officers, employees, or designees of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
4 members shall be national home health industry representatives.
4 members shall be patient advocates.
Date.--The Secretary shall appoint the members of the OTF not later than the date that is 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Study and Report.-- (1) Study.--The OTF shall conduct a study on the comprehensive assessment of patients to determine whether-- (A) the number of assessments required during an episode of care or the number of questions asked during each assessment should be decreased to eliminate redundant and uninformative clinical information; (B) a uniform data collection standard is needed to ensure that patients who are not medicare beneficiaries or medicaid beneficiaries receive the same quality of care as patients who are medicare beneficiaries or medicaid beneficiaries; and (C) OASIS data should be collected from medicaid beneficiaries who are not medicare beneficiaries.
Report.--Not later than the date that is 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the OTF shall submit to the Secretary and Congress a report on the study conducted under paragraph (1), together with such recommendations for legislative or administrative action as the OTF determines appropriate.
ELIMINATION OF MANDATORY REQUIREMENT TO COLLECT OUTCOMES ASSESSMENT AND INFORMATION SET (OASIS) DATA FROM CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS.
Not later than the date that is 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate a regulation revising the data collection requirements under the Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS) standard that is used as part of the comprehensive assessment of patients-- (1) to make the use of such data collection requirements optional with respect to patients of home health agencies who are not medicare beneficiaries or medicaid beneficiaries; and (2) to eliminate such data collection requirements with respect to any patient of a home health agency to whom only personal care services are furnished.
IMPROVING THE CLAIMS REVIEW PROCESS FOR DUALLY-ELIGIBLE MEDICARE AND MEDICAID BENEFICIARIES RECEIVING HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
In General.--The Secretary shall review each regulation relating to the demand billing process as such process applies to individuals who are both medicare beneficiaries and medicaid beneficiaries to determine whether such processes may be conducted in a manner that-- (1) is efficient; (2) allows for-- (A) the determination of coverage of home health services under the medicare program with respect to a patient not later than the date that is 3 weeks after the date on which the patient is admitted to the home health agency; and (B) the expedient submission of a claim prior to the end of an episode of care that avoids the submission of a request for anticipated payment before a final payment determination is made; and (3) does not adversely affect medicare beneficiaries, medicaid beneficiaries, or home health agencies in the determination of whether payment may be made under the medicare program for an item or service furnished by a home health agency.
Implementation.--Not later than the date that is 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate a final rule in accordance with section 1871 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395hh) revising the processes described in subsection (a) based on the review conducted under such subsection.
CLAIMS REVIEW AND AUDIT TASK FORCE (CRATF).
Establishment of the Claims Review and Audit Task Force.--The Secretary shall establish the Claims Review and Audit Task Force (in this section referred to as the ``CRATF'') in accordance with the provisions of section 1114(f) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1314(f)).
Membership.--The CRATF shall be composed of 11 members appointed by the Secretary as follows: (1) 5 members shall be officers or employees of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
6 members shall be national home health industry representatives.
Date.--The Secretary shall appoint the members of the CRATF not later than the date that is 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Study and Report.-- (1) Study.-- (A) In general.--The CRATF shall conduct a study on the processes and policies used to review medical claims submitted by home health agencies, technical denials of payment of such claims, and the statistical sampling methodology used to conduct post-payment audits and reviews of such claims.
Specific proposals considered.--In conducting the study under subparagraph (A), the CRATF shall consider the following proposals: (i) Establishing reasonable time limits on regional home health intermediaries for review of claims.
Creating opportunities to use alternative dispute resolution to resolve disputes involving a claim for payment of a home health agency.
Taking into account the results of all past claim reviews and appeal determinations to decide whether the provider should be subject to the proposed audit.
Setting standards for responsible and ethical home health agencies so that agencies that meet those standards would be subject to a minimal number of sampling audits, focused medical reviews, and extensive prepayment claim reviews.
The elimination of technical denials of payment of claims submitted by home health agencies.
Allowing the resubmission of any technically noncompliant claim submitted by a home health agency that has been corrected so that such claim is a clean claim.
Allowing physician assistants and nurse practitioners to certify and make changes to home health care plans to ensure that home health agencies will be reimbursed in a timely manner and that care to the medicare beneficiary or medicaid beneficiary would not be interrupted.
Developing a sampling regulation through the rulemaking process described in section 1871(b)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1871(b)(1)).
Only using the methodology of projecting overpayment to a provider of home health services from a sample of claims where the Secretary has documented a widespread pattern of submitting erroneous claims for payment by that provider for which payment is made under the medicare program.
Report.--Not later than the date that is 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the CRATF shall submit to the Secretary and Congress a report on the study conducted under paragraph (1), together with such recommendations for legislative or administrative action as the CRATF determines appropriate.
IMPLEMENTATION OF TASK FORCE RECOMMENDATIONS.
Implementation of OTF Recommendations.--Not later than the date that is 6 months after the date on which the Secretary receives the report submitted under section 4(d)(2), the Secretary shall promulgate a regulation in accordance with section 1871 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395hh) revising the regulations relating to the comprehensive assessment of patients in order to implement the recommendations of the OTF contained in such report.
Implementation of CRATF Recommendations.--Not later than the date that is 6 months after the date on which the Secretary receives the report submitted under section 7(d)(2), the Secretary shall promulgate a regulation in accordance with section 1871 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395hh) revising the regulations relating to the processes and policies for review of medical claims submitted by home health agencies, technical denials of payment of such claims, and the statistical sampling methodology used to conduct post-payment audits and reviews of such claims in order to implement the recommendations of the CRATF contained in such report.