SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Eliminate the Magnet for Illegal Immigration Act of 1995''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Increase in INS investigators to enforce employer sanctions.
Increase in Department of Labor investigators to enforce labor standards.
Increase in investigators in Office of Special Counsel for Immigration-Related Unfair Employment Practices to enforce antidiscrimination provisions.
Subpoena and related authority.
Reducing the number of employment verification documents.
Increasing penalties for document fraud.
Joint targeted efforts by the INS and the Department of Labor to investigate employer sanctions and labor standards.
Increasing civil money penalties for hiring, recruiting, and referral violations.
Increasing penalties for repeated or willful violations of labor standards.
Increasing civil money penalties for unfair immigration- related employment practices.
INCREASE IN INS INVESTIGATORS TO ENFORCE EMPLOYER SANCTIONS.
In General.--In addition to such amounts as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to be appropriated for each of the fiscal years 1996 and 1997 for hiring, training, salaries and expenses of personnel of the Immigration and Naturalization Service such amounts as may be necessary-- (1) to provide for an increase each year in the number of investigators of such Service by 365 full-time equivalent investigator positions above the number of such positions authorized as of May 1, 1995; and (2) to provide such personnel and resources as are necessary to assist the additional investigators in the enforcement of employer sanctions (as defined in section 14(1)).
Duties.--The additional investigators provided for in subsection (a) shall be assigned to investigate violations of employer sanctions with priority given to areas where there are high concentrations of unauthorized aliens (as defined in section 14(4)) who are employed.
INCREASE IN DEPARTMENT OF LABOR INVESTIGATORS TO ENFORCE LABOR STANDARDS.
In General.--In addition to such amounts as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to be appropriated for each of the fiscal years 1996 and 1997 for hiring, training, salaries, and expenses of personnel of the Employment Standards Administration of the Department of Labor such amounts as may be necessary-- (1) to provide for an increase each year in the number of investigators of such Administration by 300 full-time equivalent investigator positions above the number of such positions authorized as of May 1, 1995; and (2) to provide such support personnel and resources as are necessary to assist the additional investigators in the enforcement of labor standards (as defined in section 14(3)).
Duties.--The additional investigators provided for in subsection (a) shall be assigned to investigate violations of labor standards with priority given to areas where there are high concentrations of unauthorized aliens who are employed.
INCREASE IN INVESTIGATORS IN OFFICE OF SPECIAL COUNSEL FOR IMMIGRATION-RELATED UNFAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES TO ENFORCE ANTIDISCRIMINATION PROVISIONS.
In General.--In addition to such amounts as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to be appropriated for each of the fiscal years 1996 and 1997 for hiring, training, salaries, and expenses of personnel of the Office of Special Counsel for Immigration-Related Unfair Employment Practices in the Department of Justice such amounts as may be necessary-- (1) to provide for an increase in the number of investigators of such Office by 50 full-time equivalent investigator positions above the number of such positions authorized as of May 1, 1995; and (2) to provide such support personnel and resources as are necessary to assist the additional investigators in the enforcement of immigration-related antidiscrimination provisions (as defined in section 12(2)).
Duties.--The additional investigators provided for in subsection (a) shall be assigned to investigate and prosecute violations of immigration-related antidiscrimination provisions.
SUBPOENA AND RELATED AUTHORITY.
Subpoena Authority for Designated Immigration Officers.-- Sections 274A(e)(2) and 274C(d)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a(e)(2), 1324c(d)(1)) are each amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period and inserting ``, and''; and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph: ``(C) immigration officers designated by the Commissioner may compel by subpoena the attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence at any designated place prior to the date notice of an intention to impose an order under this subsection is provided.''.
Secretary of Labor Authority.-- (1) In general.--Title II of the Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``secretary of labor authority ``Sec.
Subpoena Authority.--The Secretary of Labor may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of any records, books, papers, or documents in connection with any investigation or hearing conducted in the enforcement of any immigration program for which the Secretary of Labor has been delegated enforcement authority under this title.
Authority in Hearings.--In such a hearing, the Secretary of Labor may administer oaths, examine witnesses, and receive evidence.
Enforcement for Subpoenas.--In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued under this section and upon application of the Secretary of Labor, an appropriate district court of the United States may issue an order requiring compliance with such subpoena and any failure to obey such order may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of contents of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 293 the following: ``Sec.
Secretary of Labor authority.''.
REDUCING THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATION DOCUMENTS.
In General.--Subparagraph (B) of section 274A(b)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by adding ``or'' at the end; (2) in clause (v), by striking ``or other alien registration card, if the card--'' and inserting ``alien registration card, or other documentation designated by regulation by the Attorney General, if the document--''; (3) in clause (v), by inserting ``and contains appropriate security features'' before the period; (4) by striking clauses (ii), (iii), and (iv); and (5) by redesignating clause (v) as clause (ii).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to hiring, recruiting, or referring that occurs after such date (not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act) as the Attorney General shall specify.
INCREASING PENALTIES FOR DOCUMENT FRAUD.
Criminal Penalties.-- (1) Fraud and misuse of government-issued identification documents.--Section 1028(b)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``five years'' and inserting ``10 years'' and by adding at the end the following new provision: ``Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the maximum term of imprisonment that may be imposed for an offense under this section-- ``(1) if committed to facilitate a drug trafficking crime (as defined in section 929(a)) is 15 years; and ``(2) if committed to facilitate an act of international terrorism (as defined in section 2331) is 20 years.''.
Changes to the sentencing levels.--Pursuant to section 994 of title 28, United States Code, and section 21 of the Sentencing Act of 1987, the United States Sentencing Commission shall promptly promulgate guidelines, or amend existing guidelines, to make appropriate increases in the base offense levels for offenses under section 1028(a) of title 18, United States Code.
Civil Penalties.-- (1) Activities prohibited.--Section 274C(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324c(a)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (3), by striking ``or'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (4), by striking the period and inserting ``, or''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(5) to present before boarding a common carrier for the purpose of coming to the United States a document that relates to the alien's eligibility to enter the United States and to fail to present such document to an immigration officer upon arrival at a United States port of entry, or ``(6) in reckless disregard of the fact that the information is false or does not relate to the applicant, to prepare, to file, or to assist another in preparing or filing, documents which are falsely made for the purpose of satisfying a requirement of this Act.
The Attorney General may waive the penalties of this section with respect to an alien who knowingly violates paragraph (5) if the alien is subsequently granted asylum under section 208 or withholding of deportation under section 243(h).
For the purposes of this section, a document relating to an individual shall be considered to be `falsely' made if the document was prepared with knowledge or in reckless disregard of the fact that the document contains false, fictitious, or fraudulent information or material misrepresentation, or fails to include a material fact pertaining to the individual.''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 274C(d)(3) of such Act (8 United States Code 1324c(d)(3)) is amended by striking ``each document used, accepted, or created and each instance of use, acceptance, or recreation'' each place it appears in subparagraphs (A) and (B) and inserting ``each document that is the subject of a violation under subsection (a)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply with respect to violations that occur on or after the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
JOINT TARGETED EFFORTS BY THE INS AND THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR TO INVESTIGATE EMPLOYER SANCTIONS AND LABOR STANDARDS.
In General.--The Secretary of Labor shall establish, in consultation with the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization and not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, programs for the Immigration and Naturalization Service and Department of Labor to jointly investigate violations of employer sanctions and labor standards and target areas where there are high concentrations of unauthorized aliens who are employed.
Performance Review.--Not later than 6 months after the date the Secretary of Labor and the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization have established the programs referred to in subsection (a), the National Performance Review in the Office of the Vice- President shall assess the programs and identify the best strategies for targeting industries likely to violate both employer sanctions and labor standards.
The Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, the Small Business Administrator, and the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, shall conduct a nationwide program to inform employers about their responsibilities concerning employer sanctions, labor standards, and immigration-related antidiscrimination provisions.
INCREASING CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES FOR HIRING, RECRUITING, AND REFERRAL VIOLATIONS.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 274A(e)(4) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a(e)(4)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``$250 and not more than $2,000'' and inserting ``$1,000 and not more than $3,000''; (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``$2,000 and not more than $5,000'' and inserting ``$3,000 and not more than $8,000''; and (3) in clause (iii), by striking ``3,000 and not more than $10,000'' and inserting ``$10,000 and not more than $25,000''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to violations that occur on or after the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASING PENALTIES FOR REPEATED OR WILLFUL VIOLATIONS OF LABOR STANDARDS.
In General.--Section 274A(h) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a(h)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Increased penalties.--In the case of a person or entity that has been found through a final administrative determination or determination by a court (which finding has not been reversed) to have willfully or repeatedly violated one or more labor standards with respect to an unauthorized alien who is employed, each dollar amount specified in subsections (e)(4), (e)(5), and (g)(2) shall be twice the dollar amount otherwise specified for violation occurring during the 10-year period beginning on the date of such determination.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 274A of such Act (8 United States Code 1324a) is amended-- (1) in paragraphs (4)(A) and (5) of subsection (e), by inserting ``(subject to subsection (h)(4))'' after ``in an amount''; and (2) in subsection (g)(2), by striking ``of $1,000'' and inserting ``in an amount (subject to subsection (h)(4)) equal to $1,000''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to violations of employer sanctions that occur on or after the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, but shall not apply to violations of labor standards occurring before the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASING CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES FOR UNFAIR IMMIGRATION- RELATED EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
In General.--Clause (iv) of section 274B(g)(2)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324b(g)(2)(B)) is amended-- (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``$250 and not more than $2,000'' and inserting ``$1,000 and not more than $3,000''; (2) in subclause (II), by striking ``$2,000 and not more than $5,000'' and inserting ``$3,000 and not more than $8,000''; (3) in subclause (III), by striking ``3,000 and not more than $10,000'' and inserting ``$10,000 and not more than $25,000''; and (4) in subclause (IV), by striking ``100 and not more than $1,000'' and inserting ``$200 and not more than $5,000''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to violations that occur on or after the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Study.--The Attorney General shall provide for a study on the effect increased enforcement of employer sanctions has on discrimination in the workplace based on national origin or citizenship since 1989.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall submit to Congress a report on the study under subsection (a).
Such report shall include recommendations regarding how such discrimination may be prevented.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Employer sanctions.--The term ``employer sanctions'' means the requirements of section 274A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a).
Immigration-related antidiscrimination provisions.--The term ``immigration-related antidiscrimination provisions'' means the provisions of section 274B of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324b).
Labor standards.--The term ``labor standards'' includes requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 201 et sequentes), the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (29 United States Code 1801 et sequentes), and the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 United States Code 2601 et.
Unauthorized alien.--The term ``unauthorized alien'' has the meaning given such term in section 274A(h)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a(h)(3)).