This Act may be cited as the ``Trading With the People's Republic of China Military Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The People's Liberation Army is the principal instrument of repression within the People's Republic of China and is responsible for massacring an unknown number of students, workers, and other demonstrators for democracy in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989.
The People's Liberation Army is responsible for occupying Tibet since 1950 and implementing the official policy of the People's Republic of China to eliminate the unique cultural, linguistic, and religious heritage of the Tibetan people.
The People's Liberation Army has operational control of the People's Armed Police, an internal security force of over 1,000,000 troops, whose primary purpose is to suppress the legitimate protests of the Chinese people.
The People's Liberation Army is engaged in a massive effort to modernize its military capabilities.
The People's Liberation Army owns and operates hundreds of companies and thousands of factories the profits from which in some measure are used to support military activities.
Companies owned by the People's Liberation Army and the People's Armed Police export to the United States such products as toys, clothing, frozen fish, lighting fixtures, garlic, glassware, yarn, footwear, chemicals, machinery, metal products, furniture, decorations, gloves, tents, and tools.
Companies owned by the People's Liberation Army and the People's Armed Police regularly solicit investment in joint ventures with United States companies.
The People's Liberation Army and the People's Armed Police have established at least 23 different companies in the United States over the past decade.
The people of the United States are unaware that certain products they purchase in retail stores are produced by companies owned and operated by the People's Liberation Army or the People's Armed Police.
The purchase of these products by United States consumers places them in the position of unwittingly subsidizing the operations of the People's Liberation Army and the People's Armed Police.
The Government of the People's Republic of China, with the assistance of the People's Liberation Army and the People's Armed Police, continues to deny its citizens basic human rights enumerated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, persecutes those who seek to freely practice their religion, and denies workers the right to establish free and independent trade unions.
Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to prohibit any entity owned, operated, or controlled by the People's Liberation Army or the People's Armed Police from operating in the United States or from conducting certain business with persons subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.
COMPILATION AND PUBLICATION OF LIST OF PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA MILITARY COMPANIES.
Compilation and Publication.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, shall-- (A) compile a list of persons who are People's Republic of China military companies and who are operating directly or indirectly in the United States or any of its territories and possessions; and (B) publish the list of such persons in the Federal Register.
Periodic updates.--Every 6 months after the date of the publication of the list under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the officials referred to in that paragraph, shall make such additions to or deletions from the list as the Secretary considers appropriate based on the latest information available.
People's Republic of China Military Company.--For purposes of making the determination required by subsection (a), the term ``People's Republic of China military company''-- (1) means a person that is-- (A) engaged in providing commercial services, manufacturing, producing, or exporting; and (B) owned, operated, or controlled by the People's Liberation Army or the People's Armed Police; and (2) includes any person identified in Defense Intelligence Agency publication numbered VP-1920-271-90, dated September 1990, or PC-1921-57-95, dated October 1995, or any updates of such publications under subsection (c).
Updating of Publications.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 6 months thereafter, the Defense Intelligence Agency shall update the publications referred to in subsection (b)(2) for purposes of determining People's Republic of China military companies under this section.
Officers, Directors, Etc.--It shall be unlawful for any person to serve as an officer, director, or other manager of any office or business anywhere in the United States or its territories or possessions that is owned, operated, or controlled by a People's Republic of China military company.
Divestiture.--The President shall by regulation require the closing and divestiture of any office or business in the United States or its territories or possessions that is owned, operated, or controlled by a People's Republic of China military company.
Importation.--No goods or services that are the growth, product, or manufacture of a People's Republic of China military company may enter the customs territory of the United States.
Contracts, Loans, Ownership Interests.--It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States-- (1) to make any loan or other extension of credit to any People's Republic of China military company; or (2) to acquire an ownership interest in any People's Republic of China military company.
Exports.--It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to export goods, technology, or services to, or for any person to export goods, technology, or services that are subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to, a People's Republic of China military company.
Exception for Humanitarian Items.--Subsections (a) through (e) shall not apply with respect to a transaction if the President-- (1) determines that the transaction involves the transfer of food, clothing, medicine, or emergency supplies intended to relieve human suffering; and (2) transmits notice of that determination to Congress.
The President shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Any person who knowingly violates section 4 or any regulation issued thereunder-- (1) in the case of the first offense, shall be fined not more than $100,000, imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both; and (2) in the case of any subsequent offense, shall be fined not more than $1,000,000, imprisoned not more than 4 years, or both.
For purposes of this Act: (1) People's armed police.--The term ``People's Armed Police'' means the paramilitary service of the People's Republic of China, whether or not such service is subject to the control of the People's Liberation Army, the Public Security Bureau of that government, or any other governmental entity of the People's Republic of China.
People's liberation army.--The term ``People's Liberation Army'' means the land, naval, and air military services and the military intelligence services of the People's Republic of China, and any member of any such service.