This Act may be cited as the ``Work Incentives Amendments of 1993''.
The table of contents is as follows: Sec.
TITLE I--ACCESS TO SSI WORK INCENTIVES Sec.
Access to work incentives under SSI for SSDI-only recipients who lose eligibility for SSDI benefits because of working.
TITLE II--WORK INCENTIVES WAIVER AUTHORITY Sec.
Eligibility of certain individuals with disabilities for coverage under Medicaid home and community- based care waivers.
TITLE III--AMENDMENTS TO WORK INCENTIVES PROVISIONS Sec.
Disregard deemed income of eligible spouse when determining continued Medicaid eligibiity under section 1619(b).
Continuation of Medicaid for the aged who lose SSI due to excessive earnings.
Self-support plans not disapproved within 30 days to be deemed approved.
Regulations regarding completion of self-support plans.
Exclusion of income and resources under self-support plans in determining Medicaid eligibility in ``section 209(b)'' States.
Expansion of self-support plans to include housing goals.
Self-support plans for the aged.
Additional State supplementation requirement.
Treatment of unemployment compensation, worker's compensation, and sick pay as earned income for SSI purposes.
Treatment of certain grant, scholarship, or fellowship income as earned income for SSI purposes.
SSI eligibility for students temporarily abroad.
TITLE IV--EFFECTIVE DATE Sec.
TITLE I--ACCESS TO SSI WORK INCENTIVES SEC.
ACCESS TO WORK INCENTIVES UNDER SSI FOR SSDI-ONLY RECIPIENTS WHO LOSE ELIGIBILITY FOR SSDI BENEFITS BECAUSE OF WORKING.
In General.--Section 1619 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382h) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, a qualified individual shall not be required to have been eligible to receive benefits under section 1611 (or a State supplementary payment) for a month in order to qualify for a monthly benefit under this subsection.
''; (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``(or, in the case of a qualified individual, because of his or her resources)''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(4)(A) The requirement in paragraph (1) of this subsection, that an individual have been eligible to receive a benefit under section 1611 or any federally administered State supplementary payment for a month, shall not apply to any qualified individual.
In applying paragraph (1) of this subsection to a qualified individual, the Secretary shall, for 12-month period beginning 3 months after the end of the individual's period of trial work (as defined in section 222(c)), disregard that portion of the resources of the individual, as of the beginning of such 12-month period, that exceeds the amount which would otherwise result in the ineligibility of the individual for benefits under this title.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(e) As used in this section, the term `qualified individual' means an individual-- ``(1) who has been entitled to benefits under subsection (d), (e), or (f) of section 202 based on disability, or disability insurance benefits under section 223; ``(2) whose termination month (as defined in section 223(a)(1)) has not commenced; and ``(3) who files an application for benefits under this title during the 3-month period immediately following the individual's period of trial work (as defined in 222(c)).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall apply with respect to periods of trial work (as defined in 222(c) of the Social Security Act) ending on or after the date that is 3 months before such date of enactment.
TITLE II--WORK INCENTIVES WAIVER AUTHORITY SEC.
ELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES FOR COVERAGE UNDER MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE WAIVERS.
In General.--Section 1915(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396n(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11)(A) At the request of a State, the State plan may provide services under a waiver under this subsection to any individual described as follows (but only if such individual would otherwise be entitled to services under the waiver): ``(i) An individual who receives benefits under subsection (d), (e), or (f) of section 202 based on disability, or disability insurance benefits under section 223.
An individual who would be entitled to benefits under subsection (d), (e), or (f) of section 202 based on disability, disability insurance benefits under section 223, or benefits under section 1611 through the application of section 1619, if the individual's earnings did not exceed the applicable criteria used by the Secretary to determine whether an individual has demonstrated an ability to engage in substantial gainful activity.
In the case of an individual described in subparagraph (A)(ii), a waiver under this subsection may also include a waiver of the provisions of section 1903(f)(4)(C) requiring the Secretary to disregard subsection (b) of section 1612 in determining whether the individual's income exceeds 300 percent of the supplemental security income benefit rate established by section 1611(b)(1).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to waivers under section 1915(c) of the Social Security Act for quarters beginning 90 or more days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Part A of title XVI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1381- 1382j)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Request.--For the purpose of enabling individuals who are aged, blind, or disabled individuals to work, any State may request the Secretary to apply subsection (c) with respect to the residents of the State.
Provision of Work Incentives.--The Secretary shall apply subsection (c) with respect to the residents of a State that has submitted a request under subsection (a) if the Secretary finds that doing so would be cost-effective and efficient and not inconsistent with the purposes of this title, and would encourage work by individuals with severe disabilities.
Nature of Work Incentives.--In determining whether any resident of the State is eligible for benefits under this title and, if so, the amount of such benefits-- ``(1) section 1612(b)(4) shall be applied-- ``(A) by substituting `not more than $2,400 (as agreed upon by the Secretary and the State in which the individual resides)' for `$780' each place such term appears; and ``(B) by substituting `one-third' for `one-half' each place such term appears; and ``(2) earned income shall be excluded under section 1612(b) only pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2)(A), and (4) of such section.''.
TITLE III--AMENDMENTS TO WORK INCENTIVES PROVISIONS SEC.
DISREGARD DEEMED INCOME OF INELIGIBLE SPOUSE WHEN DETERMINING CONTINUED MEDICAID ELIGIBIITY UNDER SECTION 1619(b).
Section 1614(f)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382c(f)(1)) is amended by inserting ``(other than under section 1619(b))'' after ``benefits''.
CONTINUATION OF MEDICAID FOR THE AGED WHO LOSE SSI DUE TO EXCESSIVE EARNINGS.
Section 1619 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382h) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) For purposes of title XIX, any individual who was determined to be an eligible individual (or eligible spouse) by reason of age and was eligible to receive benefits under section 1611 (or a federally administered State supplementary payment) for a month, and who becomes ineligible to receive such benefits for a subsequent month solely due to excessive income shall, neverthelesss, be considered to be receiving supplemental security income benefits for so long as the individual continues to be otherwise eligible for benefits under this title.''.
SELF-SUPPORT PLANS NOT DISAPPROVED WITHIN 30 DAYS TO BE DEEMED APPROVED.
Amendments to Income Exclusion Rules.--Section 1612(b)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382a(b)(4)(A)) is amended in each of subparagraphs (A) and (B) by inserting ``and, for purposes of this clause, a plan for self-support which is not disapproved by the Secretary within 30 days after the date of submission shall be deemed to be approved by the Secretary until subsequently disapproved by the Secretary,'' after ``plan,''.
Amendment to Resource Exclusion Rule.--Section 1613(a)(4) of such Act (42 United States Code 1382b(a)(4)) is amended by inserting ``and, for purposes of this paragraph, a plan for self-support which is not disapproved by the Secretary within 30 days after the date of submission shall be deemed to be approved by the Secretary until subsequently disapproved by the Secretary,'' after ``such plan''.
REGULATIONS REGARDING COMPLETION OF SELF-SUPPORT PLANS.
Section 1633 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1383b) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) The Secretary shall establish a time limit by which activities under a plan for achieving self-support must be completed, using criteria that take into account the difficulty of achieving self- support based on the needs of the individual and the goals of the plan.''.
EXCLUSION OF INCOME AND RESOURCES UNDER SELF-SUPPORT PLANS IN DETERMINING MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY IN ``SECTION 209(b)'' STATES.
In General.-- (1) Determination of income.--The first sentence of section 1902(f) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(f)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and incurred expenses'' and inserting ``incurred expenses''; and (B) by striking ``thereof)'' and inserting the following: ``thereof, and any income of an individual with a plan for achieving self-support approved by the Secretary under section 1612(b)(4))''.
Determination of resources.--The first sentence of such section is amended by striking ``is not'' and inserting the following: ``and the resources of any such individual (excluding any resources excluded under a plan for achieving self-support approved by the Secretary under section 1613(a)(4)) are not''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to quarters beginning on or after the expiration of the 90-day period that begins on the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXPANSION OF SELF-SUPPORT PLANS TO INCLUDE HOUSING GOALS.
Section 1612(b)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382a(b)(4)) is amended in each of subparagraphs (A)(iii) and (B)(iv), by inserting ``, containing a career or housing goal, that has been'' before ``approved'' and Section 1613(a)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382b(a)(4)) is amended by inserting ``, containing a career or housing goal, that has been'' before ``approved''.
SELF-SUPPORT PLANS FOR THE AGED.
Income Exclusion.--Section 1612(b)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382a(b)(4) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking the comma at the end and inserting ``; or'' (2) in subparagraph (B)-- (A) by striking ``(and has not'' and all that follows through ``age 65),'' and inserting ``, or has attained age 65''; (B) in clause (ii), by inserting ``in the case of such a disabled individual (or spouse),'' after ``(ii)''; and (C) in clause (iv), by striking ``, or'' and inserting a semicolon; and (3) by striking subparagraph (C).
Resource Exclusion.--Section 1613(a)(4) of such Act (42 United States Code 1382b(a)(4)) is amended by striking ``who is blind or disabled and''.
ADDITIONAL STATE SUPPLEMENTATION REQUIREMENT.
Section 1616 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382e) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting ``(or, by reason of section 1619, are considered to be)'' before ``receiving''; and (2) in subsection (c), by striking paragraph (3).
TREATMENT OF UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION, WORKER'S COMPENSATION, AND SICK PAY AS EARNED INCOME FOR SSI PURPOSES.
Section 1612(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382a(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (D); and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(F) unemployment compensation benefits and worker's compensation benefits paid under any Federal or State law, and benefits paid to an individual as compensation for sick leave not taken by the individual; and''.
TREATMENT OF CERTAIN GRANT, SCHOLARSHIP, OR FELLOWSHIP INCOME AS EARNED INCOME FOR SSI PURPOSES.
Section 1612(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382a(a)(1)), as amended by section 309 of this Act, is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (E); and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(G) any grant, scholarship, or fellowship described in section 1612(b)(7) to the extent not excluded from income pursuant to such section.''.
SSI ELIGIBILITY FOR STUDENTS TEMPORARILY ABROAD.
Section 1611(f) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382(f)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The 1st sentence of this subsection shall not apply to any individual who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the absence of the individual from the United States will be temporary and for the purpose of conducting studies as part of an educational program related to an educational institution in the United States.''.
TITLE IV--EFFECTIVE DATE SEC.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the 1st day of the 1st calendar month that begins 90 or more days after the date of the enactment of this Act.