This Act may be cited as the ``Black Canyon National Park Complex Act of 1996''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF BLACK CANYON OF THE GUNNISON NATIONAL PARK.
There is hereby established the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park (hereinafter referred to as the ``park'') in the State of Colorado.
The Black Canyon National Monument is abolished as such, and all lands and interest therein are hereby incorporated within and made part of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park.
Any reference to the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument shall be deemed a reference to Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park, and any funds available for the purposes of the monument shall be available for purposes of the park.
The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter referred to as the ``Secretary'') acting through the Director of the National Park Service shall manage the park, subject to valid exiting rights, in accordance with this Act and under the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System including but not limited to the Act of August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461 et sequentes), and other applicable provisions of law.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GUNNISON GORGE NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA.
There is hereby established the Gunnison Gorge National Conservation Area (hereafter referred to as the ``conservation area'') in the State of Colorado, consisting of approximately 64,139 acres as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park Complex--Map No.
2, dated 10/27/95'' (hereinafter referred to as the ``map'').
The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Bureau of land management, shall manage the conservation area, subject to valid existing rights, in accordance with this Act, the Federal Land Management and Policy Act of 1976, and other applicable provisions of law.
In addition to the use of motorized vehicles on established roadways, the use of motorized vehicles in the conservation area shall be allowed to the extent compatible, in accordance with existing off- highway vehicle designations as described in the current, approved management plan, or as part of the management plan prepared pursuant to this Act.
Within four years following the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop and transmit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and to the Committee on Resources of the United States House of Representatives a comprehensive plan for the long-range protection and management of the conservation area.
The plan shall describe the appropriate uses and management of the conservation area consistent with the provisions of this Act.
The plan may incorporate appropriate decisions contained in any current management or activity plan for the area.
The plan may also incorporate appropriate wildlife habitat management or other plans that have been prepared for the lands within or adjacent to the conservation area, and shall be prepared in close consultation with appropriate agencies of the State of Colorado and shall use information developed in previous studies of the lands within or adjacent to the conservation area.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CURECANTI NATIONAL RECREATION AREA, AND THE DENVER AND RIO GRANDE RAILROAD NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
There is hereby established, the Curecanti National Recreation Area (hereinafter referred to as the ``recreation area'' in the State of Colorado.
The recreation area shall consist of the lands and water within the area designated ``Curecanti National Recreation Area'' as depicted on the map.
The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service shall manage the recreation area, subject to valid existing rights, in accordance with this Act and under provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System including but not limited to the Act of August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1 et seq.
), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461 et seq.
), and other applicable provisions of law, except as otherwise provided in this section.
The establishment of the recreation area under subsection (a) shall not affect or interfere with the validity of withdrawals made before the date of enactment of this Act for reclamation or power purposes.
Operation of improvements on and the management of lands occupied by dams, structures, or other facilities subject to the Colorado River Storage Project Act of 1956 (42 United States Code 620 et sequentes) shall be the responsibility of the Secretary, acting through the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation.
Such lands shall be delineated through a joint agreement among the Bureau of Reclamation, the National Park Service, and all associated entities.
The Secretary may enter into additional agreements which address sharing of jurisdiction and authorities on the delineated lands.
All lands within the recreation area which have been withdrawn or acquired by the United States for reclamation purposes shall remain subject to the purposes and uses established under the Colorado River Storage Project Act of 1956 (42 United States Code 620 et sequentes).
The Secretary may exclude any area from the recreation area for reclamation or power purposes upon determining that it is in the national interest to do so.
The Secretary shall administer the recreation area subject to all public laws, memoranda of interagency agreement, memoranda of agreement and/or understanding, including cooperative agreements, licenses, permits, and contracts and right-of-way agreements currently in effect, and/or referenced in the Curecanti National Recreation Area Statement for Management, dated November 1990.
Within the recreation area there is hereby established, subject to the provisions of this section, the Denver and Rio Grande National Historic Site (hereinafter referred to as the ``historic site'') consisting of the Denver and Rio Grande rolling stock and train trestle at Cimarron, as depicted on the map.
The Secretary may include those portions of the historic railroad bed within the boundaries of the historic site which would serve to enhance or contribute to the interpretation of the development of the railroad and its role in the development of western Colorado.
Within the recreation area there is hereby established, subject to the provisions of this section, the Curecanti Archeological District (hereinafter referred to as the ``district'') as depicted on the map.
Within one year after the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a comprehensive list of laws, rules, regulations, right-of way permits and agreements, licensing agreements, special-use permits or other authorizing documents issued by the Bureau of Reclamation, the Bureau of Land Management, and the Forest Service, for the use of lands within the recreation area, to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and to the Committee on Resources of the United States House of Representatives.
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BLACK CANYON OF THE GUNNISON NATIONAL PARK COMPLEX.
There is hereby established the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park Complex (hereinafter referred to as the ``complex'') in the State of Colorado.
The complex shall include the following lands as depicted on the map: (1) The park.
Those portions of lands comprising the Gunnison National Forest as depicted on the map.
The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service shall manage the park, recreation area, historic site and district; and acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, shall manage the conservation area in accordance with this Act, and other applicable provisions of law.
The Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service shall manage, subject to valid existing rights, those portions of the forest that have been included in the complex in accordance with the laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the National Forest System and this Act.
The Secretaries shall manage the areas under their jurisdiction within the complex in a consistent manner to the maximum extent practical.
Wherever possible, regulations, permits, licenses, and other agreements should be issued jointly.
The Secretaries shall ensure that, to the maximum extent practical, that personnel, equipment, and other resources are shared among the agencies and that the duplication of effort is reduced or eliminated.
Nothing in this Act, nor in any action taken pursuant thereto under any other act, shall constitute an express or implied reservation of water for any purpose.
Nothing in this Act, nor any actions taken pursuant thereto shall affect any existing water rights, including, but not limited to, any water rights held by the United States prior to the date of enactment of this Act.
Any water rights that the Secretary determines are necessary for the purposes of this Act shall be acquired under the procedural and substitutive requirements of the laws of the State of Colorado.
RECREATIONAL AND MULTIPLE-USE ACTIVITIES.
In carrying out this Act, in addition to other related activities that may be permitted pursuant to this Act, the Secretaries shall provide for general recreation and multiple use activities that are considered appropriate and compatible within the areas of their respective jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, swimming, fishing, boating, rafting, hiking, horseback riding, camping and picnicking.
The Secretaries shall also provide for certain multiple use activities, subject to valid existing rights, including grazing and the harvesting of hay; the maintenance of roads, stock driveways, and utility rights-of-way.
Within the boundaries of the recreation area the Secretary shall also provide for off-road vehicle use below high water levels, on frozen lake surfaces, and on related designated access routes; and other such uses as the Secretary may deem appropriate.
The Secretaries shall permit hunting, fishing, noncommercial taking of fresh-water crustaceans, and trapping on the lands and waters under the Secretaries jurisdiction in accordance with applicable laws and regulations of the United States and the State of Colorado, except that the Secretaries, after consultation with the Colorado Division of Wildlife, may issue regulations designating zones where and establishing periods when no hunting or trapping shall be permitted for reasons of public safety, administration, or public use and enjoyment.
Subject to valid existing rights, hunting and trapping will not be allowed within the boundaries of the park.
There is hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.