This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Oversight and Audit of Agency Rulemaking Actions Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) Federal regulations have had a positive impact in protecting the environment and health and safety of all Americans; however uncontrolled increases in the costs that regulations place on the economy, including costs associated with duplicative, overlapping, and inconsistent regulations, cannot be sustained; (2) the legislative branch has an oversight responsibility to see that laws it passes are properly implemented by the executive branch; (3) in order for the legislative branch to fulfill its legislative and oversight responsibilities, it must have accurate and reliable information on which to base its decisions; and (4) effective implementation of chapter 8 of title 5 of the United States Code (relating to Congressional review of agency rulemaking) is essential to controlling the regulatory burden that the Government places on the economy.
For purposes of Act: (1) Agency.--The term ``agency'' has the meaning given such term under section 551(1) of title 5, the United States Code; (2) Comptroller general.--The term ``Comptroller General'' means the Comptroller General of the United States.
Economically significant.--The term ``economically significant rule'' means any proposed, final, or interim rule-- (A) that may have an annual effect on the economy of $100,000,000 or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local, tribal governments, small businesses, or communities; or (B) for which an agency has prepared an initial or final regulatory flexibility analysis pursuant to section 603 or 604 of title 5 of the United States Code.
Audit and assessment.--The term ``audit and assessment'' means a review of the agency's underlying assessments and assumptions used in developing a rule.
PERFORMANCE OF CONGRESSIONAL REVIEW FUNCTIONS BY THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE PILOT PROGRAM.
In General.--A pilot project shall be established by the Comptroller General of the United States under which the Comptroller General may review a published economically significant proposed or interim rule at the request of a committee of either House of Congress with jurisdiction over the subject matter of the rule.
Independent Audit and Assessment.--The independent audit and assessment of an economically significant rule by the Comptroller General shall consist of the following: (1) Analysis regarding potential benefits.--An analysis of the agency's and the public's assessment of the potential benefits of the rule, including any beneficial effects that cannot be quantified in monetary terms and the identification of the persons or entities likely to receive the benefits.
Such analysis may include, upon the request of the Committee, the Comptroller General's development of a separate benefit assessment based on the data available to the agency, including data generated after publication of the rule in the Federal Register.
Analysis regarding potential costs.--An analysis of the agency's and public's assessment of the potential costs of the rule, including any adverse effects that cannot be quantified in monetary terms and the identification of the persons or entities likely to bear the costs.
Such analysis may include, upon the request of the Committee, the Comptroller General's development of a separate cost assessment based on the data available to the agency, including data generated after publication of the rule in the Federal Register.
Analysis of alternatives.--An analysis of the agency's and the public's alternative approaches that could achieve the objectives of the agency in a more cost effective manner.
For each such alternative assessed, the Comptroller General shall state whether current law forecloses the agency from selecting a particular alternative.
Such an analysis may include, upon the request of the Committee, the development of separate alternatives by the Comptroller that were not cited by the agency or submitted by the public to the agency.
Analysis and assessment of impact statement or report.--An analysis and assessment of any impact statement or report prepared by the agency, including those reports and assessments mandated by executive orders or statutes, as part of the rulemaking, including any assessment of impacts on State and local governments.
List of analyses, groups, entities, and sources consulted.--A list of all analyses, groups, entities, and sources consulted in developing the analyses and assessments set forth in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4).
Procedures for Priorities of Requests.--The Comptroller General shall have discretion to develop procedures for determining the priority and number of requests for review under subsection (a) for which a report will be submitted under subsection (e).
Agency Cooperation and Comments.--Upon request of the Comptroller General, each agency shall provide any available or existing records, information, or data upon which the agency relied in developing an economically significant rule.
The agency may provide records, information, and data not requested by the Comptroller General but which the agency determines are relevant to its development of an economically significant rule.
Submission of Report.-- (1) Interim audit.--The Comptroller General shall submit an interim audit to the Committee requesting the report 30 days after the close of the comment period unless the final regulation must issue less than 120 days from the date of publication of the proposed or interim rule in which case the report shall issue within 10 days after the close of the comment period.
The interim audit shall contain the assessments set forth in paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (b) for the proposed rule.
The agency shall not be required to consider any alternatives in this report in the development of a final rule to the extent that the agency determines that it cannot consider the alternative under established law.
Final audit.--The Comptroller General shall prepare and transmit an independent audit containing the assessments and analyses set forth in paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (b) on the final rule within 30 days after publication in the Federal Register.
In addition to the required analyses and assessments, the Comptroller General shall provide a summary of the differences, to the extent such differences exist, between the proposed and final rule.
The Comptroller General may incorporate any material in the final report that the Comptroller General utilized in preparing the interim report pursuant to paragraph (1).
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Comptroller General to carry out this Act $5,200,000 for the fiscal year 2001.
EFFECTIVE DATE AND DURATION OF PILOT PROJECT.
Effective Date.--This Act shall take effect 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Duration of Pilot Project.--The pilot project established under section 4(a) shall continue for a period of 5 years if, in each fiscal year or portion thereof included in that period, a specific annual appropriation of not less than $5,200,000 or the pro-rated equivalent thereof shall have been made for the pilot project.
Report.--Before the conclusion of the 5-year period referred to in subsection (b), the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report reviewing the effectiveness of the pilot project and what, if any, changes should be made to the procedures set forth in section 4 and recommending whether or not Congress should permanently authorize the pilot project.