This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Family Health Information Technology Act of 2006''.
In General.--Chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 8902a the following: ``Sec.
Electronic health records ``(a) This section provides for the establishment, in connection with the program established under this chapter, of electronic health records for each covered individual, including-- ``(1) requiring the establishment of a carrier electronic health record under subsection (b); ``(2) requiring the offering by carriers to covered individuals of a personal electronic health record under subsection (c); and ``(3) providing carrier-based incentives for establishing provider-based electronic health records under subsection (d).
(1) Each contract under this chapter shall require that the carrier establish, maintain, and make available, in accordance with standards adopted by the Office of Personnel Management under this section, a carrier electronic health record for each covered individual who is enrolled under this chapter in a health benefits plan offered by the carrier.
(A) A carrier electronic health record for a covered individual under this subsection shall consist of a carrier's health information on the individual's health care claims, health care services data, or both, such as information describing the individual's inpatient facility admissions, emergency room visits, and claims for prescription drugs.
Such a record shall include, to the maximum extent practicable, such information as it relates to claims or services for another carrier in which the covered individual was previously enrolled under this title.
The information under subparagraph (A) shall cover the period beginning on the later of January 1, 2008, or the date of the covered individual's enrollment with the carrier under this title.
Such period is not required to be longer than the period specified in standards adopted by the Office of Personnel Management under this section.
In the case of a covered individual who changes enrollment under this title after the effective date specified in paragraph (4) from one carrier to another carrier, the first carrier shall transfer information from the carrier electronic health record under this subsection to the second carrier to the extent specified by the Office of Personnel Management by not later than 90 days after the date the first carrier receives notice of the change in enrollment.
Information from a carrier electronic health record for a covered individual shall be made available to the individual and shall be made available (in accordance with the regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) to a health care provider treating the individual.
A carrier shall make such information available, in accordance with standards adopted under this section-- ``(A) promptly; ``(B) over a secure internet or other electronic-based connection; ``(C) in a format useful for diagnosis and treatment; and ``(D) in a format that permits its importation into a personal electronic health record under subsection (c).
The previous provisions of this subsection shall apply with respect to contracts for contract years beginning with-- ``(A) the 3rd contract year (or 4th contract year, if the Office of Personnel Management determines that carriers are not prepared to implement the previous provisions of this subsection by such 3rd contract year) beginning after the date of the enactment of this section; or ``(B) such earlier contract year as the Office of Personnel Management may determine.
(1) Each contract under this chapter shall require the carrier in accordance with standards adopted under this section-- ``(A) to provide, upon the request of a covered individual, for the establishment and maintenance of a personal electronic health record for the individual; ``(B) to establish a method for the individual to access the individual's personal electronic health record through a mechanism that is integrated with access to the carrier electronic health record for the individual under subsection (b); and ``(C) to establish a method for the individual to transfer the individual's personal electronic health record to the individual (or to a carrier or other entity designated by the individual) upon the request of the individual at any time, including at the time of disenrollment of the individual.
A personal electronic health record for a covered individual shall consist of such personal health information, such as family health history, symptoms, use of over-the-counter medication, diet, exercise, and other relevant health information and activities, as the individual may provide.
Such record may also include information from a provider-based electronic health record referred to in subsection (d) as well as from a carrier electronic health record.
Each contract under this chapter shall require the carrier to enable health information to be imported in standard electronic format into a personal electronic health record from a provider-based electronic health record and from a carrier electronic health record consistent with standards adopted by the Office.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as authorizing the carrier or another person, other than a covered individual, to access a personal electronic health record of the individual without the authorization of the individual.
The previous provisions of this subsection shall apply with respect to contracts for contract years beginning with the contract year beginning after the first contract year with respect to which the requirements of subsection (b) are in effect under subsection (b)(4).
(1) Each contract under this chapter shall require the carrier to provide, in accordance with standards adopted by the Office under this section, incentives (subject to the availability of amounts from the Federal Family Health Information Technology Trust Fund, as established by section 4 of the Federal Family Health Information Technology Act of 2006) for providers to implement a comprehensive system of provider-based electronic health records for all patients covered by the contract.
The previous provisions of this subsection shall be effective with respect to contract years beginning with such contract year as the Office of Personnel Management shall determine.
Beginning with the contract year beginning after the first contract year with respect to which the requirements of subsection (b) are in effect, each carrier shall report to the Office of Personnel Management its progress and plan for enabling each covered individual, upon request, to store and access, through a portable, electronic medium, the individual's personal electronic health record established under subsection (c), as well as the carrier electronic health record for the individual (established under subsection (b)) and provider- based electronic health records relating to the individual referred to in subsection (d).
Such plan shall provide a means for such storage and access through such a portable medium beginning with the 5th contract year after the first contract year with respect to which the requirements of subsection (b) are in effect.
(1) Standards adopted under this section regarding carrier, personal, and provider-based electronic health records shall be consistent with any standards for interoperability of electronic health records developed by ONCHIT.
In addition to paragraph (1), the Office of Personnel Management shall consult with ONCHIT in the implementation of this section, including the establishment of effective dates under subsections (b)(4)(B) and (d)(2).
For purposes of this subsection, the term `ONCHIT' means the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology in the Department of Health and Human Services, and includes any successor to the functions performed by such Office.
(1) The Office of Personnel Management may waive any or all of the requirements of this section for a carrier described in paragraph (2) insofar as the carrier has established an electronic health record system that substantially meets the purpose of each such requirement that is waived.
A carrier described in this paragraph is a carrier that-- ``(A) is an integrated health care system that combines the functions of a health plan, hospitals, pharmacy, laboratories, and clinicians; and ``(B) has developed and is implementing, as of the date of the enactment of this section, a provider-based comprehensive electronic medical record for each member of the health plan.
For purposes of this section, the term `covered individual' has the meaning given such term by section 8902a(a)(1)(B).''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 8902 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(p) A contract may not be made which is not in conformance with the requirements of section 8902b, except that the Office of Personnel Management may phase in or waive conformance with some or all of such requirements during the first two contract years in which a carrier has a contract under this title.''.
The table of sections for chapter 89 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 8902a the following: ``8902b.
During the period ending with the contract year following the first contract year with respect to which the requirements of subsection (b) of section 8902b of title 5, United States Code, as inserted by section 2(a), are in effect, in determining rates under section 8902(i) of such title, the Office of Personnel Management shall not take into account any carrier administrative costs, monetary savings, or return on investment resulting from implementation of carrier and personal electronic health records required under subsections (b) and (c) of such section 8902b, except that the Office shall have access to the unused portion of contributions set aside in the Employees Health Benefits Fund under section 8909(b)(1) of such title without fiscal year limitation for such use as the Office considers necessary to assist carriers in complying with such subsections.
FEDERAL FAMILY HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRUST FUND.
In General.--The Office of Personnel Management shall establish the Federal Family Health Information Technology Trust Fund (in this section referred to as the ``Trust Fund'') for the purpose of receiving donations to be used to award grants to carriers who meet certain requirements as set forth by the Office.
Acceptance of Donations.--In accordance with the section, the Office may accept donations made to the Trust Fund.
Donations made to the Trust Fund, and grants awarded from such Fund to carriers, shall not be considered to be the solicitation or payment of remuneration of any kind, nor shall receipt of such grants be considered an inducement to refer, purchase, order, or lease any good, facility, item, or service.
Deposit of Amounts Received.--Funds received by the Office under this section shall be transmitted by the Office to the Trust Fund.
Funds To Be Used for Carrier Grants.--The Office shall award grants from the Trust Fund to carriers under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, to be distributed under section 8902b(d) of such title as incentives to their contracting health care providers for implementing provider-based electronic health records based on requirements and qualifications set forth by the Office and standards adopted under section 8902b(f) of such title.
The Office of Personnel Management shall provide for the implementation of this Act through appropriate administrative guidance, which may be by regulation, by carrier letter, or otherwise.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as affecting the application or compliance with regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (relating to access to and disclosure of health information).