This Act may be cited as the ``Senior Citizen Protection Act of 1993''.
TITLE I--VIOLENT CRIMES SEC.
In General.--Chapter 227 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Mandatory sentence for felony against individual of age sixty-five or over ``(a) Upon conviction of any Federal felony crime of violence, if any victim of such crime is an individual who had attained the age of 65 years on or before the date that the offense was committed, the court shall sentence the defendant to imprisonment-- ``(1) for a term of not less than three fourths of the maximum term of imprisonment provided for such crime, in the case of a first offense to which this section is applicable; and ``(2) for a term of not less than the maximum term of imprisonment provided for such crime, in the case of a second or subsequent offense to which this section is applicable.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, with respect to a sentence imposed under subsection (a) of this section-- ``(1) the court shall not suspend such sentence; ``(2) the court shall not give the defendant a probationary sentence; ``(3) such sentence shall be served consecutively to any other sentence imposed for a Federal offense; and ``(4) the court shall reject any plea agreement which would result in the imposition of a term of imprisonment less than that which would have been imposed under subsection (a) of this section in connection with any charged offense.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 227 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``3581.
Mandatory sentence for felony against individual of age sixty- five or over.''.
Conforming Amendments to Rules of Procedure.-- (1) Rule 32(c) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure is amended-- (A) by adding at the end of the first paragraph in paragraph (1) the following new sentence: ``Neither the defendant nor the court may waive a presentence investigation and report unless there is in the record information sufficient for the court to determine whether a mandatory sentence must be imposed pursuant to title 18, United States Code, section 3581.
''; and (B) in paragraph (2)(D), by inserting after ``the offense'' the following: ``and information relating to whether any victim of the offense had attained age 65 on the date that the offense was committed''.
Rule 11(e)(1) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure is amended by striking out ``The'' after ``In General.''
and inserting in lieu thereof ``Except as provided in title 18, United States Code, section 3581, the''.
In any case in which Federal law punishes conduct that is murder in the first degree, as defined in section 1111 of title 18, United States Code, shall, in addition to any penalties imposed by the provision of law prohibiting that conduct, be subject to the penalty of death.
When the Government seeks a sentence of death under this section, the procedures with respect to death penalties under section 903 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 shall, as nearly as may be, apply with respect to death penalties under this section.
Participation in the Financial Crimes Enforcement Center.--The Federal Trade Commission shall participate in, and be on the receiving list of law enforcement products of, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Center of the Department of the Treasury.
Venue.--Subsections (a) and (b) of section 13 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 53) are each amended by adding at the end the following: ``Whenever it appears to the court that the interests of justice require that any other person, partnership, or corporation should be a party in such suit, the court may cause such person, partnership, or corporation to be summoned without regard to whether they reside or transact business in the district in which the suit is brought, and to that end process may be served wherever the person, partnership, or corporation may be found.''.
Criminal Contempt Authority.--Section 16(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 56(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``civil'' the first place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``Federal court''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``The Commission may bring a criminal contempt action for violations of orders obtained in cases brought under section 13(b) of this Act in the same manner as civil penalty and other Federal court actions to which this subsection applies.
Such cases may be initiated by the Commission on its own complaint, or pursuant to its acceptance of an appointment by a court to assist it in enforcing such orders pursuant to Rule 42(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.''.
Fraud and Deceit.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend its sentencing guidelines relating to fraud and deceit so as to provide for increases in offense levels based on the number of persons that the offender has victimized.
Elderly Victims.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend its sentencing guidelines relating to vulnerable victims so as to provide that if the offender knew or should have known that the victim was 65 years of age or old, the offense level shall be increased by 7 levels.
Order of Restitution.--Section 3663(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``may order'' and inserting ``shall order''.
Procedure.--Section 3664(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``in determining whether to order restitution under section 3663 of this title and the amount of such restitution'' and inserting ``in determining the amount of restitution under section 3663''.
SENSE OF CONGRESS CONCERNING THE NATIONAL TELEMARKETING FRAUD WORKING GROUP.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) all United States Attorneys should regularly enter information on telemarketing fraud into the database of the National Telemarketing Fraud Working Group; and (2) the National Telemarketing Fraud Working Group and the States should continue to cooperate with each other in coordinating the prosecution of offenders in venues that are convenient to the victims of their offenses.
CONSUMER AND ANTI-FRAUD ACTIVITIES.
The Attorney General shall designate 50 existing full-time equivalent positions for attorneys and sufficient support staff to be assigned to the prosecution of consumer fraud and for law enforcement and consumer fraud education programs.
Civil Forfeiture.--Section 981 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1)-- (A) in subparagraph (D) by inserting ``(i)'' before ``Any'' and redesignating clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), and (vi) as subclauses (I), (II), (III), (IV), (V), and (VI), respectively; (B) by striking ``(E) With respect to an offense listed in subsection (a)(1)(D)'' and inserting ``(ii) With respect to an offense described in clause (i)''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Any property, real or personal, that constitutes, represents, is derived from, or is traceable to the proceeds of a violation of section 1029, 1341, or 1343 of this title if such violation relates to crimes against individuals 65 years of age or older.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 524 of title 28, United States Code, up to 25 percent of the amounts forfeited pursuant to this subparagraph for an offense may be used to provide restitution to any victim of the offense.''.
Criminal Forfeiture.--Section 982(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(5) The court, in imposing sentence on a person convicted of a violation of, or a conspiracy to violate, section 1029, 1341 or 1343 of this title, affecting an individual 65 years of age or older, shall order that the person forfeit to the United States any property constituting, or derived from, proceeds the person obtained directly or indirectly, as the result of such violation.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 524 of title 28, United States Code, up to 25 percent of the amounts forfeited pursuant to this paragraph for an offense may be used to provide restitution to any victim of the offense.''.
Criminal Contempt Authority.--Section 16(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 56(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``civil'' the first place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``Federal court''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``The Commission may bring a criminal contempt action for violations of orders obtained in cases brought under section 13(b) of this Act in the same manner as civil penalty and other Federal court actions to which this subsection applies.
Such cases may be initiated by the Commission on its own complaint, or pursuant to its acceptance of an appointment by a court to assist it in enforcing such orders pursuant to Rule 42(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.''.
UNIFORM LAWS GOVERNING LICENSING OF HOME REPAIR CONTRACTORS, MORTGAGE COMPANIES, AND PRIZE GIVEAWAY COMPANIES.
The Attorney General, in consultation with the American Law Institute, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, or other interested persons, shall prepare model State law on each of the following subjects: (1) Licensing of home repair contractors.
Licensing of mortgage companies.
Licensing of prize giveaway companies.
Offense.--Section 1341 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or places in any private courier service office or authorized depository for receipt of matter to be delivered by private courier service,'' after ``mail matter,''; (2) by inserting ``or by a private courier service'' after ``Postal Service''; and (3) by inserting ``or private courier service'' after ``by mail''.
Definition.-- (1) Private courier service.--Section 1346 of title 18, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Definitions ``In this chapter-- ```private courier service' means a private entity providing services provided by the United States Postal Service.
```scheme or artifice to defraud' includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.''.
Technical amendment.--The chapter analysis for chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking the item for section 1346 and inserting the following item: ``1346.
STUDY ON MEDICAID FRAUD AND SOCIAL SECURITY FRAUD.
The Social Security Administration shall conduct a study of Medicaid fraud and Social Security fraud.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administration shall report to Congress the results of that study.