This Act may be cited as ``United States-Mexico Border Sewage Cleanup Act of 1999''.
In General.--The Congress finds that it is necessary to take appropriate actions to address the comprehensive treatment of sewage emanating from the Tijuana River in order to substantially reduce river and ocean pollution in the San Diego border region.
Factors.--Congress bases the finding under subsection (a) on the following factors: (1) The San Diego border region is adversely impacted from cross border raw sewage flows that affect the environment and the health and safety of citizens in the United States and Mexico.
The United States and Mexico have agreed, pursuant to the Treaty for the Utilization of Waters of the Colorado and Tijuana Rivers and of the Rio Grande, dated February 3, 1944, ``to give preferential attention to the solution of all border sanitation problems''.
The United States and Mexico recognize the need for utilization of reclaimed water to supply the growing needs of the City of Tijuana, Mexico, and the entire border region.
Current legislative authority regarding funding of the IWTP limits the geographic scope of proposed options for treatment of effluent from the IWTP.
This Act provides authority to take action to address the comprehensive treatment of sewage emanating from the Tijuana River in order to substantially reduce river and ocean pollution in the San Diego border region and to exploit effective reclamation opportunities.
The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) Subject to the negotiation and approval of a new or modified Treaty Minute, to authorize the Commission to provide for secondary treatment of effluent of the IWTP in Mexico.
Subject to the negotiation and approval of a new or modified Treaty Minute, to authorize the Commission to provide for the development of a privately-funded Mexican Facility, through the execution of a fee-for-services contract with the owner of such facility, in order to provide for-- (A) secondary treatment of effluent from the IWTP, if such treatment is not provided for at a facility in the United States; and (B) additional capacity for primary and secondary treatment of up to 50 million gallons per day of sewage in order to fully address the trans-border sanitation problem.
To request the Secretary to initiate negotiations with Mexico, within 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, for a new Treaty Minute, or a modification of Treaty Minute 283, so as to allow for the siting of sewage treatment facilities in Mexico, provide for additional treatment capacity (up to 50 million gallons per day) for the treatment of additional sewage emanating from the Tijuana area, and to address other matters necessary for compliance with the provisions of this Act.
To provide such other authority as may be necessary to implement a comprehensive solution to the trans-border sanitation problem as soon as practicable.
ACTIONS TO BE TAKEN BY COMMISSION.
Authority To Provide for Secondary Treatment.--Subject to the negotiation and conclusion of a new Treaty Minute or the amendment of Treaty Minute 283, and notwithstanding section 510(b)(2) of the Water Quality Amendments Act of 1987, the Commission is authorized to provide for the secondary treatment of effluent from the IWTP in Mexico.
Authority to Enter Into Contract With Mexican Facility.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to provide for sewage treatment in Mexico, the Commission is authorized to enter into a fee-for-services contract with the owner of the Mexican Facility.
Requirements for contract.--The fee-for-services contract referred to in paragraph (1) shall provide for the following: (A) The secondary treatment of effluent from the IWTP, if such treatment is not provided for at a facility in the United States.
The primary and secondary treatment of up to 50 million gallons per day of additional sewage from the Tijuana area so as to ensure to the extent possible that untreated sewage will not flow into the United States through the Tijuana River.
Transportation of the advance primary effluent from the IWTP to the Mexican Facility for secondary treatment.
Treatment of effluent from the IWTP to the secondary level in a manner that is in compliance with applicable water quality laws of the United States, California, and Mexico.
Return conveyance of any such treated effluent that cannot be reused in either Mexico or the United States to the South Bay Ocean Outfall for disposition into the Pacific Ocean.
Sewage treatment capacity which provides for primary and secondary treatment of up to 50 million gallons per day of sewage in addition to the capacity required to treat the advanced primary effluent from the IWTP.
A contract term of 30 years.
Appropriate arrangements for the monitoring and verification of compliance with applicable United States, California, and Mexican water quality standards.
Arrangements for the appropriate disposition at a location or locations in Mexico of sludge produced from the IWTP and the Mexican Facility.
Payment of appropriate fees by the Commission to the owner of the Mexican Facility for sewage treatment services with the annual amount payable to reflect all costs associated with the development, construction, operation, and financing of the Mexican Facility.
Provision for transfer of ownership of the Mexican Facility to the United States if the Commission fails to perform its obligations under the fee-for- services contract, and provision for a cancellation fee by the United States to the owner of the Mexican Facility, which shall be established in amounts declining over the term of the contract anticipated to be sufficient to repay construction debt and other amounts due to the owner that remain unamortized due to early termination of the contract.
NEGOTIATION OF NEW TREATY MINUTE.
Congressional Statement.--In light of the existing threat to the environment and to public health and safety within the United States as a result of the river and ocean pollution in the San Diego United States-Mexico border region, the Secretary is requested to give the highest priority to the negotiation and execution of a new Treaty Minute, or a modification of Treaty Minute 283, consistent with the provisions of this Act, in order that the other provisions of this Act to address such pollution may be implemented as soon as possible.
Negotiation.--The Secretary is requested to initiate, not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, negotiations with Mexico for a new Treaty Minute or a modification of Treaty Minute 283 consistent with the provisions of this Act.
Terms of Treaty Minute.--A new Treaty Minute or a modification of Treaty Minute 283 under this section shall address the following: (1) A requirement that such new or modified Treaty Minute be subject to the provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA).
The ability to site treatment facilities in Mexico and in the United States.
The ability to carry out at the Mexican Facility the secondary treatment of effluent from the IWTP, if such treatment is not provided for at a facility in the United States.
The ability to carry out at the Mexican Facility the primary and secondary treatment of sewage at a capacity up to 50 million gallons per day, in addition to the capacity for the advanced primary effluent from the IWTP, to be funded by the United States.
The ability to obtain such approvals from the Government of Mexico as are needed to verify and enforce water quality standards at the Mexican Facility.
The ability to allow for the use in the United States, in a manner consistent with applicable Federal and State law, of treated effluent from the Mexican Facility, if there is reclaimed water that is surplus to the needs of users in Mexico.
Any other terms and conditions considered necessary by the Secretary in order to fully implement the provisions of this Act.
LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS.
Limitation.--Except as provided in subsection (b), none of the funds appropriated for any fiscal year to the Environmental Protection Agency may be used for making grants authorized under section 510 of the Water Quality Act of 1987 that exceed a total of $239,400,000, and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall take no action to obligate any funds under such section if the impact on the total program cost to the Environmental Protection Agency of such action would exceed $239,400,000.
Exception.--The limitations under subsection (a) do not apply if the Governments of the United States and Mexico enter into a new Treaty Minute or a renegotiation of Treaty Minute 283 that gives effect to the provisions specified in section 5(c).
In this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the United States section of the International Boundary and Water Commission, United States and Mexico.
IWTP.--The term ``IWTP'' means the Advanced Primary Wastewater Treatment Facility constructed under the provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1987, section 510 of the Water Quality Amendments Act of 1987, and Treaty Minutes to the Treaty for the Utilization of Waters of the Colorado and Tijuana Rivers and of the Rio Grande, dated February 3, 1944.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of State.
Mexican facility.--The term ``Mexican Facility'' means the proposed public/private wastewater treatment facility to be constructed within Mexico for the purpose of treating sewage flows generated within Mexico, which flows impact the surface waters, health, and safety of the United States and Mexico.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.