This Act may be cited as the ``National Materials Corridor and United States-Mexico Border Technology Partnership Act of 2000''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the 2,000 mile long United States-Mexico border region, extending 100 kilometers north and south of the international boundary, has undergone rapid economic growth that has provided economic opportunity to millions of people; (2) the border region's rapid economic growth has unfortunately created serious problems including pollution, hazardous wastes, and the inefficient use of resources that threaten people's health and the prospects for long-term economic growth in the region; (3) there are a significant number of major institutions in the border States of both countries currently conducting research, development and testing activities in technologies that might help alleviate these problems; (4)(A) these new technologies may provide major opportunities for significantly-- (i) minimizing industrial wastes and pollution that may pose a threat to public health; (ii) reducing emissions of atmospheric pollutants; (iii) using recycled natural resources as primary materials for industrial production; and (iv) improving energy efficiency; and (B) such advances will directly benefit both sides of the United States-Mexico border by encouraging energy efficient, environmentally sound economic development that improves the health and protects the natural resources of the border region; (5) in August 1998, the binational United States-Mexico Border Region Hazardous Wastes Forum, organized by the Department of Energy's Carlsbad Area Office, resulted in a consensus of experts from the United States and Mexico that the Department of Energy's science and technology could be leveraged to address key environmental issues in the border region while fostering further economic development of the border region; (6) the Carlsbad Area Office, which manages the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant in Carlsbad, New Mexico, is well suited to lead a multiagency program focused on the problems of the border region given its significant expertise in hazardous materials and location near the border; (7)(A) promoting clean materials industries in the border region that are energy efficient has been identified as a high priority issue by the United States-Mexico Foundation for Science Cooperation; and (B) at the 1998 discussions of the United States-Mexico Binational Commission, Mexico formally proposed joint funding of a ``Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative'', proposing $1,000,000 to implement the Initiative if matched by the United States; (8) recognizing the importance of materials processing, research institutions in the border States of both the United States and Mexico, in conjunction with private sector partners of both nations, and with strong endorsement from the Government of Mexico, in 1998 organized the Materials Corridor Council to implement a cooperative program of materials research and development, education and training, and sustainable industrial development as part of the Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative; and (9) successful implementation of this Act would advance important United States energy, environmental, and economic goals not only in the United States-Mexico border region but also serve as a model for similar collaborative, transnational initiatives in other regions of the world.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a multiagency program to-- (1) alleviate the problems caused by rapid economic development along the United States-Mexico border; (2) support the Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative referred to in section 2(7); and (3) promote energy efficient, environmentally sound economic development along that border through the development and use of new technologies, particularly hazardous waste and materials technologies.
In this Act: (1) Program.--The term ``program'' means the program established under section 5(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
ESTABLISHMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a multiagency program to-- (A) alleviate the problems caused by rapid economic development along the United States-Mexico border, particularly those associated with public health and environmental security; (B) support the Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative; and (C) promote energy efficient, environmentally sound economic development along that border through the development and use of new technologies, particularly hazardous waste and materials technologies.
Considerations.--In developing the program, the Secretary shall give due consideration to the proposal made to the United States-Mexico Binational Commission for the Materials Corridor Partnership Initiative.
Program management.--This program shall be managed for the Secretary by the Department's Carlsbad Area Office, with support, as necessary, from the Albuquerque Operations Office.
Participation of Other Federal Agencies and Commissions.--The Secretary shall organize and conduct the program jointly with-- (1) the Department of State; (2) the Environmental Protection Agency; (3) the National Science Foundation; (4) the National Institute of Standards and Technology; (5) the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission; and (6) any other departments, agencies, or commissions the participation of which the Secretary considers appropriate.
Participation of the Private Sector.--When appropriate, funds made available under this act shall be made available for technology deployment, research, and training activities that are conducted with the participation and support of private sector organizations located in the United States and, subject to section 7(c)(2), Mexico, to promote and accelerate in the United States-Mexico border region the use of energy efficient, environmentally sound technologies and other advances resulting from the program.
Mexican Resource Contributions.--The Secretary shall-- (1) encourage public, private, nonprofit, and academic organizations located in Mexico to contribute significant financial and other resources to the program; and (2) take any such contributions into account in conducting the program.
Transfer of Technology From National Laboratories.--In conducting the program, the Secretary shall emphasize the transfer and use of technology developed by the national laboratories of the Department of Energy.
ACTIVITIES AND MAJOR PROGRAM ELEMENTS.
Activities.--Funds made available under this Act shall be made available for technology deployment, research, and training activities, particularly related to hazardous waste and materials technologies, that will alleviate the problems caused by rapid economic development along the United States-Mexico border, that focus on issues related to the protection of public health and environmental security, and that promote-- (1) minimization of industrial wastes and pollutants; (2) reducing emissions of atmospheric pollutants; (3) use of recycled resources as primary materials for industrial production; and (4) improvement of energy efficiency.
Major Program Elements.-- (1) In general.--The program shall have the following major elements, all of which shall emphasize hazardous waste and materials technologies: (A) Technology Deployment, focused on the clear, operational demonstration of the utility of well developed technologies in new organizations or settings.
Research, focused on developing, maturing, and refining technologies to investigate or improve the feasibility or utility of the technologies.
Training, focused on training businesses, industries, and their workers in the border region in energy efficient, environmentally sound technologies that minimize waste, decrease public health risks, increase recycling, and improve environmental security.
Technology deployment and research.--Projects under paragraph (1)(A) and (1)(B) should typically involve significant participation from private sector organizations that would use or sell such a technology.
PARTICIPATION OF DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES, AND COMMISSIONS OTHER THAN THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY.
Agreement.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall enter into an agreement with the departments, agencies, and commissions referred to in section 5(b) on the coordination and implementation of the program.
Actions of Departments, Agencies, and Commissions.--Any action of a department, agency, or commission under an agreement under subsection (a) shall be the responsibility of that department, agency, or commission and shall not be subject to approval by the Secretary.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary and the departments, agencies, and commissions referred to in section 5(b) may use funds made available for the program for technology deployment, research, or training activities carried out by-- (A) State and local governments and academic, nonprofit, and private organizations located in the United States; and (B) State and local governments and academic, nonprofit, and private organizations located in Mexico.
Condition.--Funds may be made available to a State or local government or organization located in Mexico only if a government or organization located in Mexico (which need not be the recipient of the funds) contributes a significant amount of financial or other resources to the project to be funded.
Transfer of Funds.--The Secretary may transfer funds to the departments, agencies, and commissions referred to in section 5(b) to carry out the responsibilities of the departments, agencies, and commissions under this Act.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee consisting of representatives of the private, academic, and public sectors.
Considerations.--In establishing the advisory committee, the Secretary shall take into consideration organizations in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, such as the Materials Corridor Council and the Business Council for Sustainable Development-Gulf Mexico.
Consultation and Coordination.--Departments, agencies, and commissions of the United States to which funds are made available under this Act shall consult and coordinate with the advisory committee in identifying and implementing the appropriate types of projects to be funded under this Act.
FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Federal departments, agencies, and commissions participating in the program may provide financial and technical assistance to other organizations to achieve the purpose of the program.
Technology Deployment and Research.-- (1) Use of cooperative agreements.-- (A) In general.--Federal departments, agencies, and commissions shall, to the extent practicable, use cooperative agreements to fund technology deployment and research activities by organizations outside the Federal Government.
National laboratories.--In the case of a technology deployment or research activity conducted by a national laboratory, a funding method other than a cooperative agreement may be used if such a funding method would be more administratively convenient.
Federal share.-- (A) In general.--The Federal Government shall pay not more than 50 percent of the cost of technology deployment or research activities under the program.
Qualified funding and resources.--No funds or other resources expended either before the start of a project under the program or outside the scope of work covered by the funding method determined under paragraph (1) shall be credited toward the non-Federal share of the cost of the project.
Training.-- (1) In general.--Federal departments, agencies, and commissions shall, to the extent practicable, use grants to fund training activities by organizations outside the Federal Government.
National laboratories.--In the case of a training activity conducted by a national laboratory, a funding method other than a grant may be used if such a funding method would be more administratively convenient.
Federal share.--The Federal Government may fund 100 percent of the cost of the training activities of the program.
Selection.--All projects funded under contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements established under this program shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be selected in an open, competitive process using such selection criteria as the Secretary, through his program management, and in consultation with the departments, agencies, and commissions referred to in section 5(b), determines to be appropriate.
Any such selection process shall weigh the benefits to the border region.
Accounting Standards.-- (1) Waiver.--To facilitate participation in the program, Federal departments, agencies, and commissions may waive any requirements for Government accounting standards by organizations that have not established such standards.
GAAP.--Generally accepted accounting principles shall be sufficient for projects under the program.
No Construction.--No program funds may be used for construction.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
Passed the Senate April 13, 2000.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.