This Act shall be cited as the ``VA State Health-Care Reform Pilot Programs Act''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) The term ``Department'' means the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The term ``family'' means the spouse of a veteran or a child of a veteran as those terms are defined in section 101 of title 38, United States Code.
The term ``pilot program'' means a program authorized by section 5(a) of this Act.
The term ``reformed health-care system'' means a State program which is statutorily established by a State that the Secretary determines was established to assure that residents of the State have access to health-care services.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
The term ``veteran'' has meaning given such term in section 101(2) of title 38, United States Code.
Authority To Conduct Programs.--In up to five States that have reformed health-care systems, the Secretary may conduct pilot programs under which the Department may provide health care services, directly or by contract, to persons identified in subsection (b) on the same or similar basis as the State plan mandates for residents in the State.
Persons Eligible for Services Under Programs.--Persons eligible to receive services under a pilot program are any residents of the State in which the pilot program is being conducted who are-- (1) veterans; (2) individuals eligible for benefits under section 1713 of title 38, United States Code; or (3) members of the family of any veteran who participates in a pilot program.
Authority To Comply With State Health Plan Requirements.--In conducting pilot programs, the Secretary may comply with such requirements of State law applicable to the establishment and operation of a health plan under a State reform plan, or to functioning as a participant in, member of, or contractor to, such a health plan, as the Secretary considers appropriate for application to a department or agency of the Federal Government.
Catchment Areas.--In conducting pilot programs in a State, the Secretary may-- (1) conduct the programs in some or all health care facilities of the Department located in the State; and (2) establish such catchment areas within the State as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Condition on Establishment of Programs.--The Secretary may establish and operate a pilot program in a State only after determining, based on such factors as the Secretary considers relevant (including the factors referred to in subsection (b)), that, in the absence of an enrollment option through a Department plan in that State, the projected workload in one or more Department health care facilities in the State would decline to a level that-- (1) would threaten to impair the capability of such facilities to meet one or more assigned mission of such facilities; or (2) would result in a deterioration in the quality of the service delivered by such facilities to an extent that it would not be reasonable to continue to provide needed services in such facilities and satisfactory alternative arrangements could not feasibly be provided.
Factors.--In making a determination under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consider the following: (1) The relative universality of coverage provided to State residents under the State reform plan.
The scope of benefits offered under the plan.
The extent of financing supporting the plan.
The extent to which the State may serve as a model for the Department in determining how to compete with other health care providers in other States when Congress enacts National health care reform.
Such other matters as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Notice and Wait Requirement.--(1) The Secretary may establish and operate a pilot program in a State not earlier than 30 days after submitting to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report on the pilot program.
Each report submitted under paragraph (1) shall include the following: (A) The rationale for proposed participation in the State reform plan.
A description of the extent to which applicable provisions of State law specifically accommodate and facilitate participation of the Department in the State reform plan.
A detailed business plan for the participation of the Department under the State reform plan.
A description of the actions the Secretary has taken to consult with veterans on the proposed participation of the Department in the State reform plan.
Requirement for Regulations.--The Secretary may operate a pilot program in a State only after prescribing implementing regulations.
Copayments.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall require persons receiving health care services under a pilot program to pay all premiums, copayments, deductibles, and coinsurance amounts required by State law in the State where the pilot program is undertaken.
The Secretary may not collect premiums, copayments, deductibles, and coinsurance amounts under this subsection from the following individuals: (A) Any veteran with a service-connected disability.
any veteran whose discharge or release from the active military, naval or air service was for a disability incurred or aggravated in the line of duty.
Any veteran who is in receipt of, or who, but for a suspension pursuant to section 1151 of title 38, United States Code (or both such a suspension and the receipt of retired pay), would be entitled to disability compensation, but only to the extent that such a veteran's continuing eligibility for such care is provided for in the judgment or settlement provided for in such section.
Any veteran who is a former prisoner of war.
Any veteran of the Mexican border period or World War I.
Any veteran who is unable to defray the expenses of necessary care as determined under section 1722(a) of title 38, United States Code.
The authority to conduct pilot programs under this Act shall expire on December 31, 1997.
Revolving Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a revolving fund for conducting pilot programs authorized by section 3(a).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the revolving fund for fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997 such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability of Funds.--(1) Amounts in the revolving fund established under subsection (a) shall be available without fiscal year limitation for payment of all expenses necessary to carry out the pilot programs, including-- (A) expenses of furnishing medical care and services; (B) expenses of consumer surveys; (C) expenses of printing, marketing, and advertising services (including contracts for such services); and (D) expenses for the acquisition, construction, repair, or renovation of facilities (including the land on which facilities are located or to be constructed).
Funds in the revolving fund shall not be available for a major medical facility project, or a major medical facility lease, under section 8104(a)(3) of title 38, United States Code, unless specifically authorized by law.
Collection of Funds.--(1) The Secretary may recover or collect funds which result from participation by the Department in a pilot program authorized under section 3(a) for care provided to veterans or their dependents.
The Secretary may recover or collect such funds (including amounts received as premiums, copayments, deductibles or third-party reimbursements) from an individual, another agency or department of the Federal Government, an agency of State or local government, or a health-care provider, health care plan, insurer, or other entity.
The Secretary shall, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, estimate the collection of funds to be received for services to be provided to veterans by each Department facility participating in a State pilot program during each fiscal year.
Such estimates shall be based upon and consistent with the higher of-- (A) the fiscal year baseline for third-party recoveries, copayments, and other medical collections for the fiscal year included in the budget submitted to Congress by the President; or (B) the fiscal year baseline for such collections for the fiscal year as reestimated by the Congressional Budget Office.
(A) Amounts collected for services provided to dependents shall be deposited in the revolving fund established in subsection (a).
Amounts collected for services provided to veterans in excess of the estimate determined under paragraph (2) shall be deposited in the revolving fund established under subsection (a).
An amount up to the estimate determined under paragraph (2) shall be deposited in the Medical-Care Cost Recovery Fund established under section 1729(g) of title 38, United States Code.
Applicability of Notice and Wait Requirement.--The Secretary may carry out any reorganization necessary to carry out a pilot program authorized by section 3(a) without regard to the provisions of section 510(b) of title 38, United States Code.
Applicability of Other Provisions of Law.--The Director of a Department health care facility participating in a pilot project authorized by section 3(a) may enter into agreements with health care plans, insurers, health care providers, or with any other entity or individual to furnish or obtain any health care resource, as that term is defined in section 8152 of title 38, United States Code, without regard to the following: (1) Chapter 7 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 410 et.
Chapter 4 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 251 et sequentes).
Subsections (b)(7), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of section 8 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637), relating to certificate of competency, notice, and sole sourcing.
Office of Management and Budget Circular A-76.
Section 8110(c) of title 38, United States Code, relating to contracting out at Department medical facilities.
Subchapter V of chapter 35 of title 31, United States Code, relating to Government Accounting Office protests.
Sections 3526 and 3702 of title 31, United States Code, relating to jurisdiction over Government Accounting Office protests.
Section 1491 of title 28, United States Code, relating to protests to the United States Court of Federal Claims.
Section 702 of title 5, United States Code, and section 1346(2) of title 28, United States Code, relating to protests to United States district courts.
Section 8125 of title 38, United States Code, relating to local contracts for health care items.
The provisions of law appearing as sections 471 through 544 of title 40, United States Code, for purposes of the proposal of the Law Revision Counsel of a codification of Federal law, relating to the authority of the General Services Administration over leasing and disposal of property.
Section 8122(a)(1) of title 38, United States Code, relating to out-leasing by the Department.
The Secretary may carry out such promotional, advertising, and marketing activities as the Secretary considers necessary to effectively establish and operate a health plan pilot program.
Not later than November 30 of each of 1995 through 1998, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report on the pilot programs carried out by the Secretary under this Act.
Benefits.--The Secretary shall provide the persons referred to in section 3(b) with all benefits authorized to be provided to such persons under title 38, United States Code, in accordance with the terms and conditions applicable to such persons and such benefits, notwithstanding that such benefits are not provided under the pilot program.
Utilization of Other Department Facilities.--Department facilities not participating in pilot programs shall continue to furnish health care benefits in accordance with the provisions of title 38, United States Code.