This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Benefit Equity and Emergency Access to Prescription Drugs Act of 1999''.
Congress finds as follows: (1) American taxpayers should receive equal Medicare services regardless of place of residence.
Medicare managed care plans play a fundamental role in the health of our Nation's seniors, often providing coordinated care and access to pharmaceuticals.
The loss of Medicare managed care plans and their services can be devastating to our Nation's Medicare-eligible seniors.
For the second consecutive year, Medicare managed care plans are abandoning hundreds of thousands of medicare beneficiaries.
The most recent announcement of plan cancellations means that within the past two years, 734,000 of the Nation's 6,200,000 Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in managed care plans will have been dropped from those plans.
In 1999, Medicare managed care plan withdrawals affected nearly 407,000 Medicare beneficiaries, and 51,276 beneficiaries in 79 counties were left with no other Medicare managed care option.
Beginning January 2000, another 327,000 enrollees will need to find alternative coverage, and 79,000 of these Medicare managed care participants will have no other Medicare+Choice plan available.
Medicare beneficiaries who have lost their managed care option can enroll in Medicare fee-for-service; however, Medicare fee-for-service does not currently provide comprehensive outpatient pharmaceutical coverage.
While all beneficiaries pay the same medicare part B premium as other program participants, Medicare beneficiaries regularly pay managed care plans varied amounts and receive very unequal services and benefits.
A growing body of data suggests that medical practice and Medicare spending vary substantially among the Nation's hospital referral regions, even after adjustments for differences in regional prices and illness rates, but there is little evidence that greater spending brings better health.
By adjusting Medicare reimbursement payment rates (adjusted for age, sex, severity of illness, etc.,) and lowering Medicare reimbursement payment to providers and regions where there are more costly patterns of practice without better health outcomes, Congress can provide more equitable and efficient health care for our Nation's 39,000,000 Medicare beneficiaries.
Such a strategy will encourage a more responsible practice of medicine at the lowest cost to the taxpayer and Medicare beneficiary, and will free resources for improvements to the medicare program.
MEDICARE CLINICAL PRACTICE AND PAYMENT PATTERN ADJUSTMENT.
Establishment of Practice Profiles.-- (1) In general.--By not later than January 1, 2002, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish clinical profiles of the practice and payment patterns of health care providers (including both institutional providers and health care professionals) furnishing items and services under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act in order to determine how their practice and payment patterns compare to each other on a local, State, and national basis.
In establishing such profiles, the Secretary shall take into account differences in the case mix and severity of patients served by such providers and shall take into account, to the extent practicable, the medical outcomes resulting from such practices.
Dissemination of information.--The Secretary shall establish a method for disseminating summary information to the public on the clinical profiles established under paragraph (1).
No information that identifies (or permits the identification of) an individual patient shall be disseminated.
Authority To Make Payment Adjustments.--For items and services furnished on or after January 1, 2003, the Secretary of Health and Human Services may adjust the amount of the payments made under the medicare program to such health care providers in order to encourage their provision of services in a medically appropriate manner and to discourage significant deviations in underservice or overservice from generally accepted norms of medical practice.
Such adjustments shall be made on the basis of provider profiles established under subsection (a) and shall be made only after-- (1) taking into account variations among providers in the case mix and severity of patients served; and (2) the Secretary determines that discouraging particular patterns of overservice will not adversely affect outcomes or quality of care.
Schedule To Reduce Overpayments.-- (1) In general.--For items and services furnished on or after January 1, 2004, the Secretary shall annually reduce overpayments to providers by five percent of the overpayment amount (as defined in paragraph (2)).
Such reduction shall be administered through a percentage reduction in the providers' applicable payment methodology.
Overpayment amount defined.--In this subsection, the term ``overpayment amount'' means a health care provider's payment profile minus the median national payment profiles for similar health care providers, adjusted for variations in case mix and severity of patients served.
ADJUSTMENT IN MEDICARE+CHOICE PAYMENT RATES TO OVERPAID COUNTIES.
In General.--Section 1853(c)(1)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-23(c)(1)(C)) is amended-- (1) in clause (ii), by striking ``For a subsequent year,'' and inserting ``Subject to clause (iii), for a subsequent year,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iii) In the case of a year beginning after 1999 for which the Secretary determines there is an overpaid payment area (as defined in paragraph (8)), the following: ``(I) In the case of such overpaid payment area, 100.5 percent of the annual Medicare+Choice capitation rate under this paragraph for the area for the previous year.
In the case of a payment area that is not an overpaid payment area, 102 percent of the annual Medicare+Choice capitation rate under this paragraph for the area for the previous year.''.
Overpaid Payment Area Defined.--Section 1853(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395w-23(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Overpaid payment area defined.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(C)(iii), the term `overpaid payment area' means a Medicare+Choice payment area for a year for which the annual per capita rate of payment for such area exceeds the mean of the annual per capita rates of payments for all Medicare+Choice payment areas for that year by more than two standard deviations, such mean determined without regard to the number of Medicare beneficiaries in such payment areas.''.
Allocation of Savings to Underpaid Counties.--For a contract year consisting of a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2000, for which the Secretary of Health and Human Services has determined there is an overpaid payment area (as defined in section 1853(c)(8)), as added by subsection (b), the Secretary shall adjust the annual per capita rate of payment for Medicare+Choice payment areas described in section 1853(c)(1)(C)(iii)(II), as added by subsection (a), to increase the blended capitation rate applicable to such areas under section 1853(c)(1)(A) (in such pro rata manner as the Secretary determines appropriate) by an aggregate amount equal to the aggregate amount of reductions in payments attributable to section 1853(c)(1)(C)(iii)(I), as added by subsection (a).
PROVISION OF EMERGENCY OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUG COVERAGE FOR MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES LOSING DRUG COVERAGE UNDER MEDICARE+CHOICE PLANS.
Temporary Coverage of Outpatient Prescription Drugs for Medicare Beneficiaries Losing Prescription Drug Coverage Under Medicare+Choice Plans.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for coverage of outpatient prescription drugs to eligible Medicare beneficiaries under this section.
The Secretary shall provide for such coverage by entering into agreements with eligible organizations to furnish such coverage.
Term of emergency coverage.--The Secretary shall provide coverage of outpatient prescription drugs to an eligible Medicare beneficiary under this section for the 18- month period beginning on the date the eligible Medicare beneficiary loses coverage of outpatient prescription drugs under the Medicare+Choice plan in which the beneficiary is enrolled.
Cost-sharing.--The Secretary shall impose the following cost-sharing requirements under coverage of outpatient prescription drugs furnished under this section: (A) Benefits under this section shall not begin until the eligible medicare beneficiary has met a $50 deductible.
The eligible Medicare beneficiary shall pay coinsurance in the amount of 10 percent.
Payment.--The Secretary shall provide for payment for such coverage under this section from the Emergency Reserve Outpatient Prescription Drug Account established under subsection (b).
Account for Emergency Outpatient Prescription Drug Benefit in SMI Trust Fund.-- (1) Establishment.--There is hereby established in the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395t) an expenditure account to be known as the ``Emergency Reserve Outpatient Prescription Drug Account''.
Crediting of funds.--The Managing Trustee shall credit to the Emergency Reserve Outpatient Prescription Drug Account such amounts as may be deposited in the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund as follows: (A) Amounts appropriated to the account.
Amounts equal to the annual outstanding balance of the Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control Account under section 1817(k) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i(k)) at the end of each fiscal year that the Secretary determines may be made available to the Emergency Reserve Outpatient Prescription Drug Account.
Amounts attributable to reductions in payments to providers under section 3(c) of this Act.
Use of funds.--Funds credited to the Outpatient Prescription Drug Account may only be used to pay for outpatient prescription drugs furnished under this section.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Eligible medicare beneficiary.--The term ``eligible Medicare beneficiary'' means an individual-- (A) who is enrolled in a Medicare+Choice plan under part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act; (B) who requires outpatient prescription drugs for an extended period of time for the treatment of a condition, as determined by a physician; and (C)(i) whose enrollment in such plan is terminated or may not be renewed for the next contract year because the plan has been terminated or will not be offered in such contract year; or (ii) whose coverage of outpatient prescription drugs under such plan has been terminated, significantly reduced, or no longer provides for the coverage of a particular outpatient prescription drug required as specified under subparagraph (B).
Covered outpatient drug.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term ``covered outpatient drug'' means any of the following products: (i) A drug which may be dispensed only upon prescription, and-- (I) which is approved for safety and effectiveness as a prescription drug under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; (II)(aa) which was commercially used or sold in the United States before the date of enactment of the Drug Amendments of 1962 or which is identical, similar, or related (within the meaning of section 310.6(b)(1) of title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations) to such a drug, and (bb) which has not been the subject of a final determination by the Secretary that it is a ``new drug'' (within the meaning of section 201(p) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act) or an action brought by the Secretary under section 301, 302(a), or 304(a) of such Act to enforce section 502(f) or 505(a) of such Act; or (III)(aa) which is described in section 107(c)(3) of the Drug Amendments of 1962 and for which the Secretary has determined there is a compelling justification for its medical need, or is identical, similar, or related (within the meaning of section 310.6(b)(1) of title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations) to such a drug, and (bb) for which the Secretary has not issued a notice of an opportunity for a hearing under section 505(e) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act on a proposed order of the Secretary to withdraw approval of an application for such drug under such section because the Secretary has determined that the drug is less than effective for all conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in its labeling.
A biological product which-- (I) may only be dispensed upon prescription; (II) is licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act; and (III) is produced at an establishment licensed under such section to produce such product.
Insulin approved under appropriate Federal law.
A prescribed drug or biological product that would meet the requirements of clause (i) or (ii) but that is available over- the-counter in addition to being available upon prescription.
Exclusion.--The term ``covered outpatient drug'' does not include any product-- (i) except as provided in subparagraph (A)(iv), which may be distributed to individuals without a prescription; (ii) when furnished as part of, or as incident to, a diagnostic service or any other item or service for which payment may be made under title XVIII of the Social Security Act; or (iii) that is a therapeutically equivalent replacement for a product described in clause (i) or (ii), as determined by the Secretary.
Eligible organization.--The term ``eligible organization'' means any organization that the Secretary determines to be appropriate, including-- (A) pharmaceutical benefit management companies; (B) wholesale and retail pharmacist delivery systems; (C) insurers; (D) other organizations; or (E) any combination of the entities described in subparagraphs (A) through (D).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.