POSTHUMOUS CITIZENSHIP FOR TERRORIST ATTACK VICTIMS.
Permitting Granting of Posthumous Citizenship.--Notwithstanding any provision of title III of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1401 et sequentes), the Attorney General shall provide, in accordance with this section, for the granting of posthumous citizenship, as of September 10, 2001, to a person described in subsection (b), if the Attorney General approves an application for such citizenship filed under subsection (e).
Noncitizens Eligible for Posthumous Citizenship.--A person referred to in subsection (a) is a person who-- (1) while an alien or a noncitizen national of the United States, died as a result of an injury incurred in one or more of the events described in subsection (c); (2) was not culpable for any of such events; and (3) on September 11, 2001-- (A) had pending an application for naturalization, or for a certificate of citizenship, filed with the Attorney General by the person; or (B) was the beneficiary of a pending application for naturalization filed with the Attorney General by a parent of the person.
Events Described.-- (1) In general.--The events described in this subsection are the following: (A) The hijacking of American Airlines Flight 11 on September 11, 2001, the crash of that aircraft into the World Trade Center in New York, New York, and the subsequent destruction that resulted.
The hijacking of United Airlines Flight 175 on such date, the crash of that aircraft into the World Trade Center in New York, New York, and the subsequent destruction that resulted.
The hijacking of American Airlines Flight 77 on such date, the crash of that aircraft into the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia, and the subsequent destruction that resulted.
The hijacking of United Airlines Flight 93 on such date, and the crash of that aircraft in Stony Creek Township, Pennsylvania.
Response personnel included.--Any person who died as a result of an injury incurred while assisting in the emergency response to an event described in paragraph (1) (such as military personnel, law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency management personnel, search and rescue personnel, medical personnel, engineers and other personnel providing technical assistance, and volunteers) shall be considered to have died as a result of an injury incurred in such event.
Requirements.-- (1) In general.--Unless otherwise provided by this section, no person may be granted posthumous citizenship under this section who would not otherwise have been eligible for naturalization on the date of the person's death.
Unless otherwise provided by this section, any provision of law that specifically bars or prohibits a person from being naturalized as a citizen of the United States shall be applied to the granting of posthumous citizenship under this section.
Waiver of english language and government requirements.--Notwithstanding section 312 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1423), or any similar provision of law requiring that a person demonstrate an understanding of the English language or a knowledge and understanding of the fundamentals of the history, and of the principles and form of government, of the United States in order to be naturalized, no such demonstration shall be required for the granting of posthumous citizenship under this section.
Waiver of oath.--No oath of renunciation or allegiance shall be required for the granting of posthumous citizenship under this section.
Investigation of applicants; examination of applications.--To the maximum extent practicable, the investigation and examination described in section 335 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1446) shall be conducted with respect to an application described in subsection (b)(3) in the same manner as they otherwise would have been conducted if the subject of the application had not died.
Requests for Posthumous Citizenship.--A request for the granting of posthumous citizenship to a person described in subsection (b) may be filed on behalf of the person only by the next of kin (as defined by the Attorney General) or another representative (as defined by the Attorney General), and must be filed not later than 2 years after the later of-- (1) the date of the enactment of this section; or (2) the date of the person's death.
Documentation of Posthumous Citizenship.--If the Attorney General approves such a request to grant a person posthumous citizenship, the Attorney General shall send to the individual who filed the request a suitable document which states that the United States considers the person to have been a citizen of the United States on and after September 10, 2001.
No Benefits to Survivors.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as providing for any benefits under the Immigration and Nationality Act for any spouse, son, daughter, or other relative of a person granted posthumous citizenship under this section.