This Act may be cited as the ``Education Development Block Grant Act of 1997''.
TITLE I--BLOCK GRANTS AND GRANT REQUIREMENTS Sec.
103. Review of plans.
TITLE II--ALLOCATION OF GRANT AMOUNTS Sec.
TITLE III--FEDERAL GUARANTEES FOR FINANCING Sec.
Limitations on amount of guarantees.
Local Bond Authority.--The term ``local bond authority'' means-- (1) a local educational agency with authority to issue a bond for construction or renovation of educational facilities in a local area; and (2) a political subdivision of a State with authority to issue such a bond for an area including a local area.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
TITLE I--BLOCK GRANTS AND GRANT REQUIREMENTS SEC.
Authority.--For each of fiscal years 1998 through 2001, the Secretary shall (to the extent amounts are made available to carry out this Act) make grants under this section to a local bond authority to allow such authority to repair its school infrastructure.
Plan Requirement.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may make a grant under this Act to a local bond authority for a fiscal year only if-- (A) the local bond authority has submitted to the Secretary an education plan for such fiscal year under section 102; and (B) the plan has been determined under section 103 to comply with the requirements of section 102.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the applicability of the requirements under paragraph (1), in whole or in part, if the Secretary finds that a local bond authority has not complied or cannot comply with such requirements due to circumstances beyond the control of the authority.
Administrative Expenses.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, authorize each recipient to use not more that 5 percent of any grant amounts received under this Act for any reasonable administrative costs.
Plan Submission.--The Secretary shall provide for each local bond authority to submit an education plan as described in subsections (b) and (c).
4-Year Plan.--Each education plan under this section shall be in a form prescribed by the Secretary and shall contain, with respect to the 4-year period beginning with the fiscal year for which the plan is submitted, the following information: (c) 1-Year Plan.--An education plan under this section for a local bond authority shall be in a form prescribed by the Secretary and contain the following information relating to the upcoming fiscal year for which the assistance under this Act is to be made available: SEC.
103. REVIEW OF PLANS.
Review and Notice.-- (1) Review.--The Secretary shall conduct a limited review of each education plan submitted to the Secretary to ensure that the plan complies with the requirements of section 102.
The Secretary shall have the discretion to review a plan only to the extent that the Secretary considers review is necessary.
Notice.--The Secretary shall notify each local bond authority for which a plan is submitted whether the plan complies with such requirements not later than 60 days after receiving the plan.
If the Secretary does not notify the local bond authority, as required under this subsection and subsection (b), the plan shall be considered, for purposes of this Act, to have been determined to comply with the requirements under section 102 and the local bond authority shall be considered to have been notified of compliance upon the expiration of such 60-day period.
Notice of Reasons for Determination of Noncompliance.--If the Secretary determines that a plan, as submitted, does not comply with the requirements under section 102, the Secretary shall specify in the notice under subsection (a) the reasons for the noncompliance and any modifications necessary for the plan to meet the requirements under section 102.
Review.--After submission of the education plan or any amendment or modification to the plan to the Secretary, to the extent that the Secretary considers such action to be necessary to make determinations under this subsection, the Secretary shall review the plan (including any amendments or modifications thereto) to determine whether the contents of the plan-- (1) set forth the information required by section 102 to be contained in an education plan; (2) are consistent with information and data available to the Secretary; and (3) are prohibited by or inconsistent with any provision of this Act or other applicable law.
If the Secretary determines that any of the appropriate certifications required under section 102 are not included in the plan, the plan shall be deemed to be incomplete.
Updates to Plan.--After a plan under section 102 has been submitted for a local bond authority for any fiscal year, the local bond authority may comply with the provisions of such section for any succeeding fiscal year (with respect to information included for the 4- year period under section 102(b) or the 1-year period under section 102(c)) by submitting only such information regarding such changes as may be necessary to update the plan previously submitted.
Effective Date.--This section and section 102 shall take effect on the date provided by the Secretary.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, by notice issued in the Federal Register, establish any requirements necessary to implement this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated for grants under this title $2,000,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001.
TITLE II--ALLOCATION OF GRANT AMOUNTS SEC.
For each fiscal year, the Secretary shall allocate any amounts made available for assistance under this Act for the fiscal year, in accordance with the provisions of part A of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
TITLE III--FEDERAL GUARANTEES FOR FINANCING SEC.
Authority.--To such extent or in such amounts as provided in appropriations Acts, the Secretary may, subject to the limitations of this title and upon such terms and conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, guarantee and make commitments to guarantee, the notes or other obligations issued by local bond authorities, for the purposes of financing repairs to school infrastructure.
Lack of Financing Elsewhere.--A guarantee under this title may be used to assist a local bond authority in obtaining financing only if the local bond authority has made efforts to obtain such financing without the use of such guarantee and cannot complete such financing consistent with the timely execution of the program plans without such guarantee.
Terms of Loans.--Notes or other obligations guaranteed pursuant to this title shall be in such form and denominations, have such maturities, and be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by regulations issued by the Secretary.
The Secretary may not deny a guarantee under this title on the basis of the proposed repayment period for the note or other obligation, unless the period is more than 20 years or the Secretary determines that the period causes the guarantee to constitute an unacceptable financial risk.
Limitation on Outstanding Guarantees.--No guarantee or commitment to guarantee shall be made with respect to any note or other obligation if the total outstanding notes or obligations of the issuer guaranteed under this title (excluding any amount defeased under the contract entered into under section 302(a)(1)) would thereby exceed an amount equal to 5 times the amount of the grant approval for the issuer pursuant to title III.
Requirements on Issuer.--To assure the repayment of notes or other obligations and charges incurred under this title and as a condition for receiving such guarantees, the Secretary shall require the local bond authority issuing such notes or obligations to-- (1) enter into a contract, in a form acceptable to the Secretary, for repayment of notes or other obligations guaranteed under this title; (2) pledge any grant for which the issuer may become eligible under this Act; (3) demonstrate that the extent of such issuance and guarantee under this title is within the financial capacity of the local bond authority and is not likely to impair the ability to use grant amounts under title I; and (4) furnish, at the discretion of the Secretary, such other security as may be deemed appropriate by the Secretary in making such guarantees.
Repayment From Grant Amounts.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act-- (1) the Secretary may apply grants pledged pursuant to subsection (a)(2) to any repayments due the United States as a result of such guarantees; and (2) grants allocated under this Act for a local bond authority may be used to pay principal and interest due (including such servicing, underwriting, and other costs as may be specified in regulations issued by the Secretary) on notes or other obligations guaranteed pursuant to this title.
Full Faith and Credit.--The full faith and credit of the United States is pledged to the payment of all guarantees made under this title.
Any such guarantee made by the Secretary shall be conclusive evidence of the eligibility of the obligations for such guarantee with respect to principal and interest, and the validity of any such guarantee so made shall be incontestable in the hands of a holder of the guaranteed obligations.
The Secretary may make, and contract to make, grants, in such amounts as may be approved in appropriations Acts, to or on behalf of a local bond authority issuing notes or other obligations guaranteed under this title, to cover not to exceed 30 percent of the net interest cost (including such servicing, underwriting, or other costs as may be specified in regulations of the Secretary) to the borrowing entity or agency of such obligations.
The Secretary may also, to the extent approved in appropriations Acts, assist the issuer of a note or other obligation guaranteed under this title in the payment of all or a portion of the principal and interest amount due under the note or other obligation, if the Secretary determines that the issuer is unable to pay the amount because of circumstances of extreme hardship beyond the control of the issuer.
The Secretary, in cooperation with eligible public entities, shall carry out training and information activities with respect to the guarantee program under this title.
LIMITATIONS ON AMOUNT OF GUARANTEES.
Aggregate Fiscal Year Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject only to the absence of qualified applicants or proposed activities and to the authority provided in this title, to the extent approved or provided in appropriations Acts, the Secretary may enter into commitments to guarantee notes and obligations under this title.
Authorization of Appropriations for Credit Subsidy.--There are authorized to be appropriated to cover the costs (as such term is defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974) of guarantees under this title such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001.
Fiscal Year Limitations.--The Secretary shall monitor the use of guarantees under this title by local bond authorities.
If necessary, the Secretary may impose limitations on the amount of guarantees any one local bond authority may receive in any fiscal year.