This Act may be cited as the ``State High Risk Pool Funding Extension Act of 2004''.
EXTENSION OF FUNDING FOR ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF STATE HIGH RISK HEALTH INSURANCE POOLS.
Extension of Availability of Seed Funding for Additional Year.--The second sentence of subsection (c) of section 2745 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-45) is amended by striking ``under this subsection for a fiscal year'' and inserting ``under paragraph (1) shall be available for obligation through the end of fiscal year 2005 and funds appropriated under paragraph (2) for a fiscal year''.
Funding for Operation of State High Risk Pools in Fiscal Year 2005.--Subsection (c)(2) of such section is amended by inserting ``and $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2005'' after ``2004''.
Change in Requirements for Qualified High Risk Pools.-- (1) Change in requirement for operational grants.-- Subsection (b)(1)(A) of such section is amended by striking ``150 percent'' and inserting ``200 percent''.
Change in definition of qualified high risk pool.-- Subsection (d) of such section is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Qualified high risk pool.--The term `qualified high risk pool' has the meaning given such term in section 2744(c)(2), except that a State may elect to meet the requirement of subparagraph (A) of such section (insofar as it requires the provision of coverage to all eligible individuals) through providing for the enrollment of eligible individuals through an acceptable alternative mechanism (as defined for purposes of section 2744) that includes a high risk pool as a component.
Standard risk rate.--The term `standard risk rate' means a rate that-- ``(A) is determined under the State high risk pool by considering the premium rates charged by other health insurers offering health insurance coverage to individuals in the insurance market served; ``(B) is established using reasonable actuarial techniques; and ``(C) reflects anticipated claims experience and expenses for the coverage involved.
State.--The term `State' means any of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to grants for fiscal years beginning with fiscal year 2005.
Change in Allotment Formula for Operational Grants.--Subsection (b)(2) of such section is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(before fiscal year 2005)'' after ``for a fiscal year''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``The amount appropriated under subsection (c)(2) for a fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2005 shall be made available to the States (including entities that operate the high risk pool under applicable State law in a State) that qualify for a grant under subsection (b) as follows: ``(A) An amount equal to 50 percent of the amount shall be allocated in equal amounts among such qualifying States.
An amount equal to 25 percent of the amount shall be allocated among such States so that the amount provided to a State bears the same ratio to such available amount as the number of uninsured individuals in the State bears to the total number of uninsured individuals in all such States (as determined by the Secretary).
An amount equal to 25 percent of the amount shall be allocated among such States so that the amount provided to a State bears the same ratio to such available amount as the number of individuals enrolled in health care coverage through the qualified high risk pool of the State bears to the total number of individuals so enrolled through qualified high risk pools in all such States (as determined by the Secretary).''.
Administrative Provisions.--Such section is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Administrative Provisions.-- ``(1) Applications.--To be eligible for a grant under this section, a State shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the secretary may require.
No entitlement.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as providing a State with an entitlement to a grant under this section.