This Act may be cited as the ``Family Farm Protection Act''.
TREATMENT OF LAND SUBJECT TO A QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
Estate Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--Section 2031 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the definition of gross estate) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Estate Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.-- ``(1) In general.--If the executor makes the election described in paragraph (3) of this subsection, then, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, there shall be excluded from the gross estate the value of land subject to a qualified conservation easement (reduced by the amount of any indebtedness to which such land is subject).
For purposes of this subsection, the term `land subject to a qualified conservation easement' means land that is located in an area which, on the date of the decedent's death, is a metropolitan area (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget), and which was owned by the decedent or a member of the decedent's family at all times during the three-year period ending on the date of the decedent's death, and with respect to which a qualified conservation contribution of a qualified real property interest (as defined in section 170(h)(1) and (2)(C)) is or has been made by the decedent or a member of the decedent's family.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified real property interest' shall not include any structure or building constituting a `certified historic structure' (as defined in section 170(h)(4)(B)) or within the definition of a `historically important land area' (as defined in section 170(h)(4)(A)(iv)).
For purposes of this subsection, the term `member of the decedent's family' shall have the same meaning as the term `member of the family' in section 2032A.
Payment of tax upon certain disposition of land subject to retained development right.--The exclusion described in paragraph (1) shall not apply to the value of any development right retained by the donor in the conveyance of such qualified conservation easement.
The tax imposed by section 2001, if any, attributable to any development right so retained shall be imposed only upon the disposition of such property.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `disposition' shall not include any gift or devise.
The tax so imposed shall be due and payable by the person so disposing of such property on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the calendar year in which such disposition occurs.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `development right' shall mean the right to establish or use, any structure and the land immediately surrounding it for sale, or for rent or any other commercial purpose which is not subordinate to and directly supportive of the conservation purpose identified in the easement, or the activity of farming, forestry, ranching, horticulture, viticulture, or recreation, whether or not for profit, conducted on land subject to the easement in which such right is retained.
Election with respect to land subject to qualified conservation easement.--The election under this subsection shall be made on the return of the tax imposed by section 2001 and in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.
Such an election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
Calculation and notice of potential estate tax due.-- An executor making the election described in paragraph (3) of this subsection shall compute the amount of tax imposed by section 2001 upon any development right (as defined in paragraph (2) of this subsection) retained by the donor in the conveyance of such qualified conservation easement and include such computation with the return of the tax imposed by section 2001.
The executor shall also file a `Notice of Potential Estate Tax Due' in the place or places where deeds are put to public record for the locality in which the land subject to such qualified conservation easement is located.
The report of the computation of tax on any retained development right and the filing of the notice prescribed in this paragraph shall be done in such manner and on such forms as the Secretary shall prescribe.''
Carryover Basis.--Section 1014(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis of property acquired from a decedent) is amended by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3), inserting ``, or'' at the end thereof, and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(4) to the extent of the applicability of the exclusion described in section 2031(c), the basis in the hands of the decedent.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to gross estates including land on which qualified conservation easements were granted after December 31, 1994, in taxable years ending after such date.
GIFT TAX ON LAND SUBJECT TO A QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
Gift Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--Section 2503 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to taxable gifts) is amended by adding a new subsection (h) to read as follows: ``(h) Gift Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--The transfer by gift of land subject to a qualified conservation easement shall not be treated as a transfer of property by gift for purposes of this chapter.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `land subject to a qualified conservation easement' shall have the same meaning as in section 2031(c), except that references therein to `decedent' shall refer to the donor and references to `the date of the decedent's death' shall refer to the date of the transfer by the donor.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to gifts of land on which qualified conservation easements were granted after December 31, 1994, in taxable years ending after such date.
EXCLUSION OF GAIN FROM SALE OF CERTAIN FARMLAND.
General Rule.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by redesignating section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after section 136 the following new section: ``SEC.
SALES AND EXCHANGES OF FARMLAND THE USE OF WHICH IS RESTRICTED TO FARMING.
General Rule.--In the case of an operator of farmland, gross income does not include gain from the sale or exchange of farmland if there is in effect on the date of such sale or exchange a qualified covenant which does not permit any use of such farmland for any purpose other than use as farmland.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Farmland.--The term `farmland' means any real property-- ``(A) which is located in the United States, and ``(B) which is used as a farm for farming purposes (within the meaning of section 2032A(e)).
Qualified covenant--The term `qualified covenant' means a covenant-- ``(A) which may not be revoked, ``(B) which, with respect to farmland to which such covenant applies, is entered into by all persons having any ownership interest in such farmland, and ``(C) which binds all future owners of the farmland to which such covenant applies.
Application With Principal Residences.--For purposes of this section, use as farmland includes use as the principal residence of the operator of such farmland.
Verification of Covenant.--Subsection (a) shall not apply by reason of any covenant unless such person-- ``(1) notifies (in such form and manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe) both the Secretary and the Secretary of Agriculture of the political subdivision of the State in which such covenant is recorded, and ``(2) submits to the Secretary a copy of such covenant.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such part is amended by striking out the item relating to section 137 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``Sec.
Sales and exchanges of farmland the use of which is restricted to farming.
Cross references to other Acts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to covenants first recorded after December 31, 1994, in taxable years ending after such date.