This Act may be cited as the ``Colville National Forest Adaptive Management of Timber Resources Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Forest vegetation on Federal lands in the intermountain West, including eastern Washington and particularly the Colville National Forest in the State of Washington, is in an extremely overstocked condition due to fire exclusion and nonmanagement, resulting in unhealthy, low-vigor stands that are susceptible to disease, insects, and fire.
The value of this forest vegetation far exceeds the cost of managing these stands for a healthy, productive ecosystem, but the current regulatory structure of overlapping directives and planning documents hinders management of this forest vegetation in a manner necessary to achieve, simultaneously, healthy and productive ecosystems and community benefits.
The current regulatory structure and overall policy direction further hinder the flexibility of the Forest Service to plan and prepare projects that effectively consider local conditions and opportunities or capture market opportunities.
Federal budgetary limitations have reduced the trained and experienced Forest Service workforce below the level necessary to plan for and maintain healthy and productive ecosystems.
At the same time the Forest Service is forced to spend a disproportionate amount of its resources on planning, with insufficient resources remaining to implement scientifically acceptable forest management activities.
Implementation of adaptive management techniques in selected areas of the Colville National Forest will provide a healthy ecosystem, provide for long-term national fiber needs, generate funds in excess of costs, and stimulate the economies of local, resource-dependent communities.
The scientific knowledge gained from projects conducted using the adaptive management techniques required under this Act will benefit similar forest stands throughout the intermountain West.
The economic knowledge gained from such projects will benefit management projects in all timber stands.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To combat the adverse human and environmental consequences of catastrophic wildfire, including immediate-term loss of life, vegetation, soil, water, and nearby land use, and long-term loss of land productivity and continuous resource flow.
To use a creditable, science-based, adaptive management approach to manage fire-generated, overstocked, small-diameter, stagnated forest stands to improve forest health, meet current and future environmental needs, and provide wood fiber for processing in dependent communities.
To demonstrate the cost-effective use of private contractors to perform substantive planning and plan implementation tasks for the Forest Service.
PREPARATION, IMPLEMENTATION, AND EVALUATION OF ADAPTIVE FOREST MANAGEMENT IN COLVILLE NATIONAL FOREST.
Adaptive Management Research Plan Required.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall prepare and submit to Congress a research plan, including supporting environmental documents, that provides for the implementation and evaluation of controlled silvicultural treatment in fire-generated, overstocked, small-diameter, stagnated forest stands in designated areas of the Colville National Forest in the State of Washington for the purpose of testing the effect of adaptive management techniques in the treatment of such forest stands.
Areas Covered by Plan.--The research plan prepared under subsection (a) shall apply to the following areas of the Colville National Forest: (1) The approximately 110,000 acres of the Colville National Forest identified as economically suited for adaptive management techniques in the Forest Service study of 1989-1994 regarding creating opportunities.
Other lands in the Colville National Forest selected by the Secretary as having characteristics similar to the lands identified in paragraph (1).
Implementation of Plan.--The Secretary shall implement the research plan prepared under subsection (a) not later than the second full field season beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Secretary may begin an initial demonstration project based on a preliminary draft of the research plan as soon as practicable in an area of approximately 10,000 acres.
Use of Private Sector.--Subject to the availability of funds for this purpose under subsection (e), the Secretary may use private contractors, including individuals and groups involved in the preparation of the study referred to in subsection (b)(1), in the preparation and implementation of the research plan required under subsection (a) and in monitoring the effects of the research plan under subsection (i).
To the greatest extent practicable, such private contractors shall be selected from communities adversely affected by reductions in the timber sale program of the National Forest System.
Funding.-- (1) Establishment of special account.--To fund the preparation and implementation of the research plan required under subsection (a), the Secretary shall establish an account to be known as the ``Ecosystem Adaptive Management Demonstration Account''.
Funds for account.--There shall be allocated or transferred to the account the following: (A) A portion of the amount annually allocated to the Colville National Forest pursuant to any other provision of law, to be based on the proportion of the Colville National Forest subject to the research plan.
The amounts deposited pursuant to subsection (g)(3).
Any amounts borrowed under paragraph (3).
Borrowing authority.--To the extent necessary to fund startup costs under the research plan, the Secretary may borrow amounts from salvage sale accounts of the Forest Service or amounts available under the Act of June 9, 1930 (16 United States Code 576 et seq; commonly known as the Knutson-Vandenberg Act).
The Secretary shall repay amounts borrowed, without interest, using funds deposited in the account under subsection (g)(3).
Use of Account.--The Secretary shall use amounts in the special account established under subsection (e) for-- (1) the design and implementation of research projects conducted under the research plan prepared under subsection (a), except that the Secretary shall use funds from other sources to cover any costs related to appeals or litigation concerning those projects; and (2) to the extent amounts remain available in the special account after expenditures under paragraph (1), vegetative management activities, fuels treatment, monitoring, and watershed improvement projects within the areas covered by the research plan.
Treatment of Receipts.--Receipts generated from the sale of forest products resulting from silvicultural treatments under the research plan prepared under subsection (a) shall be deposited or utilized as follows: (1) 25 percent shall be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury of the United States as a miscellaneous receipt, pursuant to the procedures specified in the fifth paragraph under the heading ``FOREST SERVICE'' in the Act of March 4, 1907 (34 United States Statutes at Large 1270; 16 United States Code 499), and related laws.
25 percent shall be provided to the State of Washington pursuant to the procedures specified in the sixth paragraph under the heading ``FOREST SERVICE'' in the Act of May 23, 1908 (35 United States Statutes at Large 260; 16 United States Code 500).
50 percent shall be deposited in the special account established under subsection (e).
Schedule of Silvicultural Treatments.--Silvicultural treatments under the research plan prepared under subsection (a) shall be conducted during the 10-year period beginning on the date the research plan is first implemented.
The total number of acres treated in each of the first 5 years shall not vary by more than 20 percent from \1/10\ of the total acres covered by the research plan.
Monitoring and Reports.--The Secretary shall commence monitoring of the effects of research activities under the research plan prepared under subsection (a) immediately after implementation of the research plan.
Monitoring activities shall continue for a period of not less than 15 years.
At 5-year intervals during the monitoring period, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report containing the results of the monitoring, findings derived from the research projects under the research plan, and the implications of such findings for management of similar overstocked stands.
Each report shall include a detailed accounting of direct costs and returns associated with the implementation of the research plan.