This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Health Outreach Grants Amendments Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM OF GRANTS FOR RURAL HEALTH OUTREACH.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``Part P--Rural Health Outreach Grant Program ``SEC.
RURAL HEALTH OUTREACH GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants to demonstrate new and innovative models of outreach and health care services delivery in rural areas that lack basic health services.
Grants will be awarded for one of the following: direct provision of health services to rural populations (especially for those who are not currently receiving those services), or to enhance access to and utilization of existing available services.
Missions of the Outreach Projects.--Projects under subsection (a) should be designed to address the needs of a wide range of populations living in rural communities including, but not limited to, the poor, farmers, farm workers, senior citizens, individuals with disabilities, pregnant women, infants, adolescents, and rural populations with special health care needs.
The program could include projects to: ``(1) Provide, enhance, or revitalize emergency medical services in rural communities.
Provide ambulatory health and/or mental health services in health professional shortage areas and in frontier areas.
Enhance the health and safety of farmers through direct health services for farm families, and migrant and seasonal farm workers.
Provide direct health services to enhance health care services to senior citizens.
Provide direct health services that will reduce infant mortality in rural communities.
Composition of Program.-- ``(1) Consortium arrangements.--Participation in the program established in subsection (a) requires the formation of consortium arrangements among three or more separate and distinct entities to carry out an outreach project.
Certain requirements.-- ``(A) A consortium under paragraph (1) must be composed of three or more existing health care providers or a combination of three or more health care and social service providers.
Consortium members may include such entities as: hospitals, public health agencies, home health providers, mental health centers, rural health clinics, social service agencies, health profession(s) schools, educational institutions, emergency medical centers/providers, and community and migrant health centers.
All public and private entities, both nonprofit and for-profit may participate as members of a consortium arrangement under paragraph (1).
A grant under subsection (a) will be made to only one entity in a consortium under paragraph (1).
The grant recipient must be a nonprofit or public entity which meets one of the following requirements: ``(i) Applicants must be located outside of a Metropolitan Statistical Area as defined by the Federal Government.
Applicant must be located in a rural census tract.
(This provision applies to counties that are technically classified as Metropolitan Statistical Areas or considered as part of a Metropolitan Statistical Area but large parts of the counties are rural.)
Organizations located in the rural areas of the counties mentioned previously are eligible for participation in the program.
Review Criteria.--An outreach application under this section may be evaluated based on the following criteria: ``(1) The extent to which the applicant has proposed a new and innovative approach to health care in the rural area.
Services shall be directed as population groups that are unserved or underserved.
The extent to which the applicant has justified and documented the needs for the project and developed measurable goals for meeting the needs.
The extent to which the applicant has clearly defined the roles and responsibilities for each member of the consortium and developed a workable plan for managing the consortium's activities.
The level of local commitment and involvement with the project, including the extent of cost participation by the applicant and/or other organizations.
The feasibility of the project to continue after Federal grant support is completed.
The extent of the evaluation component.
How Project Funds Are To Be Expended.-- ``(1) Grantees under subsection (a) will be required to use at least 85 percent of the total amount awarded for outreach and care services.
60 percent of funds must be spent in rural areas.
This provision is designed accordingly--when a consortium is purchasing goods and services, priority should be given to purchases in rural areas.
Grant funds may not be used for purchase, construction, or renovation of real property or to support the delivery of inpatient services.
Grant funds may be used for equipment and vehicles when such equipment is essential to carrying out the outreach project.
Individual grant awards will be limited to a total amount of $300,000 per year.
Projects will be federally funded for three years.
Applicants must demonstrate that existing levels of institutional and other support are not reduced or supplanted by the availability of these grant funds.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year thereafter.