This Act may be cited as the ``Military Retiree and Veteran Health Care Act of 1993''.
DEFINITION OF MEDICARE SUBVENTION FUNDING.
Section 1072 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) The term `medicare subvention funding' means funds or funding authority of any program authorized under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes), which is made available to a department or agency for the provision of health care services, and wherein funds are provided directly to a military treatment facility operated by the Department of Defense or Department of Veterans' Affairs for the purpose of payment for care provided to authorized personnel treated in that particular facility; and further wherein the funds provided would otherwise be utilized for the same purpose in a nonmilitary treatment facility.''.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL CARE FOR MEMBERS AND CERTAIN FORMER MEMBERS.
Section 1074(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(2) If a member or former member eligible for care under paragraph (1) is also eligible for health insurance payments under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes), the member or former member shall be entitled to and given medical and dental care in any medical facility of any uniformed service.
The facility of the uniformed service that provides such care will recover the cost for the care provided from medicare subvention funding by direct billing of the appropriate program administering the health insurance program defined under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) and appropriate for the particular recipient of the care.
Medicare subvention funding payments to the providing military treatment facility will be at fixed rates approved by the President.
Payments received by a military treatment facility or Department of Veterans' Affairs facility for medical services provided, whether the funds originated as Department of Defense appropriated funds or from medicare subvention funding shall be deposited to the credit of the operating and maintenance fund of the particular medical facility that provided the service, and as direct reimbursement for services rendered; without any requirement of equal or reciprocal reduction of the operating and maintenance budget of the providing facility.''.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL CARE FOR DEPENDENTS.
Section 1076(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking out paragraph (1) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new paragraph: ``(1) A dependent described in paragraph (2) is entitled, upon request, to the medical and dental care prescribed by section 1077 of this title in facilities of the uniformed services.
If the dependent is also entitled to hospital insurance benefits under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes), then the facility of the uniformed service will still provide authorized care, but will recover the cost for providing the care from medicare subvention funding by direct billing of the appropriate program administering the health insurance program defined under that Act, and appropriate for the particular recipient of the care.
Medicare subvention funding payments to the providing military treatment facility will be at fixed rates approved by the President; and will be used, deposited, and credited as specified in section 1074 of this title.''
CONFORMING AMENDMENT REGARDING MEDICARE SUBVENTION FUNDING.
Section 1086(d) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) A covered beneficiary who is entitled to hospital insurance benefits under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes), and who elects to receive care in a military treatment facility, as authorized by section 1076 of this title, may do so.
The insurance benefits of the Social Security Act may then be utilized to reimburse the military treatment facility for the care given, in the manner and rate as specified in sections 1074(b) and 1076(a)(1).''.
COLLECTION FROM THIRD-PARTY PAYERS.
Section 1095 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking out subsection (d) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Collection may be made from any third-party payer, including the appropriate program administering the health insurance program defined under title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) pursuant to medicare subvention funding.''.
DETERMINATION OF INABILITY TO PROVIDE MEDICAL AND DENTAL SERVICES.
Section 1076 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking out subsection (c) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new subsection: ``(c) Medical or dental care may be denied to a person who is otherwise eligible for such care at a military treatment facility only if the senior officer-in-charge or commanding officer of the military treatment facility makes a determination that the treatment facility, or subunit thereof, cannot provide the particular care required.
This determination may be made, if, and only if, that particular military treatment facility, or subunit thereof, does not, at that particular time, have space or facilities available to provide the treatment due solely to the then actual existing requirements to utilize all existing space or facilities for active duty members; or does not, at that particular time, and under any circumstances, provide the type of care required.
Authority to make such determination may not be delegated.
The administering Secretary will be advised immediately in all instances where a determination to deny treatment, under this subsection, is made, with a verifiable date as to when the restriction will be removed.''.
MEDICARE PROCEDURE FOR PAYMENT OF CLAIMS OF PROVIDERS OF SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1835 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395n) is amended by striking out subsection (d) and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``(d) Payments to Federal Provider of Services or Other Federal Agencies Prohibited.--Subject to sections 1880, 1890, and 1890A, no payment may be made under this part (42 United States Code 1395j et sequentes) to any Federal provider of services or other Federal agency, except a provider of services which the Secretary determines is providing services to the public generally as a community institution or agency; and no such payment may be made to any provider of services or other person for any item or service which such person or persons is obligated by a law of, or a contract with, the United States to render at public expense.''.
Exception for Military and Veterans Treatment Facilities.-- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by inserting after section 1889 the following: ``SEC.
Eligibility for Payments; Conditions and Requirements.--A military treatment facility operated by a uniformed service of the Department of Defense shall be eligible for payments under this title notwithstanding sections 1814(c) and 1835(d) if and for so long as that military treatment facility meets all of the conditions and requirements for such payments which are applicable to hospitals and skilled nursing facilities under this title.
Definition.--Such payments under this section shall be referred to as medicare subvention funding, as that term is defined in section 1072(6) of title 10, United States Code.
DEPARTMENTS OF VETERANS AFFAIRS MEDICAL TREATMENT FACILITY.
Eligibility for Payments; Conditions and Requirements.--A medical treatment facility operated by the Department of Veterans Affairs shall be eligible for payments under this title notwithstanding sections 1814(c) and 1835(d) if and for so long as that medical treatment facility meets all of the conditions and requirements for such payments which are applicable to hospitals and skilled nursing facilities under this title.
Definition.--Such payments under this section shall be referred to as medicare subvention funding, as that term is defined in section 1072(6) of title 10, United States Code.