This Act may be cited as the ``Grassland Reserve Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Vast grassland once provided critical habitat for complex plant and animal communities throughout much of North America.
Today, grassland areas have been largely converted to other uses, threatening and eliminating plant and animal communities unique to North America.
A significant portion of the remaining grassland is on working ranches.
Ranchers have an economic interest in preserving the remaining grassland as forage for their livestock.
Many ranchers are also concerned about losing the open spaces and ``big sky'' central to the ranching way of life.
Apart from the loss of grassland, ranches themselves have steadily disappeared through the years and are likely to disappear at a faster rate in the immediate decade as a generation of ranchers reach retirement age.
Ranch land provides important open-space buffers for animal and plant habitat.
Ranching forms the economic backbone for much of the rural area of the western United States.
Currently, there are no Federal programs that conserve grassland, ranch land, or other land with comparable high resource value, other than wetland, on a national scale.
A grassland reserve program would provide important economic assistance to ranchers and other agricultural producers who may be struggling financially and who may voluntarily decide that participating in the program would be to their advantage.
Chapter 1 of subtitle D of title XII of the Food Security Act of 1985 (16 United States Code 3830 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter: ``Subchapter D--Grassland Reserve Program ``SEC.
Establishment.--The Secretary, acting through the Natural Resource Conservation Service, shall establish a grassland reserve program (referred to in this subchapter as the `program') to assist owners in restoring and conserving eligible land described in subsection (c).
Enrollment Conditions.-- ``(1) Maximum enrollment.--The total number of acres enrolled in the program shall not exceed 1,000,000 acres.
Methods of enrollment.--The Secretary shall enroll in the program for a willing owner not less than 100 contiguous acres of land west of the 90th meridian or not less than 50 contiguous acres of land east of the 90th meridian through-- ``(A) permanent easements or 30-year easements; or ``(B) in a State that imposes a maximum duration for such an easement, an easement for the maximum duration allowed under State law.
Eligible Land.--Land shall be eligible to be enrolled in the program if the Secretary determines that the land is-- ``(1) natural grass or shrubland; ``(2) land that-- ``(A) is located in an area that has been historically dominated by natural grass or shrubland; and ``(B) has potential to serve as habitat for animal or plant populations of significant ecological value if the land is restored to natural grass or shrubland; or ``(3) land that is incidental to land described in paragraph (1) or (2), if that incidental land is determined by the Secretary to be necessary for the efficient administration of the easement.
Requirements of Landowner.--To be eligible to enroll land in the program, the owner of the land shall-- ``(1) grant an easement that runs with the land to the Secretary; ``(2) create and record an appropriate deed restriction in accordance with applicable State law to reflect the easement; ``(3) provide a written statement of consent to the easement signed by persons holding a security interest or any vested interest in the land; ``(4) provide proof of unencumbered title to the underlying fee interest in the land that is the subject of the easement; ``(5) agree to comply with the terms of the easement and related restoration agreements; and ``(6) agree to the permanent retirement of any existing cropland base and allotment history for the land under any program administered by the Secretary.
Terms of Easement.--An easement under subsection (a) shall-- ``(1) permit-- ``(A) common grazing practices on the land in a manner that is consistent with maintaining the viability of natural grass and shrub species indigenous to that locality; ``(B) haying, mowing, or haying for seed production, except that such uses shall not be permitted until after the end of the nesting season for birds in the local area which are in significant decline or are conserved pursuant to State or Federal law, as determined by the Natural Resources Conservation Service State conservationist; and ``(C) construction of fire breaks and fences, including placement of the posts necessary for fences; ``(2) prohibit-- ``(A) the production of row-crops, fruit trees, vineyards, or any other agricultural commodity that requires breaking the soil surface; and ``(B) the conduct of any other activities that would disturb the surface of the land covered by the easement, including-- ``(i) plowing; and ``(ii) disking; and ``(3) include such additional provisions as the Secretary determines are appropriate to carry out or facilitate the administration of this subchapter.
Ranking Easement Applications.-- ``(1) Establishment of criteria.--The Secretary, in conjunction with State technical committees, shall establish criteria to evaluate and rank applications for easements under this subchapter.
Emphasis.--In establishing the criteria, the Secretary shall emphasize support for native grass and shrubland, grazing operations, and plant and animal biodiversity.
Restoration Agreements.--The Secretary shall prescribe the terms by which grassland that is subject to an easement under the program shall be restored.
The agreement shall include duties of the land owner and the Secretary, including the Federal share of restoration payments and technical assistance.
Violations.-- ``(1) In general.--On the violation of the terms or conditions of an easement or restoration agreement entered into under this section-- ``(A) the easement shall remain in force; and ``(B) the Secretary may require the owner to refund all or part of any payments received by the owner under this subchapter, with interest on the payments as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Periodic inspections.--The Secretary shall conduct periodic inspections of land subject to easements under this subchapter to ensure that the terms of the easements and restoration agreements are being met, after providing the landowner adequate notice of inspections.
The Secretary may not prohibit the landowner or a representative of the landowner from being present during inspections.
In General.--In return for the granting of an easement by an owner under this subchapter, the Secretary shall make easement payments and payments of the Federal share of restoration and provide technical assistance to the owner in accordance with this section.
Easement Payments.-- ``(1) In general.--In return for the granting of an easement by an owner under this subchapter, the Secretary shall make easement payments to the owner in an amount equal to-- ``(A) in the case of a permanent easement, the fair market value of the land less the grazing value of the land encumbered by the easement; and ``(B) in the case of a 30-year easement or an easement for the maximum duration allowed under applicable State law, 30 percent of the fair market value of the land less the grazing value of the land for the period that the land is encumbered by the easement.
Payment schedule.--Easement payments may be provided in not less than one payment nor more than 10 annual payments of equal or unequal amount, as agreed to by the Secretary and the owner.
Federal Share of Restoration.--The Secretary shall make payments to the owner of not more than 75 percent of the costs of carrying out measures and practices necessary to restore grassland functions and values.
Technical Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall provide owners with technical assistance to execute easement documents and restore the grassland.
Reimbursement by commodity credit corporation.--The Commodity Credit Corporation shall reimburse the Secretary, acting through the Natural Resources Conservation Service, for not more than 10 percent of the cost of acquisition of easement and the Federal share of the restoration payments obligated for that fiscal year.
Payments to Others.--If an owner who is entitled to a payment under this subchapter dies, becomes incompetent, is otherwise unable to receive the payment, or is succeeded by another person who renders or completes the required performance, the Secretary shall make the payment, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary and without regard to any other provision of law, in such manner as the Secretary determines is fair and reasonable in light of all the circumstances.
Other Payments.--Easement payments received by an owner under this subchapter shall be in addition to, and not affect, the total amount of payments that the owner is otherwise eligible to receive under other Federal laws.
Delegation to Private Organizations or State Agencies.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall permit a private conservation or land trust organization or a State agency to hold and enforce an easement under this subchapter, in lieu of the Secretary, if-- ``(A) the Secretary determines that granting such permission is likely to promote grassland conservation; and ``(B) the landowner agrees to allow the private conservation or land trust organization or a State agency to hold and enforce the easement.
Application.--An organization that desires to hold an easement under this subchapter shall apply to the Secretary for approval.
Approval by secretary.--The Secretary shall approve an organization under this subchapter that is constituted for conservation or ranching purposes and is competent to administer grassland easements.
Reassignment.--If an organization holding an easement on land under this subchapter terminates-- ``(A) the owner of the land shall reassign the easement to another organization described in paragraph (1) or to the Secretary; and ``(B) the owner and the new organization shall notify the Secretary in writing that a reassignment for termination has been made.
Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this subchapter.''.
Section 1241(a)(2) of the Food Security Act of 1985 (16 United States Code 3841(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``subchapter C'' and inserting ``subchapters C and D''.