This Act may be cited as the ``Legal Reform Commission Act of 1998''.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Legal Reform Commission (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members of whom-- (A) one shall be appointed by the President; (B) one shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate; (C) one shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (D) two shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate; (E) two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate; (F) two shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the House of Representatives; and (G) two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Chairman and vice chairman.--The members of the Commission shall select a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from the members.
Prohibition.-- (A) Chairman.--The Chairman of the Commission may not be an employee or former employee of the Federal Government.
Members.--No member of the Commission may be a member or former member of the Bar of any State.
Date.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made no later than June 1, 1998.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--No later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to the reform and simplification of the United States legal system.
Matters studied.--The matters studied by the Commission shall include reform of-- (A) Federal law; (B) State law; (C) criminal law; (D) civil law; (E) judicial, trial, and appellate processes; (F) the Federal Rules of Evidence; (G) the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure; and (H) the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.
Recommendations.--The Commission shall develop recommendations on all matters studied under subsection (a) relating to reform of the United States legal system.
Report.--No later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit a report to the President and Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairman of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 3.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to the Commission to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.