This Act may be cited as the ``Parental Involvement Enhancement Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Research indicates that, regardless of economic, ethnic, or cultural background, parental involvement in a child's education is a major factor in determining success in school.
Parental involvement in a child's education contributes to such positive outcomes as improved grades and test scores, higher expectations for student achievement, better school attendance, improved rates of homework completion and graduation from secondary schools, decreased violence and substance abuse, and higher rates of graduation from and enrollment in postsecondary schools.
According to the Department of Education study entitled ``Strong Families, Strong Schools'', in elementary schools where parents were actively involved, the average fourth grade reading scores were 17 points above the national average.
According to the National Commission on Children, more than 70 percent of students ages 10 to 13, and more than 50 percent of students ages 14 to 17, would like to talk to their parents more about school and schoolwork.
Ninety-five percent of parents strongly agree that parental involvement is as important a factor as quality of teachers in ensuring student success in school, and 69 percent of parents believe that in order to improve public schools, more opportunities for parental involvement are necessary.
Of the 800 parents questioned under the National Parent Teacher Association's 1998 survey of public school parents, more than half stated that low levels of parental involvement and the inability of schools to keep parents informed are serious problems.
Teachers rank strengthening parental roles in their children's education as an important issue that should receive the highest priority in the formulation of public education policy over the next few years.
In General.--Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART G--PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT ``SEC.
PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--In accordance with this section, the Secretary may make grants to elementary schools or secondary schools to promote the involvement of parents in the education of their children.
Use of Funds.--Each school receiving a grant under this section may use the proceeds of such grant only-- ``(1) for educational or outreach materials or resources designed to increase parental involvement in their children's education; or ``(2) to pay the salary or benefits of an individual who is an eligible parent liaison as described in subsection (c).
Eligible Parent Liaisons.--For the purposes of this section, an individual shall be an eligible parent liaison if the individual is employed by the school to be a parent liaison and meets each of the following criteria: ``(1) The individual holds a degree in social work, counseling, psychology, human resources, or any other field that the school considers relevant to performing the functions described in paragraph (3).
The individual is bilingual or multilingual, if appropriate for the needs of the school.
The individual is responsible for-- ``(A) facilitating communication between the school's teachers and the parents of the school's students, especially parents who have limited English proficiency; ``(B) if national or State tests or assessments are conducted at the school, explaining to such parents how such tests or assessments work and what the results mean; and ``(C) if the school provides report cards, explaining to such parents what such report cards mean.
The individual maintains a flexible schedule that allows the individual to perform the functions described in paragraph (3) while accommodating the needs of working parents.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--Each school seeking a grant under this section shall submit to the Secretary an application that includes-- ``(A) a description of the school's student population, including information on the socioeconomic status and the English-speaking ability of the students; ``(B) a plan describing how the school seeks to increase parental involvement at the school, including information on-- ``(i) the number of eligible parent liaisons the school plans to employ; ``(ii) the activities the school plans to conduct to increase parental involvement; and ``(iii) the materials or resources that the school plans to acquire to increase parental involvement; and ``(C) a description of how the school will evaluate the materials and resources acquired, and the success of the activities carried out, with the grant.
Parental input.--Each application submitted under this paragraph (including the plan described in paragraph (1)(B)) shall be developed with the input of parents of students at the school submitting the application.
Selection Criteria.--In making grants under this section, the Secretary shall give preference-- ``(1) to schools that have a large percentage of students whose parents have limited English proficiency; and ``(2) to schools at which the involvement of parents in the education of their children has traditionally been low.
Parental Involvement in Hiring Decisions.--As a condition of the receipt of funds made available under this section, the Secretary shall require that each school receiving such funds involve each of the following when making a hiring decision with respect to an eligible parent liaison hired with such funds: ``(1) The parents of the students at the school.
Any local parent organization active in the affairs of the school.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 1002 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6302) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Parental Involvement.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out part G $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.