This Act may be cited as the ``National Junior College for Deaf and Blind at the Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind Act''.
Congress finds as follows: (1) The United States has low rates of college completion by high school graduates who are deaf or blind.
Deaf or blind students who attend college have a dropout rate in the first 2 years of college that is approximately 4 times higher than the dropout rate of hearing and sighted students.
The United States has a shortage of teachers and service professionals trained at the associate degree or certificate level to provide services to individuals who are deaf or blind.
The United States has very limited distance learning opportunities for individuals who are deaf or blind.
NATIONAL JUNIOR COLLEGE FOR DEAF AND BLIND.
Establishment.--Title I of the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986 (20 United States Code 4301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART C--NATIONAL JUNIOR COLLEGE FOR DEAF AND BLIND ``SEC.
``The purposes of this part are the following: ``(1) Easing the transition from high school to college for students who are deaf or blind.
Increasing the number of deaf or blind individuals attending and completing college.
Providing a modern distance learning program and a residential facility for postsecondary technical training and education for individuals who are deaf or blind.
Preparing individuals who are deaf or blind for successful employment.
Training individuals to provide instructional, professional, and other services to individuals who are deaf and blind.
General Authority.--The Secretary shall seek to enter into, not later than 1 year after the enactment of the National Junior College for Deaf and Blind at the Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind Act, an agreement with the Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind for the establishment and operation (including construction and provision of equipment) of the National Junior College for Deaf and Blind.
National Mission Activities.--The agreement shall provide the national mission activities of NJCDB, including the following: ``(1) Maintenance and operation of exemplary postsecondary education programs, projects, and activities for the primary purpose of developing, evaluating, and disseminating innovative curriculums, instructional techniques and strategies, and materials that can be used in various educational environments to serve individuals who are deaf or blind.
Addressing the specific educational, technological, and special support needs of students who are deaf or blind.
Provisions of Agreement.--The agreement shall-- ``(1) provide that Federal funds appropriated for the benefit of NJCDB be used in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Act and such agreement; ``(2) provide that NJCDB will make an annual report to the Secretary on its operations and the national mission activities of its postsecondary education programs; ``(3) provide that in the design and construction of any facilities, maximum attention will be given to innovative auditory and visual devices and installations appropriate for the educational functions of such facilities; and ``(4) establish a policy of outreach and recruitment to employ and advance employment of individuals with disabilities, particularly individuals who are deaf or blind, at NJCDB.
Modification.--The Secretary and AIDB may periodically modify the agreement as determined to be necessary by the Secretary or AIDB.
Scholarship Program.-- ``(1) Development.--The agreement shall provide for the development of a scholarship program, under which NJCDB awards scholarships to students enrolled in its programs.
Use of funds.--Funds awarded as scholarships under this section shall be used to assist in paying the costs of attending NJCDB, including tuition, fees, training courses, study, and room and board.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be necessary thereafter to carry out this subsection.
Provisions Regarding NTID.--If the Secretary enters into an agreement with AIDB under this section, the provisions of sections 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, and 210 shall apply to NJCDB and AIDB in the same manner as such provisions apply to NTID and the institution of higher education with which the Secretary has an agreement under section 112, respectively, except as follows: ``(1) References to individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing shall be construed as references to individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing, blind, or of low vision.
NJCDB shall develop the policies described in section 203(c)(2)(A) not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of the National Junior College for Deaf and Blind at the Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind Act.
For purposes of section 210, references to deafness related research, development, and demonstration activities shall be construed as references to deafness or blindness related research, development, and demonstration activities.''.
Definitions.--Section 201 of the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986 (20 United States Code 4351) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(8) The term `AIDB' means the Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind.
The term `NJCDB' means the National Junior College for Deaf and Blind.