This Act may be cited as the ``Universal Classroom Breakfast Expansion Act''.
GRANT PROGRAM FOR UNIVERSAL FREE CLASSROOM BREAKFAST PROGRAMS.
Establishment of Grant Program.--From the amount appropriated under subsection (h), the Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a program under which the Secretary shall make grants, on a competitive basis, to State agencies to award subgrants to qualifying schools to establish a universal free breakfast program in accordance with subsection (e).
Grant Amount.--A grant awarded under this Act to a State agency may not exceed an amount equal to 10 percent of the total amount appropriated under subsection (h) for a fiscal year.
State Agency Application.--To receive a grant under this Act, a State agency shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
State Agency Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--A State agency receiving a grant under this Act shall use funds made available under the grant to-- (A) award subgrants in accordance with subsection (e) to qualifying schools to implement a universal free breakfast program described in paragraph (4)(B) of such subsection; (B) provide technical assistance to assist such schools in implementing the program; and (C) conduct the targeted outreach described in paragraph (2).
Targeted outreach.--A State agency receiving a grant under this Act shall provide outreach to qualifying schools with the highest percentage of students who are eligible for free and reduced-price lunches under the school lunch program established under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et sequentes), as compared to other qualifying schools, to facilitate the participation of such schools in the subgrant program established under this Act.
Limitation on use of funds.--A State agency receiving a grant under this Act may not use more than 5 percent of the funds made available under the grant to provide-- (A) the technical assistance described in paragraph (1)(B); and (B) the targeted outreach described in paragraph (2).
Subgrants to Qualifying Schools.-- (1) Priority.--A State agency receiving a grant under this Act shall award subgrants to qualifying schools.
In awarding such subgrants, a State agency shall give priority to qualifying schools in which 75 percent or more of the students are eligible for free or reduced-price school lunches under the school lunch program established under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et sequentes).
Subgrant amount.--A subgrant under this Act may not be awarded to a qualifying school in an amount that exceeds $10,000 for any fiscal year.
Duration.--A subgrant under this Act shall be awarded to a qualifying school for a period of not more than 2 fiscal years.
Qualifying school.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``qualifying school'' means-- (A) a school providing elementary or secondary education in which at least 40 percent of students are eligible for free or reduced-price school lunches under the school lunch program established under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et seq.
); and (B) that agrees to-- (i) use the funds received under this Act to establish a program at such school-- (I) to serve all students enrolled in the school, for a minimum period of 3 school years, breakfast at no charge under the school breakfast program established under section 4 the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1773); and (II) that allows the students to eat such breakfast in the classroom after the start of the school day; and (ii) pay, from sources other than Federal funds, for the costs of serving all breakfasts at no charge that are in excess of the value of assistance received pursuant to the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1771 et sequentes) with respect to the number of breakfasts served during the period.
School application.--To receive a subgrant under this Act, a qualifying school shall submit to the State agency located in the same State as the school an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the State agency may require.
Use of funds by qualifying schools.--A qualifying school receiving a subgrant under this Act shall use funds available under such subgrant to cover the costs of the materials and assistance necessary to establish the program described in paragraph (4)(B), including the costs with respect to-- (A) training and technical assistance for school staff regarding the program; (B) promotional materials for students and families to encourage students to participate in the program; and (C) equipment needed to service breakfast to students outside the cafeteria and in the classroom under such program.
Report to Congress.--The Secretary, in consultation with local educational agencies, State educational agencies, and qualifying schools that receive grants or subgrants pursuant to this Act, shall submit to Congress an annual report describing-- (1) how the funds were used; and (2) the impact on-- (A) participation in the school breakfast program established under section 4 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1773); and (B) the educational environment.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit a qualifying school that receives special assistance payments under subparagraph (C), (D), or (E) of section 11 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1759a) from receiving a subgrant under this Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 to carry out this Act for fiscal year 2011 and 2012.
Definition.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``State agency'' means a State agency that administers child nutrition programs under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et sequentes) and the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1771 et sequentes).