This Act eliminates the marriage penalty.
COMBINED RETURN TO WHICH UNMARRIED RATES APPLY.
In General.--Subpart B of part II of subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to income tax returns) is amended by inserting after section 6013 the following new section: ``SEC.
COMBINED RETURN WITH SEPARATE RATES.
General Rule.--A husband and wife may make a combined return of income taxes under subtitle A under which-- ``(1) a separate taxable income is determined for each spouse by applying the rules provided in this section, and ``(2) the tax imposed by section 1 is the aggregate amount resulting from applying the separate rates set forth in section 1(c) to each such taxable income.
Treatment of Income.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) earned income (within the meaning of section 911(d)), and any income received as a pension or annuity which arises from an employer-employee relationship, shall be treated as the income of the spouse who rendered the services, and ``(2) income from property shall be divided between the spouses in accordance with their respective ownership rights in such property.
Treatment of Deductions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the deductions allowed by section 62(a) shall be allowed to the spouse treated as having the income to which such deductions relate, ``(2) the deduction for retirement savings described in paragraph (7) of section 62(a) shall be allowed to the spouse for whose benefit the savings are maintained, ``(3) the deduction for alimony described in paragraph (10) of section 62(a) shall be allowed to the spouse who has the liability to pay the alimony, ``(4) the deduction referred to in paragraph (16) of section 62(a) (relating to contributions to medical savings accounts) shall be allowed to the spouse with respect to whose employment or self-employment such account relates, ``(5) the deductions allowable by section 151 (relating to personal exemptions) shall be determined by requiring each spouse to claim 1 personal exemption and by allocating the personal exemptions under section 151(c) (relating to dependents) as provided in paragraph (7) or in such other manner as the spouses agree, ``(6) section 63 shall be applied as if such spouses were not married, and ``(7) each spouse's share of all other deductions shall be determined by multiplying the aggregate amount thereof by the fraction-- ``(A) the numerator of which is such spouse's adjusted gross income, and ``(B) the denominator of which is the combined adjusted gross incomes of the 2 spouses.
Any fraction determined under paragraph (7) shall be rounded to the nearest percentage point.
Treatment of Credits.--Credits shall be determined (and applied against the joint liability of the couple for tax) as if the spouses had filed a joint return.
Treatment as Joint Return.--Except as otherwise provided in this section or in the regulations prescribed hereunder, for purposes of this title (other than sections 1 and 63(c)) a combined return under this section shall be treated as a joint return.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out this section.''.
Unmarried Rate Made Applicable.--So much of subsection (c) of section 1 of such Code as precedes the table is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Separate or Unmarried Return Rate.--There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of every individual (other than a married individual (as defined in section 7703) filing a joint return or a separate return, a surviving spouse as defined in section 2(a), or a head of household as defined in section 2(b)) a tax determined in accordance with the following table:''.
Basic Standard Deduction for Unmarried Individuals Made Applicable.--Subparagraph (C) of section 63(c)(2) of such Code is amended by striking all that follows the dollar amount and inserting ``in the case of an individual who is not-- ``(i) a married individual filing a joint return or a separate return, ``(ii) a surviving spouse, or ``(iii) a head of household, or''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part II of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 6013 the following: ``Sec.
Combined return with separate rates.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.