This Act may be cited as the ``Cold War Victory Medal Act''.
In General.--Congress finds the following: (1) The United States Armed Forces engaged the forces of international communism from September 2, 1945, the end of World War II, through December 26, 1991, the date of the disintegration of the former Soviet Union.
During that extended period, the United States relied for the security of the Nation and its interests on the performance by the Armed Forces of their obligation to serve and defend the United States.
The defeat of the former Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies constituted the greatest success of the Armed Forces since the end of World War II.
Many members of the Armed Forces who served the Nation during the prolonged period of the Cold War have not received the tangible recognition that they are due for that service.
Reaffirmation of Prior Findings.--Congress reaffirms the findings in section 1084 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998 (Public Law 105-85; 10 United States Code note prec.
1121; 111 United States Statutes at Large 1919-1920), which commended members of the Armed Forces and Government civilian personnel who served during the Cold War, and notes that that section provided for the issuance of a certificate of recognition for those members and personnel.
COLD WAR VICTORY MEDAL.
Authority.--Chapter 57 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Cold War Victory Medal ``(a) Medal Authorized.--The Secretary concerned shall issue a service medal, to be known as the `Cold War Victory Medal', to persons eligible to receive the medal under subsection (b).
The Cold War Victory Medal shall be of an appropriate design approved by the Secretary of Defense, with ribbons, lapel pins, and other appurtenances.
Eligible Persons.--The following persons are eligible to receive a Cold War Victory Medal: ``(1) A person who-- ``(A) performed active duty or inactive duty training as an enlisted member during the Cold War; ``(B) completed the person's initial term of enlistment or, if discharged before completion of such initial term of enlistment, was honorably discharged after completion of not less than 180 days of service on active duty; and ``(C) has not received a discharge less favorable than an honorable discharge or a release from active duty with a characterization of service less favorable than honorable.
A person who-- ``(A) performed active duty or inactive duty training as a commissioned officer or warrant officer during the Cold War; ``(B) completed the person's initial service obligation as an officer or, if discharged or separated before completion of such initial service obligation, was honorably discharged after completion of not less than 180 days of service on active duty; and ``(C) has not been released from active duty with a characterization of service less favorable than honorable and has not received discharge or separation less favorable than an honorable discharge.
One Medal Authorized.--Not more than one Cold War Victory Medal may be issued to or on behalf of any person described in subsection (b).
Issuance to Representative of Deceased.--If a person described in subsection (b) dies before being issued a Cold War Victory Medal, the medal shall be presented to the person's representative, as designated by the Secretary concerned.
Replacement.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary concerned, a Cold War Victory Medal that is lost, destroyed, or rendered unfit for use without fault or neglect on the part of the person to whom it was issued may be replaced without charge.
Application for Medal.--The Secretary concerned shall issue a Cold War Victory Medal to or on behalf of a person described in subsection (b) upon receipt by the Secretary concerned of an application for such medal, submitted in accordance with such regulations as the Secretary prescribes.
Uniform Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that regulations prescribed under this section by the Secretaries of the military departments are uniform so far as is practicable.
Definition.--In this section, the term `Cold War' means the period beginning on September 2, 1945, and ending on December 26, 1991.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1134.
Cold War Victory Medal.