FEDERAL CONTRACTS TO REQUIRE COMPLIANCE WITH STATE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION LAWS.
In General.--(1) Title III of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 251 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 303G (41 United States Code 253g) the following new section: ``SEC.
COMPLIANCE WITH STATE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION LAWS.
Compliance Required.--Each contract for the purchase of property or services made by an executive agency shall provide that the prime contractor (and any subcontractor performing work on the contract under the prime contractor) shall guarantee throughout the performance of work under the contract to comply with the workmen's compensation law of each State in which work under the contract will be performed.
Termination of Work on Failure to Demonstrate Compliance.-- Each such contract shall contain the further provision that in the event the contracting officer determines that the prime contractor (or any subcontractor under the contract) is not in compliance with the workmen's compensation laws of any State within which work under the contract is being carried out, the Government may terminate the right of the offending contractor or subcontractor to proceed with the work or such part of the work being carried out in a State in which compliance with the workmen's compensation laws is not demonstrated.
Notice of such termination shall be provided in writing to the offending contractor or subcontractor.
If, within a reasonable time, the offending contractor or subcontractor has not demonstrated compliance with the workmen's compensation laws of such State, including payment of any fines or penalties assessed for failure to carry workmen's compensation insurance, the Government may complete the work.
The contractor and any sureties of the contractor shall be liable to the Government for any excess costs occasioned the Government as a result of the termination.
Exceptions.--This section shall not apply in the case of contracts covered by the Defense Base Act (42 United States Code 1651 et sequentes) or the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act (33 United States Code 901 et seq.).
Suspension of Section.--In the event of a national emergency, the President may suspend operation of this section.''.
The table of contents at the beginning of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 303G the following new item: ``Sec.
Compliance with State workmen's compensation laws.''.
Special Rule for Defense Contracts.--(1) Chapter 137 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Compliance with State workmen's compensation laws.
Compliance Required.--Each contract for the purchase of property or services made by the head of an agency shall provide that the prime contractor (and any subcontractor performing work on the contract under the prime contractor) shall guarantee throughout the performance of work under the contract to comply with the workmen's compensation law of each State in which work under the contract will be performed.
Termination of Work on Failure to Demonstrate Compliance.-- Each such contract shall contain the further provision that in the event the contracting officer determines that the prime contractor (or any subcontractor under the contract) is not in compliance with the workmen's compensation laws of any State within which work under the contract is being carried out, the head of the agency concerned may terminate the right of the offending contractor or subcontractor to proceed with the work or such part of the work being carried out in a State in which compliance with the workmen's compensation laws is not demonstrated.
Notice of such termination shall be provided in writing to the offending contractor or subcontractor.
If, within a reasonable time, the offending contractor or subcontractor has not demonstrated compliance with the workmen's compensation laws of such State, including payment of any fines or penalties assessed for failure to carry workmen's compensation insurance, the head of the agency concerned may complete the work.
The contractor and any sureties of the contractor shall be liable to the Government for any excess costs occasioned the Government as a result of the termination.
Exceptions.--This section shall not apply in the case of contracts covered by the Defense Base Act (42 United States Code 1651 et sequentes).
Suspension of Section.--In the event of a national emergency, the President may suspend operation of this section.''.
The table of contents at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``2332.
Compliance with State workmen's compensation laws.''.
Application of Amendments.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to Federal contracts entered into after the date of the enactment of this Act.