This Act may be cited as the ``International Conflicts of Concern Act''.
IDENTIFICATION OF COUNTRIES OF CONFLICT CONCERN.
Identification.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to Congress a report that identifies each country the government of which or anti-government forces in which the President believes, based on all information available to the President, is allowing one or more foreign terrorist organizations to engage in armed conflict that is occurring in such country.
Updates.--The President shall update the report required under subsection (a)-- (1) as new information becomes available; and (2) not less frequently than semi-annually.
Form.--The report required under subsection (a) and the updates required under subsection (b) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may contain a classified annex if necessary.
DESIGNATION OF COUNTRIES OF CONFLICT CONCERN.
Designation.-- (1) In general.--The President shall designate a country as a ``Country of Conflict Concern'' if the President determines that-- (A) the government of such country or anti- government forces in the country is allowing one or more foreign terrorist organizations to engage in armed conflict that is occurring in such country as identified in the report required under section 2(a) or any update to the report required under section 2(b); and (B) it is in the national security interest of the United States to restrict travel by any United States national to such country and to restrict material support provided by United States nationals to entities that are engaged in armed conflict in such country.
Initial designation.--Syria shall be deemed to have been designated by the President under paragraph (1) as of the date of the enactment of this Act and the President is not required to notify Congress of such designation of Syria under subsection (b).
Report on Designation.--Upon designating a country as a Country of Conflict Concern under subsection (a), the President shall submit to Congress a report notifying Congress of the designation of the country.
Licensing Requirement.-- (1) In general.--With respect to any country designated as a Country of Conflict Concern under subsection (a), the President shall exercise the authorities of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1705 et sequentes) without regard to section 202 of such Act to require a United States national to obtain a license-- (A) to travel to such country; or (B) to provide material support to entities that are engaged in armed conflict in such country.
Exception.--The requirement to obtain a license under paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to United States national who is a full-time officer or employee of the United States Government for purposes of carrying out official business of the United States Government.
Penalties.--The penalties provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1705) shall apply to a person who violates paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (c), or a regulation prescribed under this Act, to the same extent that such penalties apply to a person that commits an unlawful act described in section 206(a) of that Act (50 United States Code 1705(a)).
Termination of Designation.--The designation of a country as a Country of Conflict Concern under subsection (a) shall terminate on the date on which the President submits to Congress a report that contains-- (1) a determination and certification that subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1) (as the case may be), or both, no longer applies with respect to the country; and (2) a justification for the determination and certification.
The President is authorized to promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act, including the promulgation of such regulations under the authority of section 205 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1704).
In this Act: (1) Foreign terrorist organization.--The term ``foreign terrorist organization'' means any organization so designated by the Secretary of State under section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1189).
United states national.--The term ``United States national'' means-- (A) a national of the United States (as defined in section 101(a)(22) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(22)); or (B) an alien who is lawfully present in the United States.