This Act may be cited as the ``Sportfishing and Boating Improvement Act of 1997''.
AMENDMENT OF 1950 ACT.
Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision of the 1950 Act, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide that the United States shall aid the States in fish restoration and management projects, and for other purposes,'' approved August 9, 1950 (16 United States Code 777 et sequentes), popularly known as the Federal Aid in Fish Restoration Act.
OUTREACH AND COMMUNICATIONS PROGRAMS.
Definitions.--Section 2 of the 1950 Act (16 United States Code 777a) is amended-- (1) by indenting the left margin of so much of the text as precedes ``(a)'' by 2 ems; (2) by inserting ``For purposes of this Act--'' after the section caption; (3) by striking ``For the purpose of this Act the'' in the first paragraph and inserting ``(1) the''; (4) by indenting the left margin of so much of the text as follows ``include--'' by 4 ems; (5) by striking ``(a)'', ``(b)'', ``(c)'', and ``(d)'' and inserting ``(A)'', ``(B)'', ``(C)'', and ``(D)'', respectively; (6) by striking ``department.''
and inserting ``department;''; and (7) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(2) the term `outreach and communications program' means a program to improve communications with anglers, boaters, and the general public regarding angling and boating opportunities, to reduce barriers to participation in these activities, to advance adoption of sound fishing and boating practices, to promote conservation and the responsible use of the nation's aquatic resources, and to further safety in fishing and boating; and ``(3) the term `aquatic resource education program' means a program designed to enhance the public's understanding of aquatic resources and sport-fishing, and to promote the development of responsible attitudes and ethics toward the aquatic environment.''.
Increase in State Allocation.--Section 8 of the 1950 Act (16 United States Code 777g) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b) by striking ``12\1/2\ per centum'' each place it appears and inserting ``15 percent''; (2) in subsection (c) by striking ``10 per centum'' and inserting ``15 percent''; (3) in subsection (c) by inserting ``and communications'' after ``outreach''; and (4) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (f); and by inserting after subsection (c) the following: ``(d) National Outreach and Communications Program.-- ``(1) Implementation.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of the Sportfishing and Boating Improvement Act of 1997, the Secretary of the Interior shall develop and implement, in cooperation and consultation with the Sport Fishing and Boating Partnership Council, a national plan for outreach and communications.
Content.--The plan shall provide-- ``(A) guidance, including guidance on the development of an administrative process and funding priorities, for outreach and communications programs; and ``(B) for the establishment of a national program.
Secretary may match or fund programs.--Under the plan, the Secretary may-- ``(A) make grants to any State or private entity to pay all or any portion of the cost of carrying out any outreach or communications program under the plan; or ``(B) contract with States or private entities to carry out such a program.
Review.--The plan shall be reviewed periodically, but not less frequently than once every 3 years.
State Outreach and Communications Program.--Within 12 months after the completion of the national plan under subsection (d)(1), a State shall develop a plan for an outreach and communications program and submit it to the Secretary.
In developing the plan, a State shall-- ``(1) review the national plan developed under subsection (d); ``(2) consult with anglers, boaters, the sportfishing and boating industries, and the general public; and ``(3) establish priorities for the State outreach and communications program proposed for implementation.''.
CLEAN VESSEL ACT FUNDING.
Section 4(b) of the 1950 Act (16 United States Code 777c(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Use of Balance After Distribution.-- ``(1) In general.--Of the balance of each annual appropriation remaining after making the distribution under subsection (a), an amount equal to $42,500,000 for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2003 shall be used as follows: ``(A) $15,000,000 shall be transferred to the Secretary of Transportation and shall be expended for State recreational boating safety programs under section 13106(a)(1) of title 46, United States Code.
$10,000,000 shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior for obligation for qualified projects under section 5604(c) of the Clean Vessel Act of 1992 (33 United States Code 1322 note).
$10,000,000 shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior for obligation for qualified projects under section (5)(d) of the Sportfishing and Boating Improvement Act of 1997.
$7,500,000 shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior for obligation for the national outreach and communications program under section 8(d).
The Secretary of the Interior shall publish a detailed accounting of the projects, programs, and activities funded under subparagraph (D) annually in the Federal Register.
No funds available to the Secretary under this subsection may be used to replace funding traditionally provided through general appropriations, nor for any purposes except those purposes authorized by this Act.
Amount remaining unobligated after 3 years.--Amounts available under subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (1) that are unobligated by the Secretary of the Interior after 3 years shall be transferred to the Secretary of Transportation and be expended for State recreational boating safety programs under section 13106(a)(1) of title 46, United States Code.
Carryforward.--Amounts available for the national outreach and education program under paragraph (1)(D) shall remain available for 2 fiscal years after the fiscal year in which the amounts are first available.
Amounts available to the program under that paragraph that are unobligated by the Secretary of the Interior more than 2 years after the first fiscal year in which the amounts are available shall be available to the Secretary, in addition to amounts otherwise available, for apportionment under section 4(d).''.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to provide funds to States for the development and maintenance of public facilities for transient nontrailerable recreational vessels.
Survey.--Section 8 of the 1950 Act (16 United States Code 777g), as amended by section 3, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(g) Surveys.-- ``(1) National framework.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Sportfishing and Boating Improvement Act of 1997, the Secretary, in consultation with the States, shall adopt a national framework for a public boat access needs assessment which may be used by States to conduct surveys to determine the adequacy, number, location, and quality of facilities providing access to recreational waters for all sizes of recreational boats.
State surveys.--Within 18 months after such date of enactment, each State that agrees to conduct a public boat access needs survey following the recommended national framework shall report its findings to the Secretary for use in the development of a comprehensive national recreational boat access needs assessment.
Exception.--Paragraph (2) does not apply to a State if, within 18 months after such date of enactment, the Secretary certifies that the State has developed and is implementing a plan that ensures there are and will be public boat access adequate to meet the needs of recreational boaters on its waters.
Funding.--A State that conducts a public boat access needs survey under paragraph (2) may fund the costs of conducting that assessment out of amounts allocated to it as funding dedicated to motorboat access to recreational waters under subsection (b)(1) of this section.''.
Plan.--Within 6 months after submitting a survey to the Secretary under section 8(g) of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide that the United States shall aid the States in fish restoration and management projects, and for other purposes,'' approved August 9, 1950 (16 United States Code 777g(g)), as added by subsection (b) of this section, a State may develop and submit to the Secretary a plan for the construction, renovation, and maintenance of public facilities, and access to those facilities, for transient nontrailerable recreational vessels to meet the needs of nontrailerable recreational vessels operating on navigable waters in the State.
Grant Program.-- (1) Matching grants.--The Secretary of the Interior shall obligate amounts made available under section 4(b)(1)(C) of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide that the United States shall aid the States in fish restoration and management projects, and for other purposes,'' approved August 9, 1950 (16 United States Code 777c(b)(1)(C)) to make grants to any State to pay not more than 75 percent of the cost to a State of constructing, renovating, or maintaining public facilities for transient nontrailerable recreational vessels.
Priorities.--In awarding grants under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give priority to projects that-- (A) consist of the construction, renovation, or maintenance of public facilities for transient nontrailerable recreational vessels in accordance with a plan submitted by a State under subsection (c); (B) provide for public/private partnership efforts to develop, maintain, and operate facilities for transient nontrailerable recreational vessels; and (C) propose innovative ways to increase the availability of facilities for transient nontrailerable recreational vessels.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the term-- (1) ``nontrailerable recreational vessel'' means a recreational vessel 26 feet in length or longer-- (A) operated primarily for pleasure; or (B) leased, rented, or chartered to another for the latter's pleasure; (2) ``public facilities for transient nontrailerable recreational vessels'' includes mooring buoys, day-docks, navigational aids, seasonal slips, or similar structures located on navigable waters, that are available to the general public and designed for temporary use by nontrailerable recreational vessels; and (4) ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on October 1, 1997.
AQUATIC RESOURCES TRUST FUND.
Excise Tax Amendments.--Sections 4041(a)(2) and 4081(d)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are each amended by striking ``1999'' and inserting ``2005''.
Trust Fund Amendments.-- (1) Section 9503 of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``1997'' in subsection (c)(4)(A)(i) and inserting ``2005''; (B) by striking subsection (c)(4)(A)(ii) and inserting the following: ``(ii) Limit on transfers during any fiscal year.--The aggregate amount transferred under this subparagraph during any fiscal year shall not exceed $60,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and for each fiscal year thereafter.
''; and (C) by striking ``1997'' in subsection (c)(5) and inserting ``2005''.
Section 9504 of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``(as in effect on October 1, 1988)'' in subsection (b)(2)(A) and in subsection (c); and (B) by striking ``April 1, 1998'' in subsection (c) and inserting ``October 1, 2005''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 13106 of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking the first sentence of subsection (a)(1) and inserting the following: ``Subject to paragraph (2) and subsection (c), the Secretary shall expend in each fiscal year for State recreational boating safety programs, under contracts with States under this chapter, an amount equal to the sum of (A) the amount appropriated from the Boat Safety Account for that fiscal year and (B) the amount transferred to the Secretary under section 4(b) of the Act of August 9, 1950 (16 United States Code 777c(b)).
''; and (2) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following: ``(c) Of the amount transferred for each fiscal year to the Boat Safety Account under section 9503(c)(4)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, $5,000,000 is available to the Secretary for payment of expenses of the Coast Guard for personnel and activities directly related to carrying out the national recreational boating safety program under this title.
No funds available to the Secretary under this subsection may be used to replace funding traditionally provided through general appropriations, nor for any purposes except those purposes authorized by the Act of August 9, 1950 (16 United States Code 777 et seq.).
Amounts made available by this subsection shall remain available until expended.
The Secretary shall publish annually in the Federal Register a detailed accounting of the projects, programs, and activities funded under this subsection.