REDUCTION IN LIMITATION AMOUNT APPLICABLE TO NONPARTY MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE CONTRIBUTIONS IN ELECTIONS FOR FEDERAL OFFICE.
Section 315(a)(2)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting after ``$5,000'' the following: ``, except that, in the case of a nonparty multicandidate political committee, the limitation under this subparagraph shall be $1,000''.
PROHIBITION OF NONPARTY MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE BUNDLING OF CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) No nonparty multicandidate political committee may act as an intermediary or conduit with respect to a contribution to a candidate for Federal office.''.
PROHIBITION OF LEADERSHIP COMMITTEES.
Section 302 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 432) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) A candidate for Federal office may not establish, maintain, finance, or control a political committee, other than the principal campaign committee of the candidate.''.
INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES FOR THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting before section 25 the following new section: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES FOR THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed, subject to the limitations in subsection (b), as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year, an amount equal to all local congressional political contributions for which payment is made by the taxpayer within the taxable year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for a taxable year shall not exceed $100 ($200 in the case of a joint return).
Verification.--A credit shall be allowed by subsection (a) with respect to any local congressional political contribution only if the contribution is verified in the manner prescribed by the Secretary in regulations.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Local congressional political contribution.--The term `local congressional political contribution' means a contribution or gift of money to-- ``(A) a local congressional candidate, or ``(B) a committee, association, or organization (whether or not incorporated) organized and operated exclusively for the purpose of influencing (or attempting to influence) the nomination or election of a local congressional candidate, for use to further the candidacy of such candidate for nomination or election to the House of Representatives.
Local congressional candidate.--The term `local congressional candidate' means a candidate in any primary, general, or special election for nomination or election to the House of Representatives for the congressional district in which the principal residence of the taxpayer is located.
Candidate.--The term `candidate' means an individual who-- ``(A) publicly announces before the close of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the contribution or gift is made that the individual is a candidate for nomination or election to the House of Representatives, and ``(B) meets the qualification prescribed by law to hold such office.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 1034.
Cross Reference.-- ``For disallowance of credits to estates and trusts, see section 642(j).''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 642 of such Code (relating to special rules for credits and deductions) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Political Contributions.--An estate or trust shall not be allowed the credit for contributions to candidates for the House of Representatives provided by section 24.''
The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting before the item relating to section 25 the following new item.
Contributions to candidates for the House of Representatives.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid after the date of the enactment of this Act.
REPEAL OF CERTAIN CHANGES IN THE MINIMUM TAX RELATING TO DEPLETION AND INTANGIBLE DRILLING COSTS.
Restoration of Minimum Tax Preference for Depletion and Intangible Drilling Costs for Independent Producers and Royalty Owners.--Section 1915 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (and the amendments made by such section) are hereby repealed, and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be applied and administered as if such section (and amendments) had never been enacted.
Repeal of Minimum Tax Deduction Based On Intangible Drilling Cost Preference.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 56(h)(1) of such Code (relating to adjustment based on energy preferences), as in effect after the application of subsection (a), is amended to read as follows: ``(A) 50 percent of the marginal production depletion preference, or''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Subsection (h) of section 56 of such Code, as so in effect, is amended by striking paragraphs (3), (4), and (6) and by redesignating paragraphs (5), (7), and (8) as paragraphs (3), (4) and (5), respectively.
Paragraph (4) of section 56(h) of such Code (as so redesignated by subparagraph (A)) is amended to read as follows: ``(4) Special rule.--For purposes of paragraphs (1)(B) and (3), alternative minimum taxable income shall be determined without regard to the deduction allowable under this subsection and the alternative tax net operating deduction under subsection (a)(4).''
Clause (ii) of section 59(a)(2)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``alternative tax energy preference''.
Paragraph (1) of section 59A(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``alternative tax energy preference''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Transfer of Definition.--Section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(20) The term `multicandidate political committee' means a political committee which has been registered under section 303 for a period of not less than 6 months, which has received contributions from more than 50 persons, and, except for any State political party organization, has made contributions to 5 or more candidates for Federal office.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 315(a)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(4)) is amended by striking out the second sentence.