SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR INTEREST ON EDUCATION LOANS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
INTEREST ON EDUCATION LOANS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 15 percent of the interest paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year on any qualified education loan.
Maximum Credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed $300.
Limitation on Taxpayers Eligible for Credit.--No credit shall be allowed by this section to an individual for the taxable year if a deduction under section 151 with respect to such individual is allowed to another taxpayer for the taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year begins.
Limit on Period Credit Allowed.-- ``(1) Taxpayer and taxpayer's spouse.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a credit shall be allowed under this section only with respect to interest paid on any qualified education loan during the first 48 months (whether or not consecutive) in which interest payments are required.
For purposes of this paragraph, any loan and refinancings of such loans shall be treated as one loan.
Dependent.--If the qualified education loan was used to pay education expenses of an individual other than the taxpayer of the taxpayer's spouse, a credit shall be allowed under this section for any taxable year with respect to such loan only if a deduction under section 151 with respect to such individual is allowed to the taxpayer for such taxable year.
Phaseout of Benefit.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of interest which would (but for this subparagraph) be taken into account under paragraph (a) for the taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount which bears the same ratio to such interest as the excess of the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for such taxable year over the applicable dollar amount bears to phaseout range.
Applicable dollar amount; phaseout range.--For purposes of subparagraph (1)-- ``(A) in the case of a return of an unmarried individual, the applicable dollar amount is $40,000 and the phaseout range is $15,000, ``(B) in the case of joint return, the applicable dollar amount is $60,000 and the phaseout range is $30,000, and ``(C) in the case of a married individual filing a separate return, the applicable dollar amount is $30,000 and the phaseout range is $15,000.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified education loan.--The term `qualified education loan' means any indebtedness incurred to pay qualified higher education expenses-- ``(A) which are incurred on behalf of the taxpayer, the taxpayer's spouse, or a dependent of the taxpayer, ``(B) which are paid or incurred within a reasonable period of time before or after the indebtedness is incurred, and ``(C) which are attributable to education furnished during a period during which the recipient was at least a half-time student.
Such term includes indebtedness used to refinance indebtedness which qualifies as a qualified education loan.
The term `qualified education loan' shall not include any indebtedness owed to a person who is related (within the meaning of section 267(b) or 707(b)(1)) to the taxpayer.
Qualified higher education expenses.--The term `qualified higher education expenses' means the cost of attendance (as defined in section 472 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, (section 1087ll of title 20 United States Code), 20 United States Code 1087 11, as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act) of the taxpayer, the taxpayer's spouse, or a dependent of the taxpayer at an eligible educational institution.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `eligible educational institution' has the same meaning given such term by section 135(c)(3), except that such term shall also include an institution conducting an internship or residency program leading to a degree or certificate awarded by an institution of higher education, a hospital, or a health care facility which offers postgraduate training.
Half-time student.--The term `half-time student' means any individual who would be a student as defined in section 151(c)(4) if `half-time' were substituted for `full- time' each place it appears in such section.
Dependent.--The term `dependent' has the meaning given such term by section 152.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Denial of double benefit.--No credit shall be allowed under this section for any amount for which a deduction is allowable under any other provision of this chapter.
Marital status.--Marital status shall be determined in accordance with section 7703.''
Optional Deduction for Interest on Education Loans.--Paragraph (2) of section 163(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining personal interest) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F), and by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) any interest paid on a qualified education loan (as defined in section 23(f)) during the period described in section 23(d) and subject to the income limitations described in section 23(e), unless a credit or deduction is taken with respect to such interest under any other provisions of this chapter, and''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subpart A is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Section 23.
Interest on education loans.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993, but only with respect to loans the first required payment on which is after such date.