This Act may be cited as the ``Thrift Savings Fund Improvement Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) In order to enhance stability in the operations of the legislative branch of the Government, it is important to maintain a professional congressional staff and to promote longevity of service.
Consistent with paragraph (1), Congress has recently enacted legislation authorizing new benefits, such as a student loan forgiveness program, and taken other measures to improve staff compensation and benefits.
The Thrift Savings Plan is an important benefit which is offered to congressional employees, and which furthers the goal of attracting and retaining talented individuals to serve in the legislative branch of the Government.
The 3 stock index funds in the Thrift Savings Plan have not performed well recently, especially when measured against inflation.
In 2002, for example, losses from those funds were greater than 3, 4, and 5 percent, respectively, in the month of December alone, and more than 15, 18, and 22 percent, respectively, for the entire year.
By contrast, during that same year, the Government securities and bond index funds in the Thrift Savings Plan had earnings of 5 and 10 percent, respectively, and, in December of that year alone, slightly more than \1/2\ of 1 percent and 2 percent, respectively.
By yet greater contrast, increases in gold spot prices more than offset the losses experienced by even the worst- performing stock index fund in the Thrift Savings Plan in 2002, with the price of gold increasing by nearly 25 percent in that year and by more than 9 percent in December of that year alone.
PRECIOUS METALS INVESTMENT FUND.
Fund Defined.--Section 8438(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (9), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (10), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(11) the term `Precious Metals Investment Fund' means the Precious Metals Investment Fund established under subsection (b)(1)(F).''.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--Section 8438(b)(1) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (E), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(F) a Precious Metals Investment Fund as provided in paragraph (5).''.
Fund requirements.--Section 8438(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5)(A) The Board shall establish a Precious Metals Investment Fund.
Contributions to the Precious Metals Investment Fund shall be invested in physical gold, silver, or platinum bullion (rather than any mining company shares, certificates, derivatives, or futures options), and any bullion so acquired shall constitute the assets of the Precious Metals Investment Fund and shall be stored in a vault in a Federally chartered or State chartered bank.
Each share in the Precious Metals Investment Fund shall represent a direct investment in the precious metal itself.''.
Acknowledgment of Risk.--Section 8439(d) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``or the Small Capitalization Stock Index Investment Fund,'' and inserting ``the Small Capitalization Stock Index Investment Fund, or the Precious Metals Investment Fund,''; and (2) by striking ``and (10),'' and inserting ``(10), and (11),''.
Effective Date.--The Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board-- (1) shall study the operation of existing precious metals funds to determine the best practices of those funds; and (2) not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act-- (A) shall establish the Precious Metals Investment Fund, incorporating the best practices referred to in paragraph (1) to such extent and in such manner as the Board shall determine; and (B) shall make the Precious Metals Investment Fund available to individuals participating in the Thrift Savings Plan.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``Precious Metals Investment Fund'' has the meaning given such term by section 8438(a)(11) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by section 3(a)); and (2) the term ``Thrift Savings Plan'' refers to the plan described in subchapter III of chapter 84 of such title 5.