This Act may be cited as the ``Domesticated Salmonid Broodstock and Seedstock Act of 1996''.
In this Act: (1) The terms ``salmonid'' means a specie in the family salmonidae, including each specie of salmon and trout.
The term ``domesticated'', with respect to salmonids, means salmonids raised on a farm for profit and held throughout their life-cycle in captivity.
The term ``broodstock'' means domesticated salmonids intended to be used for reproductive purposes.
The term ``seedstock'' means gametes (egg and sperm) and fertilized (eyed) eggs produced from domesticated salmonid broodstock.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) United States breeders of domesticated salmonids raise broodstock and produce seedstock which are essential to the production of domesticated salmonids in the United States and throughout the world; (2) the production and dissemination in interstate commerce of salmonid broodstock and seedstock provides employment and income in economically depressed rural areas and contributes to the expansion of United States exports; (3) various foreign nations, including the members of the European Union, have adopted requirements that salmonid seedstock imported from the United States and other nations be inspected and certified by a competent authority prior to export; (4) existing Federal and State programs for the inspection and certification of the health status of salmonid broodstock and seedstock are inadequate and inconsistent; (5) the efficient and effective inspection and certification of salmonid breeding facilities, broodstock, and seedstock is essential to the economic well-being of the domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock industry in the United States; and (6) the Secretary of Agriculture currently provides inspection and certification services to the livestock and live poultry industries and has the technical expertise and capacity necessary to administer a program to provide similar services to the United States domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock industry.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to designate the Secretary of Agriculture as the single competent authority for the health inspection and certification of salmonid broodstock and seedstock used to produce domesticated salmonids; (2) to promote fair trade and interstate commerce in salmonid broodstock and seedstock produced in the United States, which is used to produce domesticated salmonids; and (3) to reduce the risk of transmission in interstate commerce of diseases, pathogens and pests in domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock to the extent practicable.
PREVENTION OF INTRODUCTION AND SPREAD OF CONTAGION.
Required Activities.--In cooperation with producers of domesticated salmonid seedstock, the Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a comprehensive program with regard to domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock to-- (1) provide diagnostic and certification services in a manner which is effective and efficient and which fosters the participation of State and private laboratories; (2) establish health criteria for domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock; and (3) monitor, evaluate, and facilitate the elimination of, unreasonable impediments to the interstate commerce of broodstock and seedstock that is certified under the program.
Use of Existing Authorities.--To prevent the introduction or dissemination in interstate commerce and international trade of any contagious, infectious, or communicable disease associated with domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock and to promote the exportation of domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock, the Secretary may use the authorities provided in the following provisions of law (relating to livestock and poultry) to regulate the production, transportation, and exportation of domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock: (1) Sections 1, 2, and 3 of the Act of February 2, 1903 (21 United States Code 111, 121, 122).
The Act of May 29, 1884 (21 United States Code 112, 113, 113a, 114, 114a, 114a-1, 115-120; commonly known as the Animal Industry Act).
Sections 1 and 2 of the Act of February 28, 1947 (21 United States Code 114b, 114c).
The Act of March 3, 1905 (21 United States Code 123-127).
Sections 1 through 6 and sections 11, 12, and 13 of Public Law 87-516 (21 United States Code 134-134h).
Sections 1, 2, and 3 of Public Law 91-239 (21 United States Code 135-135b).
Establishment; Membership.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish an advisory committee consisting of-- (1) five members selected from representatives of the salmonid broodstock and seedstock industry; (2) three members selected from the Department of Agriculture; and (3) one member selected from the officers and employees of the Department of Agriculture who shall serve as chairman of the Committee.
Functions.--It shall be the function of the Committee to advise the Secretary with respect to the development and implementation of the program for domesticated salmonid broodstock and seedstock industry authorized by this Act, including diagnostic and certification services, all rules and related analysis pertaining thereto, and the facilitation of fair trade and the dissemination of domesticated salmonid seedstock in interstate commerce.
Meetings.--The Committee shall meet at the call of the Secretary.
Employment Status; Expenses.--Committee members (other than the chairman and other Department of Agriculture staff) shall not be considered to be employees of the United States by reason of their membership and shall not be entitled to compensation for service on the Committee.
However, the Secretary may pay their travel and subsistence expenses (or a per diem in lieu thereof) in connection with their attendance at meetings of the Committee.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall certify to any person the health status of any domesticated salmonid seedstock intended for export from the United States.
CONSTRUCTION WITH OTHER LAWS.
Notwithstanding this Act, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Commerce shall have sole responsibility for the health of salmonids, and the products thereof, located in any facility administered by the Department of the Interior or the Department of Commerce.