This Act may be referred to as the ``Tenth Amendment Enforcement Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) in most areas of governmental concern, State governments possess both the Constitutional authority and the competence to discern the needs and the desires of the People and to govern accordingly; (2) Federal laws and agency regulations, which have interfered with State powers in areas of State jurisdiction, should be restricted to powers delegated to the Federal Government by the Constitution; (3) the framers of the Constitution intended to bestow upon the Federal Government only limited authority over the States and the people; (4) under the Tenth Amendment to the Constitution, the powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people; and (5) the courts, which have in general construed the Tenth Amendment not to restrain the Federal Government's power to act in areas of State jurisdiction, should be directed to strictly construe Federal laws and regulations which interfere with State powers with a presumption in favor of State authority and against Federal preemption.
In General.--On or after January 1, 1997, any statute enacted by Congress shall include a declaration-- (1) that authority to govern in the area addressed by the statute is delegated to Congress by the Constitution, including a citation to the specific Constitutional authority relied upon; (2) if the statute interferes with State powers or preempts any State or local government law, regulation or ordinance, that Congress specifically finds that the Federal Government is the better level of government to govern in the area addressed by the statute; and (3) if the statute interferes with State powers or preempts any State or local government law, regulation or ordinance, that Congress specifically intends to interfere with State powers or preempt State or local government law, regulation, or ordinance, and that such preemption is necessary.
Factual Findings.--The Congress shall make specific factual findings in support of the declarations described in this section.
In General.--It shall not be in order in either the Senate or House of Representatives to consider any bill, joint resolution, or amendment that does not include a declaration of Congressional intent as required under section 3.
Rulemaking.--This section is enacted-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, and as such, it is deemed a part of the rules of the Senate and House of Representatives, but is applicable only with respect to the matters described in section 3 and supersedes other rules of the Senate or House of Representatives only to the extent that such sections are inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of the Senate or House of Representatives to change such rules at any time, in the same manner as in the case of any rule of the Senate or House of Representatives.
ANNUAL REPORT ON STATUTORY PREEMPTION.
Report.--Within 90 days after each Congress adjourns sine die, the Congressional Research Service shall prepare and make available to the public a report on the extent of Federal statutory preemption of State and local government powers enacted into law during the preceding Congress or adopted through judicial interpretation of Federal statutes.
Contents.--The report shall contain-- (1) a cumulative list of the Federal statutes preempting, in whole or in part, State and local government powers; (2) a summary of Federal legislation enacted during the previous Congress preempting, in whole or in part, State and local government powers; (3) an overview of recent court cases addressing Federal preemption issues; and (4) other information the Director of the Congressional Research Service determines appropriate.
Transmittal.--Copies of the report shall be sent to the President and the chairman of the appropriate committees in the Senate and House of Representatives.
EXECUTIVE PREEMPTION OF STATE LAW.
In General.--Chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 559 the following new section: ``SEC.
PREEMPTION OF STATE LAW.
No executive department or agency or independent agency shall construe any statutory authorization to issue regulations as authorizing preemption of State law or local ordinance by rulemaking or other agency action unless-- ``(1) the statute expressly authorizes issuance of preemptive regulations; and ``(2) the executive department, agency or independent agency concludes that the exercise of State power directly conflicts with the exercise of Federal power under the Federal statute, such that the State statutes and the Federal rule promulgated under the Federal statute cannot be reconciled or consistently stand together.
Any regulatory preemption of State law shall be narrowly tailored to achieve the objectives of the statute pursuant to which the regulations are promulgated and shall explicitly describe the scope of preemption.
(1) When an executive department or agency or independent agency proposes to act through rulemaking or other agency action to preempt State law, the department or agency shall provide all affected States notice and an opportunity for meaningful and timely input by duly elected or appointed State and local government officials or their designated representatives in the proceedings.
The notice of proposed rulemaking shall be forwarded to the Governor, the Attorney General and the presiding officer of each chamber of the legislature of each State setting forth the extent and purpose of the preemption.
In the table of contents of each Federal Register, there shall be a separate list of preemptive regulations contained within that Register.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to participation in rulemaking or other agency action by duly elected or appointed State and local government officials or their designated representatives acting in their official capacities.
Unless a final executive department or agency or independent agency rule or regulation contains an explicit provision declaring the Federal Government's intent to preempt State or local government powers and an explicit description of the extent and purpose of that preemption, the rule or regulation shall not be construed to preempt any State or local government law, ordinance or regulation.
(1) Each executive department or agency or independent agency shall review the rules and regulations issued by the department or agency that preempt, in whole or in part, State or local government powers.
Each executive department or agency or independent agency shall publish in the Federal Register a plan for such review.
Such plan may be amended by the department or agency at any time by publishing a revision in the Federal Register.
The purpose of the review under paragraph (1) shall be to determine whether and to what extent such rules are to continue without change, consistent with the stated objectives of the applicable statutes, or are to be altered or repealed to minimize the effect of the rules on State or local government powers.
The plan under paragraph (1) shall provide for the review of all such department or agency rules and regulations within 10 years after the date of publication of such rules and regulations as final rules.
For rules and regulations in effect more than 10 years on the effective date of this section, the plan shall provide for review within 3 years after such effective date.
Any Federal rule or regulation promulgated after January 1, 1997, that is promulgated in a manner inconsistent with this section shall not be binding on any State or local government, and shall not preempt any State or local government law, ordinance, or regulation.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding after the item for section 559 the following: ``560.
Preemption of State law.''.
In General.--No statute, or rule promulgated under such statute, enacted after the date of enactment of this Act, shall be construed by courts or other adjudicative entities to preempt, in whole or in part, any State or local government law, ordinance or regulation unless the statute, or rule promulgated under such statute, contains an explicit declaration of intent to preempt, or unless there is a direct conflict between such statute and a State or local government law, ordinance, or regulation, such that the two cannot be reconciled or consistently stand together.
Construction in Favor of States and People.--Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, any ambiguities in this Act, or in any other law of the United States, shall be construed in favor of preserving the authority of the States and the people.
Severability.--If any provision of this Act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the Act and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
APPROPRIATION BY STATE LEGISLATURES.
Any funds received by a State under Federal law shall be subject to appropriation by the State legislature, consistent with the terms and conditions required under such applicable provisions of law.