This Act may be cited as the ``American Jobs and Manufacturing Preservation Act of 1993''.
TAXATION OF INCOME OF CONTROLLED FOREIGN CORPORATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO IMPORTED PROPERTY.
General Rule.--Subsection (a) of section 954 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining foreign base company income) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6) imported property income for the taxable year (determined under subsection (h) and reduced as provided in subsection (b)(5)).''
Definition of Imported Property Income.--Section 954 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(h) Imported Property Income.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(6), the term `imported property income' means income (whether in the form of profits, commissions, fees, or otherwise) derived in connection with-- ``(A) manufacturing, producing, growing, or extracting imported property, ``(B) the sale, exchange, or other disposition of imported property, or ``(C) the lease, rental, or licensing of imported property.
Such term shall not include any foreign oil and gas extraction income (within the meaning of section 907(c)) or any foreign oil related income (within the meaning of section 907(c)).
Imported property.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term `imported property' means property which is imported into the United States by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person.
Imported property includes certain property imported by unrelated persons.--The term `imported property' includes any property imported into the United States by an unrelated person if, when such property was sold to the unrelated person by the controlled foreign corporation (or a related person), it was reasonable to expect that-- ``(i) such property would be imported into the United States, or ``(ii) such property would be used as a component in other property which would be imported into the United States.
Exception for property subsequently exported.--The term `imported property' does not include any property which is imported into the United States and which-- ``(i) before substantial use in the United States, is sold, leased, or rented by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person for direct use, consumption, or disposition outside the United States, or ``(ii) is used by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person as a component in other property which is so sold, leased, or rented.
Definitions and special rules.-- ``(A) Import.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `import' means entering, or withdrawal from warehouse, for consumption or use.
Such term includes any grant of the right to use an intangible (as defined in section 936(b)(3)(B)) in the United States.
Unrelated person.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `unrelated person' means any person who is not a related person with respect to the controlled foreign corporation.
Coordination with foreign base company sales income.--For purposes of this section, the term `foreign base company sales income' shall not include any imported property income.''
Separate Application of Limitations on Foreign Tax Credit for Imported Property Income.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 904(d) of such Code (relating to separate application of section with respect to certain categories of income) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (H), by redesignating subparagraph (I) as subparagraph (J), and by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following new subparagraph: ``(I) imported property income, and''.
Imported property income defined.--Paragraph (2) of section 904(d) of such Code is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (H) and (I) as subparagraphs (I) and (J), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (G) the following new subparagraph: ``(H) Imported property income.--The term `imported property income' means any income received or accrued by any person which is of a kind which would be imported property income (as defined in section 954(h)).''
Look-thru rules to apply.--Subparagraph (F) of section 904(d)(3) of such Code is amended by striking ``or (E)'' and inserting ``(E), or (H)''.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Clause (iii) of section 952(c)(1)(B) of such Code (relating to certain prior year deficits may be taken into account) is amended by inserting the following subclause after subclause (II) (and by redesignating the following subclauses accordingly): ``(III) imported property income,''.
Paragraph (5) of section 954(b) of such Code (relating to deductions to be taken into account) is amended by striking ``and the foreign base company oil related income'' and inserting ``the foreign base company oil related income, and the imported property income''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 1992, and to taxable years of United States shareholders within which or with which such taxable years of such foreign corporations end.
Subsection (c).--The amendments made by subsection (c) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.