This Act may be cited as the ``National Drunk Driving Protection Act''.
Establishment.--Chapter I of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 153 the following: ``Sec.
Open container requirements ``(a) Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Alcoholic beverage.--The term `alcoholic beverage' has the meaning given the term in section 158(c).
Motor vehicle.--The term `motor vehicle' means a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical power and manufactured primarily for use on public highways, but does not include a vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails.
Open alcoholic beverage container.--The term `open alcoholic beverage container' has the meaning given the term in section 410(i).
Passenger area.--The term `passenger area' shall have the meaning given the term by the Secretary by regulation.
Penalty.-- ``(1) General rule.-- ``(A) Fiscal year 2000.--If, at any time in fiscal year 2000, a State does not have in effect a law described in subsection (c), the Secretary shall transfer 1.5 percent of the funds apportioned to the State for fiscal year 2001 under each of paragraphs (1)(A), (1)(C), and (3) of section 104(b) to the apportionment of the State under section 402.
Fiscal years thereafter.--If, at any time in a fiscal year beginning after September 30, 2000, a State does not have in effect a law described in subsection (c), the Secretary shall transfer 3 percent of the funds apportioned to the State for the following fiscal year under each of paragraphs (1)(A), (1)(C), and (3) of section 104(b) to the apportionment of the State under section 402.
Open Container Laws.-- ``(1) In general.--For the purposes of this section, each State shall have in effect a law that prohibits the possession of any open alcoholic beverage container, or the consumption of any alcholic beverage, in the passenger area of any motor vehicle (including possession or consumption by the driver of the vehicle) located on a public highway, or the right-of-way of a public highway, in the State.
Motor vehicles designed to transport many passengers.--For the purposes of this section, if a State has in effect a law that makes unlawful the possession of any open alcoholic beverage container in the passenger area by the driver (but not by a passenger) of a motor vehicle designed to transport more than 10 passengers (including the driver) while being used to provide charter transportation of passengers, the State shall be deemed to have in effect a law described in this subsection with respect to such a motor vehicle for each fiscal year during which the law is in effect.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of a project carried out under section 402 with funds transferred under subsection (b) to the apportionment of a State under section 402 shall be 100 percent.
Transfer of Obligation Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--If the Secretary transfers under subsection (b) any funds to the apportionment of a State under section 402 for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall allocate to the State an amount, determined under paragraph (2), of obligation authority distributed for the fiscal year for Federal-aid highways and highway safety construction programs for carrying out projects under section 402.
Amount.--The amount of obligation authority referred to in paragraph (1) shall be determined by multiplying-- ``(A) the amount of funds transferred under subsection (b) to the apportionment of the State under section 402 for the fiscal year; by ``(B) the ratio that-- ``(i) the amount of obligation authority distributed for the fiscal year to the State for Federal-aid highways and highway safety construction programs; bears to ``(ii) the total of the sums apportioned to the State for Federal-aid highways and highway safety construction programs (excluding sums not subject to any obligation limitation) for the fiscal year.
Limitation on Applicability of Highway Safety Obligations.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no limitation on the total of obligations for highway safety programs under section 402 shall apply to funds transferred under subsection (b) to the apportionment of a State under section 402.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 153 the following: ``154.