This Act may be cited as the ``Premier Certified Lenders Program Improvement Act of 2002''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Premier Certified Lenders Program (PCLP) established under section 508 of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15 United States Code 697e) has been very successful in helping small businesses expand.
Increasing the number of premier certified lenders will allow the Government to make available more resources to small businesses even as the Small Business Administration downsizes.
The PCLP requires premier certified lenders to set aside unnecessarily large amounts in loss reserve accounts.
Requiring premier certified lenders to maintain unnecessarily large loss reserve accounts is inefficient and limits the ability of lenders to serve additional small businesses and of new lenders to join the PCLP.
Premier certified lenders should be required to maintain loss reserve accounts in amounts commensurate with the risk of loss associated with the PCLP loan portfolio of the lender.
Changing the PCLP to require that premier certified lenders maintain loss reserve accounts in amounts which reflect the risk of loss associated with the loans of the PCLP will protect taxpayers and improve the ability of the PCLP to help small businesses create economic development.
ALTERNATIVE LOSS RESERVE FOR CERTAIN PREMIER CERTIFIED LENDERS.
In General.--Section 508(c) of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15 United States Code 697e(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Alternative loss reserve.-- ``(A) Election.--With respect to any calendar quarter, any qualified high loss reserve PCL may elect to have the requirements of this paragraph apply in lieu of the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (4).
Contributions.-- ``(i) Ordinary rules inapplicable.--Except as provided under clause (ii) and paragraph (5), a qualified high loss reserve PCL which makes the election described in subparagraph (A) with respect to a calendar quarter shall not be required to make contributions to its loss reserve during such quarter.
Based on risk of loss.--A company which makes the election described in subparagraph (A) with respect to any calendar quarter shall, before the last day of such quarter, make such contributions to its loss reserve as are necessary to ensure that the amount of the loss reserve of the company is-- ``(I) not less than $25,000; and ``(II) sufficient, as determined by a third-party auditor employed by the company, to protect the Federal Government from the risk of loss associated with the portfolio of PCLP loans of the company.
Qualified high loss reserve pcl.--The term `qualified high loss reserve PCL' means, with respect to any calendar year, any company designated as a premier certified lender, if the Administrator determines that-- ``(i) the amount of the loss reserve of the company is not less than $25,000; ``(ii) the company has established a process for analyzing the risk of loss associated with its portfolio of PCLP loans and for grading each PCLP loan made by the company on the basis of the risk of loss associated with such loan; and ``(iii)(I) in the case of a company which was a qualified high loss reserve PCL with respect to the preceding calendar year, a third-party auditor employed by the company has certified during each calendar quarter of such year that the amount of the loss reserve of the company is sufficient to protect the Federal Government from the risk of loss associated with the portfolio of PCLP loans of the company; and ``(II) in the case of any other company, a third-party auditor employed by the company has certified during the preceding 90 days that the loss reserve of the company is sufficient to protect the Federal Government from the risk of loss associated with the portfolio of PCLP loans of the company.
PCLP loan.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `PCLP loan' means any loan guaranteed under this section.
Calendar quarter.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `calendar quarter' means-- ``(i) the period which begins on January 1 and ends on March 31 of each year; ``(ii) the period which begins on April 1 and ends on June 30 of each year; ``(iii) the period which begins on July 1 and ends on September 30 of each year; or ``(iv) the period which begins on October 1 and ends on December 31 of each year.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 508(b)(2)(D) of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15 United States Code 697e(b)(2)(D)) is amended by striking ``subsection (c)(2)'' and inserting ``subsection (c)''.