RED SNAPPER ALLOWABLE CATCH QUOTAS.
Definitions.-- (1) Exclusive economic zone.--The term ``exclusive economic zone'' means the zone established by Presidential Proclamation No.
5030, dated March 10, 1983, and that is the area adjacent to the United States that, except where modified to accommodate international boundaries, encompasses all waters from the seaward boundary of each of the coastal States to a line on which each point is 200 nautical miles from the baseline from which the territorial sea of the United States is measured.
Gulf red snapper.--The term ``Gulf red snapper'' means red snapper of the Gulf of Mexico.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including part 622 of title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, the total allowable catch quotas for commercial and recreational fisheries for Gulf red snapper shall be determined under subsection (c).
Quotas.-- (1) Aggregate allowable catch quotas.--For each of the calendar years 1998 through 2001, the aggregate allowable catch quota for Gulf red snapper shall be 9,120,000 pounds.
Quota for commercial fisheries.--For each calendar year specified in paragraph (1), the allowable catch quota applicable to persons who harvest Gulf red snapper under commercial vessel permits shall be 51 percent of the aggregate allowable catch quota specified in that paragraph.
Recreational quota.--For each calendar year specified in paragraph (1), the allowable catch quota applicable to persons who harvest Gulf red snapper other than under commercial vessel permits shall be 49 percent of the aggregate allowable catch quota specified in that paragraph.
Limitation on Conditions.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the harvesting of Gulf red snapper in accordance with the quotas specified under subsection (c) shall not be subject to any condition relating to the performance of bycatch reduction devices that would reduce the amounts of red snapper that may be harvested under an applicable catch quota specified in subsection (c).
Recreational Bag Limit.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including part 622.39 of title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, during the period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act and ending on December 31, 2001, the bag limit for daily catch of Gulf red snapper applicable to a person who harvests red snapper other than under a commercial vessel permit shall be 4 fish, except that any member of the crew of a for-hire vessel used for such recreational fishing shall be prohibited from catching any Gulf red snapper while aboard that vessel during the period of time that vessel is used for- hire for that purpose.
Minimum Size Limit.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including part 622.37 of title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, during the period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act and ending on December 31, 2001, the minimum size limit for Gulf red snapper shall be 15 inches (38.1 cm), total length.
Prohibition.--During the period specified in subsection (c)(1), the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service, may not establish any fishery closing date designed for the preservation of Gulf red snapper that is inconsistent with a recommendation of the Gulf of Mexico Fishery Management Council established under section 302 of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Management Act (16 United States Code 1852).
Expedited Review of TEDs.--Not later than December 31, 1998, the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service, shall-- (1) take such actions as may be necessary to complete the review of turtle excluding devices (commonly referred to as ``TEDs'') to determine whether those devices may serve effectively as functioning bycatch reduction devices; and (2) if upon completion of that review, the Secretary, acting through the Director, determines that turtle excluding devices may serve effectively as functioning bycatch reduction devices, certify those devices as functioning bycatch reduction devices.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service, shall conduct a study to provide an estimate of the bycatch reduction achieved in the Gulf of Mexico by bycatch reduction devices, including the devices described in subsection (h).
Commencement and completion dates of study.--The Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service, shall commence the study under paragraph (1) on May 1, 2001, and shall complete that study not later than August 31, 2001.
Peer review.--In conducting the study under this section, the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service, shall provide for a process of peer review of the results of the study.
Under that process, the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service, shall make the results of the study available for review by individuals with recognized scientific or other research expertise that the Secretary, acting through the Director, determines to be appropriate.
Report.--Upon completion of the study under this subsection, the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service, shall prepare and submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives, a report that contains the results of the study.