This Act may be cited as the ``Drug-Free Schools Reform Act of 1996''.
DRUG AND VIOLENCE PREVENTION PROGRAMS.
Subpart 1 of part A of title IV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7111 et sequentes) is amended to read as follows: ``Subpart 1--State Grants for Drug and Violence Prevention Programs ``SEC.
Reservations.--From the amount made available under section 4004(a) to carry out this subpart for each fiscal year, the Secretary-- ``(1) shall reserve 1 percent of such amount for grants under this subpart to Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, to be allotted in accordance with the Secretary's determination of their respective needs; ``(2) shall reserve 1 percent of such amount for the Secretary of the Interior to carry out programs under this part for Indian youth; ``(3) may reserve not more than $1,000,000 for the national impact evaluation required by section 4114(a); and ``(4) shall reserve 0.2 percent of such amount for programs for Native Hawaiians under section 4115.
State Allotments.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall, for each fiscal year, allocate among the States-- ``(A) one-half of the remainder not reserved under subsection (a) according to the ratio between the school-aged population of each State and the school- aged population of all the States; and ``(B) one-half of such remainder according to the ratio between the amount each State received under part A of title I for the preceding year and the sum of such amounts received by all the States.
Minimum.--For any fiscal year, no State shall be allotted under this subsection an amount that is less than one- half of 1 percent of the total amount allotted to all the States under this subsection.
Reallotment.--The Secretary may reallot any amount of any allotment to a State if the Secretary determines that the State will be unable to use such amount within two years of such allotment.
Such reallotments shall be made on the same basis as allotments are made under paragraph (1).
Definitions.--For the purpose of this subsection-- ``(A) the term `State' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico; and ``(B) the term `local educational agency' includes educational service agencies and consortia of such agencies.
In General.--In order to receive an allotment under section 4111 for any fiscal year, the chief executive officer of the State shall submit to the Secretary, at such time as the Secretary may require, an application that-- ``(1) describes how funds under this subpart will be coordinated with programs under this Act, the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, and other Acts, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of section 14306; ``(2) contains the results of the State's needs assessment for drug and violence prevention programs, which shall be based on the results of on-going State evaluation activities, including data on the prevalence of drug use and violence by youth in schools and communities; ``(3) contains an assurance that the State will cooperate with, and assist, the Secretary in conducting a national impact evaluation of programs required by section 4114(a); and ``(4) includes any other information the Secretary may require.
Peer Review.--The Secretary shall use a peer review process in reviewing State applications under this section.
Use of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--The chief executive officer of a State shall use funds allocated pursuant to section 4111(a)(1) for drug and violence prevention programs and activities in accordance with this section.
Administrative costs.--A chief executive officer may use not more than 5 percent of the total amount received under this part for the administrative costs incurred in carrying out the duties of such officer under this section.
Programs Authorized.-- ``(1) In general.--The exclusive and immutable purpose of these grants to or contracts with the foregoing is to finance or sponsor prevention or education programs dedicated to teaching directly the dangers, risks, health costs, legal penalties, short- and long-term negative personal impacts of illegal drug use and underage drinking with funds expended for no other purpose than a `no use,' `right-wrong' antidrug message.
If any amount or percentage of these funds is spent for purposes other than a strict no-drug-use curriculum, such as general health or hygiene education, social events, annual sports budgets, or any other non-anti-drug program, such expenditures shall be considered a violation.
Penalties.--Complete forfeiture, reimbursement, and each applicable Federal penalty provision shall apply to each person responsible for any such misapplication or misspending of the funds.
Peer review.--Grants or contracts awarded under this subsection shall be subject to a peer review process.
Special rule.--The chief executive officer of a State may carry out activities under this subsection directly, or through grants or contracts.
Law Enforcement Education Partnerships.--A chief executive officer shall use funds under subsection (a)(1) to award grants to State, county or local law enforcement agencies (including district attorneys) in consortium with local educational agencies or community- based agencies for the purposes of carrying out drug abuse and violence prevention activities, such as-- ``(1) Project Drug Abuse Resistance Education and other programs which provide classroom instruction by uniformed law enforcement officials that is designed to teach students to recognize and resist pressures to experiment that influence such children to use controlled substances or alcohol; ``(2) Project Legal Lives and other programs in which district attorneys provide classroom instruction in the law and legal system which emphasizes interactive learning techniques, such as mock trial competitions; ``(3) partnerships between law enforcement and child guidance professionals; and ``(4) before- and after-school activities.
National Impact Evaluation.-- ``(1) Biennial evaluation.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, and the Attorney General, shall conduct an independent biennial evaluation of the national impact of programs assisted under this subpart and of other recent and new initiatives to combat violence in schools and submit a report of the findings of such evaluation to the President and the Congress.
Data collection.--(A) The National Center for Education Statistics shall collect data to determine the frequency, seriousness, and incidence of violence in elementary and secondary schools in the States.
The Secretary shall collect the data using, wherever appropriate, data submitted by the States pursuant to subsection (b)(2)(B).
Not later than January 1, 2000, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the data collected under this subsection, together with such recommendations as the Secretary determines appropriate, including estimated costs for implementing any recommendation.
State Report.-- ``(1) In general.--By October 1, 1999, and every third year thereafter, the chief executive officer of the State shall submit to the Secretary a report on the implementation and outcomes of State programs under section 4113, as well as an assessment of their effectiveness.
Special rule.--The report required by this subsection shall be-- ``(A) in the form specified by the Secretary; ``(B) based on the State's ongoing evaluation activities, and shall include data on the prevalence of drug use and violence by youth in schools and communities; and ``(C) made readily available to the public.
PROGRAMS FOR NATIVE HAWAIIANS.
General Authority.--From the funds made available pursuant to section 4111(a)(4) to carry out this section, the Secretary shall make grants to or enter into cooperative agreements or contracts with organizations primarily serving and representing Native Hawaiians which are recognized by the Governor of the State of Hawaii to plan, conduct, and administer programs, or portions thereof, which are authorized by and consistent with the provisions of this title for the benefit of Native Hawaiians.
Definition of Native Hawaiian.--For the purposes of this section, the term `Native Hawaiian' means any individual any of whose ancestors were natives, prior to 1778, of the area which now comprises the State of Hawaii.