This Act may be cited as the ``Celia Cruz Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress hereby finds as follows: (1) Celia Cruz began singing in amateur contests in her hometown of Havana, Cuba, at the age of 14.
During this period Cruz studied music theory, piano and voice at Cuba's National Music Conservatory.
During the 1950's, Cruz became an accomplished music talent and recording artist in Cuba and beyond the island's shores.
On July 15, 1960, Cruz, her husband, and the members of her band fled Cuba for the United States to escape the oppressive regime of Fidel Castro.
Cruz and her husband worked and lived in the United States and became naturalized American citizens.
Cruz' successful career in the entertainment industry spanned over 5 decades and she is widely known around the globe as ``The Queen of Salsa''.
Cruz recorded over 70 records during her career, earning multiple Grammy Awards and a Billboard Magazine Lifetime Achievement Award in 1995.
Cruz has also won numerous Latin Grammy Awards and other music industry recognitions that include a myriad of platinum albums.
Cruz has been honored with a Lifetime Achievement Award by the Smithsonian Institution and, in 1994, President Clinton presented Cruz with the National Medal of the Arts, the United States highest tribute in the arts community.
Celia Cruz was a champion of freedom and artistic expression who dedicated herself to helping others.
During the summer of 2002, a foundation was established in her name, the Celia Cruz Foundation, helping to realize her dream of providing financial aid to low-income students who wish to study music and to assist cancer victims.
Celia Cruz, whose music, energy, and happiness made her a role model for generations of Americans and inspired audiences around the world, died on July 16, 2003 in Fort Lee, New Jersey.
In 2008, the world will mark the 5th anniversary of her death and it will be an appropriate time to remember her achievements and lasting musical works and charitable legacy.
Denominations.--In commemoration of the achievements and lasting musical works and charitable legacy of Celia Cruz, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) $1 silver coins.--Not more than 300,000 $1 coins which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Half dollar clad coins.--Not more than 500,000 half dollar coins which shall-- (A) weigh 11.34 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) be minted to the specifications for half dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of Celia Cruz and her lasting legacy.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2008''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', ``E Pluribus Unum'', and ``The Queen of Salsa''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts and the Celia Cruz Foundation; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning January 1, 2008.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this Act after December 31, 2008.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in section 7(a) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Marketing.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Celia Cruz Foundation, shall develop and implement a marketing program to promote and sell the coins issued under this Act both within the United States and internationally.
In General.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge as follows: (1) $10 per coin for the $1 coin.
$3 per coin for the half dollar coin.
Distribution.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, all surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Celia Cruz Foundation, a nonprofit corporation dedicated to offering financial aid to under-privileged students who wish to study music as well as funding efforts in the fight against cancer, for the purpose of supporting the programs of the Foundation.
Audits.--The Celia Cruz Foundation shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code, with regard to the amounts received by the Foundation under subsection (b).