This Act may be cited as the ``Library of Congress Financial Management Act of 2000''.
TITLE I--LIBRARY OF CONGRESS REVOLVING FUND SEC.
AVAILABILITY OF FUND FOR ACTIVITIES.
The Librarian of Congress (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Librarian'') is authorized-- (1) to establish the activities described in section 102 as Revolving Fund service activities; and (2) to establish Revolving Fund service units, which may be partially or fully sustained through the Library of Congress Revolving Fund established under section 103, to carry out such activities.
The activities described in this section are as follows: (1) The preparation of research reports, translations, analytical studies, and related services for any entity of the Federal Government or the government of the District of Columbia.
The provision of any of the following services for entities of the Federal Government or the government of the District of Columbia: (A) The centralized acquisition of publications and library materials in any format.
Information, research, and library support services.
Training in library and information services.
Services related to any of the services described in the preceding subparagraphs.
The operation of a gift shop or other sales of items associated with collections, exhibits, performances, and special events of the Library of Congress.
The location, copying, storage, preservation, and delivery services for library documents and audio-visual materials (other than basic domestic interlibrary loan services), and international interlibrary lending.
Special events and programs, performances, exhibits, workshops, and training.
The cooperative acquisitions program described in section 207 of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1998 (2 United States Code 182).
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS REVOLVING FUND.
In General.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury a revolving fund to be known as the ``Library of Congress Revolving Fund'' (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Fund'').
Contents.--The Fund shall consist of the following amounts: (A) Amounts deposited under subsection (b).
Credits under subsection (c).
Such other amounts as may be appropriated for the Fund under law.
Use of amounts in fund.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available to the Librarian without fiscal year limitation to carry out Revolving Fund service activities under this Act.
Obligations for such activities for any fiscal year are limited to the total amounts specified in appropriations Acts for such fiscal year.
Amounts Deposited.-- (1) Funds attributable to revolving fund service activities.--Upon the establishment by the Librarian of an activity as a Revolving Fund service activity under section 101, the Librarian shall transfer to the Fund the following: (A) Notwithstanding the requirements of section 1535(d) of title 31, United States Code, any obligated, unexpended balances existing as of the date of the establishment which are attributable to such activity.
An amount equal to the difference between-- (i) the total value of the supplies, inventories, equipment, gift fund balances, and other assets of the activity; and (ii) the total value of the liabilities (including the value of accrued annual leave of employees) of the activity.
In the case of the cooperative acquisitions program described in section 207 of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1998, the balance existing in the Cooperative Acquisitions Program Revolving Fund established under section 207(a) of such Act as of the date of the establishment of the program as a Revolving Fund service activity.
Temporary transfers of previously appropriated funds.-- The Librarian may temporarily transfer to the Fund other funds appropriated to the Library of Congress, except that the Fund shall reimburse the appropriate accounts of the Library of Congress for amounts so transferred before the period of availability of the Library appropriation expires.
Credits.--The Fund shall be credited with all amounts received by the Librarian which are attributable to Revolving Fund service activities, including-- (1) fees, advances, and reimbursements; (2) gifts or bequests of money or property for credit to such activity or the Fund; (3) receipts from sales and exchanges of property; (4) payments for loss or damage to property; and (5) receivables, inventories, and other assets.
Individual Accounting Requirement.--A separate account shall be maintained in the Fund with respect to each Revolving Fund service unit.
Excess Funds.--At such times as the Librarian determines to be appropriate, the Librarian shall transfer any amount in the Fund that the Librarian determines to be in excess of the amount required by the Fund to the Treasury for deposit as miscellaneous receipts.
Annual Report.--Not later than March 31 of each year, the Librarian shall submit to Congress an audited financial statement for the Fund for the preceding fiscal year.
The audit of such statement shall be conducted in accordance with Government Auditing Standards for financial audits issued by the Comptroller General of the United States.
OPERATION OF REVOLVING FUND SERVICE ACTIVITIES.
Rates for Purchase of Products and Services.--The Librarian is authorized to make any products and services provided as Revolving Fund service activities available for purchase at rates estimated by the Librarian to be adequate to recover, over a reasonable period of time, the direct and indirect costs to the activity of providing such products and services.
Advances of Funds.--Participants in Revolving Fund service activities shall pay for products and services of the activity by advance of funds-- (1) if the Librarian determines that amounts in the Revolving Fund are otherwise insufficient to cover the costs of providing such products and services; or (2) upon agreement between participants and the Librarian.
Multi-Year Contracting Authority.--In the operation of Revolving Fund service activities, the Librarian may-- (1) enter into contracts for the lease and acquisition of goods and services (including severable services) for a period that begins in one fiscal year and ends in the next fiscal year, pursuant to section 303L of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act (41 United States Code 253l); and (2) enter into multi-year contracts for the acquisition of property and services, pursuant to section 304B of such Act (41 United States Code 254c).
REPEAL OF COOPERATIVE ACQUISITIONS PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 207 of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1998 (2 United States Code 182) is repealed.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect upon the establishment by the Librarian of the cooperative acquisitions program described in section 207 of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1998, as a Revolving Fund service activity under section 101.
NO EFFECT ON PERSONNEL.
Nothing in this title may be construed to affect the terms and conditions of employment of any employee of the Library of Congress who carries out any activity designated as a Revolving Fund service activity or who is assigned to a Revolving Fund service unit.
TITLE II--CATALOGING PRODUCTS AND SERVICES SEC.
AVAILABILITY OF CATALOGING PRODUCTS AND SERVICES.
In General.--The Librarian of Congress is authorized to make cataloging products and services created by the Library of Congress available for purchase at prices that reflect as closely as practicable the cost of distribution over a reasonable period of time.
Any amounts paid to the Librarian for cataloging products and services pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the appropriation for salaries and expenses of the Library of Congress, and shall remain available until expended for expenses attributable to the necessary distribution of such products and services.
Definition.--In this title, the term ``cataloging products and services'' means bibliographic products and services (in any current or future format) that are used by libraries and library organizations, including other Library of Congress-created data bases, and related technical publications.
The undesignated paragraph beginning ``The Librarian of Congress'' under the heading ``PUBLIC PRINTING AND BINDING'' in section 1 of the Act entitled ``An Act making appropriations for sundry civil expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and three, and for other purposes'', approved June 28, 1902 (2 United States Code 150), is repealed.
TITLE III--LIBRARY OF CONGRESS TRUST FUND BOARD SEC.
REVISIONS TO MEMBERSHIP AND OPERATION OF LIBRARY OF CONGRESS TRUST FUND BOARD.
Addition of Vice Chair of Joint Committee on the Library as Board Member.--Section 1 of the Act entitled ``An Act to create a Library of Congress Trust Fund Board, and for other purposes'', approved March 3, 1925 (2 United States Code 154), is amended in the first sentence of the first paragraph by inserting ``and the vice chair'' after ``chairman.''
Quorum Requirement.--Section 1 of such Act (2 United States Code 154) is amended in the second sentence of the first paragraph by striking ``Nine'' and inserting ``Seven''.
Temporary Extension of Board Member Term.--Section 1 of such Act (2 United States Code 154) is amended in the first paragraph by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Upon request of the chair of the Board, any member whose term has expired may continue to serve on the Trust Fund Board until the earlier of the date on which such member's successor is appointed or the expiration of the 2-year period which begins on the date such member's term expires.''.
TITLE IV--EFFECTIVE DATE SEC.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect October 1, 2000.