SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``SBA Trade Programs Act of 2007''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--SMALL BUSINESS TRADE POLICY Sec.
Develop and implement small business trade policies.
Establish an annual small business trade strategy.
Track small business exports and trade resource utilization.
TITLE II--TRADE COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS Sec.
Trade Remedy and Dispute Assistance Initiative.
Patent Assistance and Intellectual Property Protections Initiative.
TITLE III--TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR SMALL BUSINESSES Sec.
Trade Adjustment Assistance Financing Initiative.
Technical resources for trade adjustment assistance.
TITLE IV--EXPORT ASSISTANCE Sec.
Increase Small Business Administration participation at Export Assistance Centers.
Increase access to capital for small and medium-sized exporters.
TITLE V--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS Sec.
TITLE I--SMALL BUSINESS TRADE POLICY SEC.
TRADE POLICY FOR SMALL BUSINESS.
Section 22 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Role in Trade Policy.-- ``(1) Recommendations.--The director of the Office shall present recommendations regarding small business exporters to trade negotiators.
Development of trade policies.--The director of the Office shall assist in the development of trade policies that increase opportunities for small businesses in domestic and foreign markets, including the removal of trade barriers.
Implementation of trade policies.--The director of the Office shall assist in the implementation of trade policies through relationships developed with Federal trade policymakers, particularly the United States Trade Representative, and transnational organizations, such as the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Small exporter promotion programs.--The director of the Office shall establish programs that will boost the export opportunities of entrepreneurs and encourage transnational organizations, such as the Organization for Economic Co- operation and Development, small exporter organizations, and ministries of foreign governments to support and publicize these programs.
Strategic alliances.-- ``(A) Congressional notification.--The director of the Office shall notify the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate of pending strategic alliances.
Follow-up activities.--The director of the Office shall ensure that planned and documented follow- up activities for strategic alliances increase trade opportunities for small businesses.
Strategic alliance defined.--In this paragraph, the term `strategic alliance' means a working relationship, entered into between the Small Business Administration and foreign national ministries representing small business concerns, for the purpose of strengthening trade between United States small businesses and foreign small businesses by establishing overseas networks and buyers.''.
ESTABLISH AN ANNUAL SMALL BUSINESS TRADE STRATEGY.
Section 22 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i) Annual Small Business Trade Strategy.-- ``(1) In general.--The director of the Office shall develop and maintain a small business trade strategy that is contributed as part of the National Export Strategy developed by the Department of Commerce that includes at least the following components: ``(A) Strategies to increase small business export opportunities.
The strategies shall include a specific strategy to increase small business export opportunities to the Asia Pacific Region.
Recommendations to increase the competitiveness of domestic small business industries in the global economy.
Recommendations to protect small businesses from unfair trade practices, including intellectual property violations.
Strategies to expand small business representation in United States trade policy formation and implementation.
Coordination efforts with the Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee of the Department of Commerce, as well as with Federal agencies that also provide trade financing to small businesses, such as the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and the Export- Import Bank.
Report.--At the beginning of each fiscal year, the director shall submit to the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate a report on the small business trade strategy required by paragraph (1).
The report shall cover, at a minimum, each of the components required by paragraph (1) and shall include specific policies and objectives and timelines to implement those policies and objectives.''.
TRACK SMALL BUSINESS EXPORTS AND TRADE RESOURCE UTILIZATION.
Section 22 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Tracking System.-- ``(1) In general.--The director of the Office shall develop a system to track small business exports and the use by small businesses of Federal trade promotion resources.
The director shall ensure that the system is consistent through each Federal agency member of the Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee.
Design emphasis.--The director shall give particular attention, in designing the system, to the tracking of data on the trade of services by small exporters, in consultation with the Department of Commerce.
Implementation.--The director shall work in consultation with members of the Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee to ensure that the system is implemented and that the results of the system are reported annually in the National Export Strategy conducted by the Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee.''.
TITLE II--TRADE COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS SEC.
TRADE REMEDY AND DISPUTE ASSISTANCE INITIATIVE.
Section 22 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k) Trade Remedy and Dispute Assistance Initiative.--The director of the Office shall design, and the district offices of the Administration shall implement, a program that provides technical assistance, counseling services, and reference materials to assist small businesses navigate the trade dispute and remedy processes.
The program shall include-- ``(1) information on available resources, procedures, and requirements for trade remedy investigations; ``(2) an approach for district office staff to provide one- on-one assistance to small businesses involved in these activities; and ``(3) an identification of legal resources and other tools to ensure small businesses can navigate the trade dispute and remedy processes affordably.''.
PATENT ASSISTANCE AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTIONS INITIATIVE.
Section 22 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(l) Patent Assistance and Intellectual Property Protections Initiative.--In consultation with the United States Patent and Trademark Office and the United States Copyright Office, the Office shall design counseling services, including identifying legal resources for small businesses to secure intellectual property protection in foreign countries.
To implement the program, the Office shall collaborate with district office staff to provide on-on-one assistance to small businesses involved in these activities.''.
TITLE III--TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR SMALL BUSINESSES SEC.
TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FINANCING INITIATIVE.
Section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(D) by inserting after ``paragraph (14)(A),'' the following: ``or to participate in a loan made under paragraph (16),''; and (2) in paragraph (16)-- (A) in subparagraph (D) by striking clauses (i) and (ii) and inserting the following: ``(i) is impacted by-- ``(I) increased competition with foreign firms in the relevant market; or ``(II) unfair trade practices, particularly intellectual property violations; and ``(ii) is injured by such impacts.
''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(E) Outreach and marketing.--The Administration shall increase outreach and marketing of international trade loans to district offices and private lenders.''.
TECHNICAL RESOURCES FOR TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE.
Section 22 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(m) Technical Resources for Trade Adjustment Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--The director of the Office shall establish a comprehensive set of services to assist small business readjustment, including access to training, technology, marketing assistance, and research and information on domestic and global markets.
Implementation.--The Administrator shall, by regulation, establish such requirements as may be necessary to carry out paragraph (1).
Outreach.--The Office shall work with the district offices and the outreach business assistance centers of the Administration, including Small Business Development Centers, Women's Business Centers, and SCORE, to offer the set of services established under paragraph (1) to small businesses in their local communities.''.
TITLE IV--EXPORT ASSISTANCE SEC.
INCREASE SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION PARTICIPATION AT EXPORT ASSISTANCE CENTERS.
Section 22 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(n) Trade Finance Positions.-- ``(1) Additional trade finance specialists.-- ``(A) In general.--The Office, over the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this subsection, shall increase the number of trade finance specialists at Export Assistance Centers by at least 6 and thereafter shall maintain the number of such trade finance specialists at or above that number.
Candidates for the positions are required to have sufficient qualifications and experiences.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out subparagraph (A) such sums as may be necessary.
Filling vacant positions.--The Office, over the 3- month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this subsection, shall fill all trade finance positions that have been vacant since 2003.
Candidates for the positions are required to have sufficient qualifications and experiences.
Filling gaps in high-export-volume areas.--The director of the Office shall-- ``(A) not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subsection, carry out a national study to compare the rate of exports from each State and major metropolitan region to the availability of Administration staff participating in Export Assistance Centers in such State or region; ``(B) not later than 2 years after such date of enactment, design a formula to eliminate gaps between supply of, and demand for, such staff in areas with high export volumes; and ``(C) request the additional staff that are required to eliminate such gaps and place them in those areas.''.
INCREASE ACCESS TO CAPITAL FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED EXPORTERS.
Section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(D) by amending the heading to read as follows: ``Participation under export working capital and international trade programs''; and (2) in paragraph (3)-- (A) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs (B) and (C)''; (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as (C) and (D), respectively; (C) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following: ``(B) if the total amount outstanding and committed (by participation or otherwise) solely for the purposes provided in paragraphs (14)(A) and (16) to the borrower from the business loan and investment fund established by this Act would exceed $2,250,000 (or if the gross loan amount would exceed $3,000,000), except as provided in subparagraph (C);''; and (D) in subparagraph (C) (as so redesignated) by striking ``$1,750,000, of which not more than $1,250,000'' and inserting ``$2,250,000, of which not more than $1,600,000''.
Section 22(c)(5) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649) is amended by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon.
TITLE V--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS SEC.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives September 4, 2007.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.
By Jorge E. Sorensen, Deputy Clerk.