This Act may be cited as the ``Coastal Barrier Resources Reauthorization Act of 1999''.
ADDITIONS TO COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES SYSTEM.
Voluntary Additions.--Section 4 of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 United States Code 3503) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Voluntary Additions to System.--The Secretary may add any parcel of real property to the System, if-- ``(1) the owner of the parcel requests that the Secretary add the parcel to the System; and ``(2) the parcel is a depositional geologic feature described in section 3(1)(A).''.
Technical Amendments Relating to Additions of Excess Property.-- (1) In general.--Section 4(d) of the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 3503 note)-- (A) is redesignated and moved so as to appear as subsection (e) of section 4 of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 United States Code 3503); and (B) is amended-- (i) in paragraph (1) by striking ``one hundred and eighty'' and inserting ``180''; (ii) in paragraph (2) by striking ``subsection (d)(1)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)''; and (iii) by striking paragraph (3).
Conforming amendment.--Section 4(f) of the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 3503 note) is repealed.
Notice Regarding Additions to System.--Section 4 of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 United States Code 3503) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Notice Regarding Additions to System.--The Secretary shall-- ``(1) publish in the Federal Register a notice of any addition of property to the System under this section, including notice of the availability of a map showing the location of the property; ``(2) provide a copy of that map to the State and local government in which the property is located and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives; and ``(3) revise the maps referred to in subsection (a) to reflect the addition of the property to the System.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 4 of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 United States Code 3503(a)) is amended by striking ``, which shall consist of'' and all that follows through the end of that subsection and inserting the following: ``, that-- ``(1) shall consist of those undeveloped coastal barriers and other areas located on the coasts of the United States that are identified and generally depicted on the set of maps on file with the Secretary entitled `Coastal Barrier Resources System', dated October 24, 1990, as such maps may be modified, revised, corrected, or replaced under subsection (c), (d), or (e) of this section, or any other provision of law enacted on or after November 16, 1990, that specifically authorizes the modification, revision, correction, or replacement; and ``(2) includes areas added to the System in accordance with subsection (d) or (e).''.
Coastal Barrier Resources Act.--The Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 United States Code 3501 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 3(3) (16 United States Code 3502(3)), in the matter following subparagraph (D), by striking ``Effective October 1, 1983, such'' and inserting ``Such''; and (2) by repealing section 10 (16 United States Code 3509).
Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990.--Section 8 of the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 3503 note) is repealed.
Section 12 of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 United States Code 3510) is redesignated as section 10 and amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this Act $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004.''.
DIGITAL MAPPING PILOT PROJECT.
Requirement to Undertake Project.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, shall undertake a pilot project to determine the feasibility and cost of creating digital versions of the Coastal Barrier Resources System maps referred to in section 4(a)(1) of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, as amended by this Act.
The pilot project shall include the creation of digital maps for at least 5 units of the System.
Use of existing data.--(A) To the extent practicable, in completing the pilot project under this subsection, the Secretary shall use existing digital spatial data including digital orthophotos; shoreline, elevation, and bathymetric data; and electronic navigational charts in the possession of other Federal agencies, including the United States Geological Survey and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The head of any Federal agency that possesses digital spatial data referred to in subparagraph (A) shall promptly provide that data to the Secretary at no cost upon request by the Secretary.
Obtaining additional data.--If the Secretary determines that data necessary to complete the pilot project under this subsection does not exist, the Secretary shall enter into an agreement with the Director of the United States Geological Survey under which the Director shall obtain, in cooperation with other Federal agencies, as appropriate, and provide to the Secretary any digital spatial data required to carry out this subsection.
Data standards.--All digital spatial data used or created to carry out this subsection shall comply with the National Spatial Data Infrastructure established by Executive Order 12906 and any other standards established by the Federal Geographic Data Committee established by the Office of Management and Budget Circular A-16.
Digital maps not controlling.--Any determination of whether a location is inside or outside of the System shall be made without regard to the digital maps prepared under this subsection.
Report.--(A) Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives that describes the results of the pilot project and the feasibility, data needs, and costs of completing digital maps for the entire System.
The report shall include a description of-- (i) the cooperative agreements entered into by the Secretary with other Federal agencies to complete the pilot project and cooperative agreements needed to complete digital mapping of the entire System; (ii) the availability of existing data to complete digital mapping of the entire System; (iii) the need for additional data to complete digital mapping of the entire System; and (iv) the funding needed to complete digital mapping of the entire System.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior $500,000 for each of fiscal years 2000, 2001, and 2002 to carry out the pilot project required under this section.
CORRECTIONS TO MAPS RELATING TO UNIT P19-P. (a) In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall, before the end of the 30-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, make such corrections to the map described in subsection (b) as are necessary to ensure that depictions of areas on that map are consistent with the depictions of areas appearing on the map relating to unit P19-P entitled ``Amendment to the Coastal Barrier Resources System'' and dated September 16, 1998.
Map Described.--The map described in this subsection is the map that-- (1) is included in a set of maps entitled ``Coastal Barrier Resources System'', dated November 2, 1994; and (2) relates to unit P19-P of the Coastal Barrier Resources System.
REPLACEMENT OF MAPS RELATING TO UNITS NC-03P AND L03.
In General.--The 7 maps included in the set of maps entitled ``Coastal Barrier Resources System'' and referred to in section 4(a)(1) of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, as amended by this Act, relating to the portions of Coastal Barrier Resources System units NC-03P and L03 located in Dare County, North Carolina, are hereby replaced by other maps relating to that unit that are entitled ``DARE COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA, Coastal Barrier Resources System, Cape Hatteras Unit NC-03P'' or ``DARE COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA, Coastal Barrier Resources System, Cape Hatteras Unit NC-03P, Hatteras Island Unit L03'' and dated July 1, 1999.
Availability.--The Secretary of the Interior shall keep the maps referred to in subsection (a) on file and available for inspection in accordance with the provisions of section 4(b) of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 United States Code 3503(b)).
CORRECTIONS TO MAP RELATING TO UNIT DE-03P.
In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall make such corrections to the map described in subsection (b) as are necessary to move on that map the boundary of the otherwise protected area (as defined in section 12 of the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 3503 note; Public Law 101-591)) to the Cape Henlopen State Park boundary to the extent necessary-- (1) to exclude from the otherwise protected area the adjacent property leased, as of the date of enactment of this Act, by the Barcroft Company and Cape Shores Associates (which are privately held corporations under the law of the State of Delaware); and (2) to include in the otherwise protected area the northwestern corner of Cape Henlopen State Park seaward of the Lewes and Rehoboth Canal.
Map Described.--The map described in this subsection is the map that is included in a set of maps entitled ``Coastal Barrier Resources System'', dated October 24, 1990, as revised October 15, 1992, and that relates to the unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System entitled ``Cape Henlopen Unit DE-03P''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 21, 1999.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.