This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Budget Concepts Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The conceptual framework of the budget, which is central to Federal planning and policy, has not been comprehensively reviewed for over 30 years.
Over those years, there has been a significant change in the way that policy makers and economists view the role of government in the economy.
In addition, major changes have occurred in the scope of Federal activity, in the economy, in the use of the budget for fiscal policy purposes, and in information technology.
Because the Federal budget is inherently complex, budget concepts may need to be modified to increase public understanding of the operation of the Federal Government and its impact on the economy.
Federal budget concepts should be reviewed and, if appropriate, revised in light of the best current thinking in accounting, budgeting, and economics.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish the National Commission on Budget Concepts to review the current structure, concepts, classifications, and bases of accounting of the Federal budget and to report recommendations to the President and Congress for modifications that would enhance the usefulness of the budget for public policy and financial planning.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL COMMISSION ON BUDGET CONCEPTS.
There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on Budget Concepts (hereinafter referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 13 members, as follows: (1) The chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate.
The chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives.
The ranking member of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate.
The ranking member of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
The Comptroller General of the United States.
The Director of the Congressional Budget Office.
The Secretary of the Treasury.
One member appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
One member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
One member appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the President of the United States.
Qualifications and Term.-- (1) Qualifications.--Members appointed to the Commission pursuant to subsection (a) shall-- (A) have expertise and experience in the fields or disciplines related to the subject areas to be considered by the Commission; and (B) not be Members of Congress, officers, or employees of the Federal Government.
Term of appointment.--The term of an appointment to the Commission shall be for the life of the Commission.
Chair and vice chair.--The appointee under subsection (a)(13) shall be the Chair of the Commission.
A Vice Chair may be elected and shall assume the duties of the Chair in the Chair's absence.
Meetings; Quorum; Vacancies; and Procedures.-- (1) Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at least once a month on a day to be decided by the Commission.
The Commission may meet at such other times at the call of the Chair or of a majority of its members.
The meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, unless by public vote, the Commission shall determine to close a meeting or any portion of a meeting to the public.
Quorum.--A simple majority of the full membership shall constitute a quorum of the Commission, except that five members may conduct hearings.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was filled under subsection (a).
Procedures.--The Commission shall adopt administrative and procedural rules that are consistent with this section, the Federal Advisory Committee Act, and the General Service Administration guidelines thereunder.
Compensation and Expenses.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowance, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Each member appointed from outside of the Federal Government, while engaged in the performance of Commission duties away from their homes, regular place of business, or official duty station, may receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Staff.--With the advance approval of the Commission, the executive director may appoint such personnel as is appropriate.
The staff of the Commission, including any experts or consultants, shall be appointed without regard to political affiliation and without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, the provision of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, and without regard to section 5 of title 41, United States Code (relating to classifications and General Schedule).
Executive Director.--The Chairman shall appoint an executive director, who shall be paid the rate of basic pay for level II of the Executive Schedule.
Experts and Consultants.--With the advance approval of the Commission, the executive director may procure by contract the temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service.
Technical and Administrative Assistance.--Upon the request of the Commission-- (1) the head of any agency, office, or establishment within the Executive or Legislative Branches of the United States Government shall provide, without reimbursement, such technical assistance as the Commission determines is necessary to carry out its duties; and (2) the Administrator of the General Services Administration shall provide, on a reimbursable basis, such administrative support services as the Commission may require.
Detail of Federal Personnel.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of an agency, office, or establishment in the Executive or Legislative branch of the United States Government is authorized to detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of that agency, office, or establishment to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties.
Any such detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the employment status or privileges of that employee.
Facilities and Support.--The Administrator of the General Services Administration shall locate suitable office space for the operation of the Commission and such facilities shall be furnished with all necessary equipment and incidentals required for the proper functioning of the Commission.
POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
Duties of the Commission.--The Commission shall-- (1) review the 1967 Report of the President's Commission on Budget Concepts and assess the implementation of the recommendations of that Report; (2) identify and evaluate structure, concepts, classifications, and bases of accounting of the Federal budget; (3) identify any applicable general accounting principles and practices in the private sector and evaluate their value to budget practices in the Federal sector; and (4) report, in accordance with subsection (g), recommendations for modifications to the structure, concepts, classifications, and bases of accounting of the Federal budget that would enhance the usefulness of the budget for public policy and financial planning.
Powers of the Commission.-- (1) Conduct of business.--The Commission may hold hearings, take testimony, receive evidence, undertake such other activities, as it determines necessary to carry out its duties.
Access to information.--(A) The Commission is authorized to obtain directly from any Federal agency information that the Commission determines is necessary to carry out its duties.
The Federal agency requested, shall provide the information requested, but shall notify the Commission if any of the information provided is protected from disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United States Code, or some similar statute.
Subject to section 552 of title 5, United States Code, the records, reports, transcripts, minutes, and other documents which were prepared by the Commission shall be available for public inspection and copying in the office of the Commission.
Any documents made available to the Commission from sources outside of the Commission, to which were attached notices that the information is protected from disclosure, shall not be made available by the Commission for inspection or copying.
Postal service.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Printing.--For purposes of cost relating to the printing and binding, including the cost of any personnel detailed from the Government Printing Office, the Commission shall be deemed to be a committee of the Congress.
Not later than February 28, 2003, the Commission shall submit a report to the President and the Congress with recommendations for modifications to the current structure, concepts, classifications, and bases of accounting of the Federal budget.
A detailed explanation of the basis of those recommendations and conclusions shall be included in the report.
At the request of any Commission member, the report shall include that member's dissenting views or opinions.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of submission of the report required in section 7.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Sums so appropriated shall remain available until expended.
The Commission shall not be considered constituted to conduct business until the earlier of the appointment of all appointed members or two months after the date of enactment of this Act.