This Act may be cited as the ``Robert Stodola Homeless Veterans Assistance Act''.
In General.--Subtitle A of title IV of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11361 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
``For purposes of this title, the term `veteran' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of title 38, United States Code.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 101(b) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 401 the following new item: ``Sec.
EMERGENCY SHELTER GRANTS PROGRAM.
Section 413 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11373) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Veterans' Share.-- ``(1) In general.--Each metropolitan city, urban county, State, and Indian tribe for which assistance under this subtitle is provided shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the total amount received by the city, county, State, or tribe in each fiscal year shall be used for eligible activities benefiting homeless persons who are veterans.
Exception.--Upon the request of a metropolitan city, urban county, State, or Indian tribe, the Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage under such paragraph for the city, county, State, or tribe if the city, county, State, or tribe demonstrates to the Secretary that, but for such waiver or reduction, amounts of assistance under this subtitle for the city, county, State, or tribe will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
Selection Criteria.--Section 426(b) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11386(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) such factors as the Secretary considers necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements under section 429(b)(4); and''.
Veterans' Share.--Section 429(b) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11389(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (3) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) not less than 20 percent shall be allocated for use only for projects and supportive services benefiting homeless persons who are veterans; except that the Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under this paragraph or reduce the percentage if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this subtitle) that, but for such waiver or reduction, amounts appropriated for such fiscal year to carry out this subtitle will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
SAFE HAVENS FOR HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Selection Criteria.--Section 434(c) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11394(c)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) such factors as the Secretary considers necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements under subsection (e); and''.
Veterans' Share.--Section 434 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Veterans' Share.-- ``(1) In general.--In making grants to applicants under this subtitle, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amount made available for each fiscal year to carry out this subtitle is used for eligible activities benefiting homeless persons who are veterans.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage under such paragraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this subtitle) that, but for such waiver or reduction, amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this subtitle will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
SECTION 8 PROGRAM FOR SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY DWELLINGS.
Selection Criteria.--The first sentence of section 441(c) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11401(c)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, while ensuring compliance with the requirements under subsection (k)''.
Veterans' Share.--Section 441 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Veterans' Share.-- ``(1) In general.--In allocating amounts to applicants under this section, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amounts made available for each fiscal year to carry out this section are used for assistance benefiting homeless persons who are veterans.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage under such paragraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this section) that, but for such waiver or reduction, amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this section will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
SHELTER PLUS CARE PROGRAM.
Selection Criteria.--Section 455(a) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11403d(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (8) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (9) as paragraph (10); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (8) the following new paragraph: ``(9) such factors as the Secretary considers necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements under subsection (d); and''.
Veterans' Share.--Section 455 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Veterans' Share.-- ``(1) In general.--In providing assistance to applicants under this subtitle, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amount made available for each fiscal year to carry out this subtitle is used for rental assistance benefiting homeless persons who are veterans.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage under such paragraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this subtitle) that, but for such waiver or reduction, amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this subtitle will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
RURAL HOMELESSNESS GRANT PROGRAM.
Section 491(c) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11408(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Veterans' share.-- ``(A) In general.--In awarding grants under subsection (a) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amount made available for the fiscal year for such grants is used for eligible activities under subsection (b) benefiting homeless persons who are veterans.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under subparagraph (A) or reduce the percentage under such subparagraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for grants under this section) that, but for such waiver or reduction, amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this section will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
INNOVATIVE HOMELESS INITIATIVES DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Comprehensive Homeless Initiative.--Section 2(c)(5) of the HUD Demonstration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 11301 note) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (E) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraph: ``(F) provides that not less than 20 percent of the total amount received by the recipient shall be used for projects and activities benefiting homeless persons who are veterans; except that, upon the request of a jurisdiction, the Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under this subparagraph or reduce the percentage for such recipient jurisdiction if the recipient demonstrates to the Secretary that, but for such waiver or reduction, assistance amounts under this subsection for the recipient for such fiscal year will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
Innovative Project Funding.-- (1) Selection criteria.--Section 2(d)(3) of the HUD Demonstration Act of 1993 is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (D) by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F); and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) such factors as the Secretary considers necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements under paragraph (4); and''.
Veterans' share.--Section 2(d) of the HUD Demonstration Act of 1993 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Veterans' share.-- ``(A) In general.--In awarding assistance under this subsection for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 20 percent of the amount made available for the fiscal year for such assistance is used for projects and activities benefiting homeless persons who are veterans.
Exception.--The Secretary may, with respect to a fiscal year, waive the requirement under subparagraph (A) or reduce the percentage under such subparagraph if the Secretary determines (based on approvable applications submitted for assistance under this subsection) that, but for such waiver or reduction, amounts made available for such fiscal year to carry out this subsection will remain unused for an unreasonable period of time.''.
Definition.--Section 2(b) of the HUD Demonstration Act of 1993 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) For purposes of this title, the term `veteran' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of title 38, United States Code.