This Act may be cited as the ``CHIP Data and Evaluation Improvement Act of 1999.''.
FUNDING FOR RELIABLE ANNUAL STATE-BY-STATE ESTIMATES ON THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN WHO DO NOT HAVE HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.
Section 2108 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.1397hh) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Adjustment to Current Population Survey To Include State-by- State Data Relating to Children Without Health Insurance Coverage.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Commerce shall make appropriate adjustments to the annual Current Population Survey conducted by the Bureau of the Census in order to produce statistically reliable annual State data on the number of low- income children who do not have health insurance coverage, so that real changes in the uninsurance rates of children can reasonably be detected.
The Current Population Survey should produce data under this subsection that categorizes such children by family income, age, and race or ethnicity.
The adjustments made to produce such data shall include, where appropriate, expanding the sample size used in the State sampling units, expanding the number of sampling units in a State, and an appropriate verification element.
Appropriation.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and each fiscal year thereafter for the purpose of carrying out this subsection.''.
FUNDING FOR CHILDREN'S HEALTH CARE ACCESS AND UTILIZATION STATE-BY-STATE DATA.
Section 2108 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397hh), as amended by section 2, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Collection of Children's Health Care Access and Utilization State-Level Data.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the National Center for Health Statistics (in this subsection referred to as the `Center'), shall collect data on children's health insurance through the State and Local Area Integrated Telephone Survey (SLAITS) for the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
Sufficient data shall be collected so as to provide reliable, annual, State-by-State information on the health care access and utilization of children in low-income households, and to allow for comparisons between demographic subgroups categorized with respect to family income, age, and race or ethnicity.
Survey design and content.-- ``(A) In general.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary, acting through the Center-- ``(i) shall obtain input from appropriate sources, including States, in designing the survey and making content decisions; and ``(ii) at the request of a State, may collect additional data to assist with a State's evaluation of the program established under this title.
Reimbursement of costs of additional data.--A State shall reimburse the Center for services provided under subparagraph (A)(ii).
Appropriation.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated $9,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and each fiscal year thereafter for the purpose of carrying out this subsection.''.
FEDERAL EVALUATION OF STATE CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS.
Section 2108 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.1397hh), as amended by sections 2 and 3, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) Federal Evaluation.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, directly or through contracts or interagency agreements, shall conduct an independent evaluation of 10 States with approved child health plans.
Selection of States.--In selecting States for the evaluation conducted under this subsection, the Secretary shall choose 10 States that utilize diverse approaches to providing child health assistance, represent various geographic areas (including a mix of rural and urban areas), and contain a significant portion of uncovered children.
Matters included.--In addition to the elements described in subsection (b)(1), the evaluation conducted under this subsection shall include, but is not limited to, the following: ``(A) Surveys of the target population (enrollees, disenrollees, and individuals eligible for but not enrolled in the program under this title).
Evaluation of effective and ineffective outreach and enrollment practices with respect to children (for both the program under this title and the medicaid program under title XIX), and identification of enrollment barriers and key elements of effective outreach and enrollment practices, including practices that have successfully enrolled hard-to-reach populations such as children who are eligible for medical assistance under title XIX but have not been enrolled previously in the medicaid program under that title.
Evaluation of the extent to which State medicaid eligibility practices and procedures under the medicaid program under title XIX are a barrier to the enrollment of children under that program, and the extent to which coordination (or lack of coordination) between that program and the program under this title affects the enrollment of children under both programs.
An assessment of the effect of cost-sharing on utilization, enrollment, and coverage retention.
Evaluation of disenrollment or other retention issues, such as switching to private coverage, failure to pay premiums, or barriers in the recertification process.
Submission to congress.--Not later than December 31, 2001, the Secretary shall submit to Congress the results of the evaluation conducted under this subsection.
Funding.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 for the purpose of conducting the evaluation authorized under this subsection.
Amounts appropriated under this paragraph shall remain available without fiscal year limitation.''.
STANDARDIZED REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR ANNUAL REPORTS.
Section 2108(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397hh(a)) is amended by-- (1) redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively and indenting appropriately; (2) by striking ``The State shall--'' and inserting the following ``(1) In general.--The State shall--''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Standardized reporting requirements.--Each annual report submitted under this subsection shall, in addition to expenditure and other reporting requirements specified by the Secretary, include the following: ``(A) Enrollee counts categorized by income (that at least identifies enrollees with income below the poverty line), age, and race or ethnicity, and, if income levels used in State reporting differ from that prescribed by the Secretary, a detailed description of the eligibility methodologies used by the State, including all relevant income disregards, exempted income, and eligibility family units.
The annual percentages of those individuals who sought coverage (as determined by the Secretary) through the screening and enrollment process established under the State program under this title who were-- ``(i) enrolled in the program under this title; ``(ii) enrolled in the medicaid program under title XIX; or ``(iii) determined eligible for, but not enrolled in, the program under this title or the medicaid program under title XIX.''.
INSPECTOR GENERAL AUDIT AND GAO REPORT ON ENROLLEES ELIGIBLE FOR MEDICAID.
Section 2108 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.1397hh), as amended by section 4, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Inspector General Audit and GAO Report.-- ``(1) Audit.--Beginning with fiscal year 2000, and every third fiscal year thereafter, the Secretary, through the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services, shall audit a sample from among the States described in paragraph (2) in order to-- ``(A) determine the number, if any, of enrollees under the plan under this title who are eligible for medical assistance under title XIX (other than as an optional targeted low-income children under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIV)); and ``(B) assess the progress made in reducing the number of targeted uncovered low-income children relative to the goals established in the State child health plan, as reported to the Secretary in accordance with subsection (a)(2).
State described.--A State described in this paragraph is a State with an approved State child health plan under this title that does not, as part of such plan, provide health benefits coverage under the State's medicaid program under title XIX.
Monitoring and report from gao.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall monitor the audits conducted under this subsection and, not later than March 1 of each fiscal year after a fiscal year in which an audit is conducted under this subsection, shall submit a report to Congress on the results of the audit conducted during the prior fiscal year.''.
COORDINATION OF DATA COLLECTION WITH DATA REQUIREMENTS UNDER THE MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH SERVICES BLOCK GRANT.
Subparagraphs (C)(ii) and (D)(ii) of section 506(a)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 706(a)(2)) are each amended by inserting ``or the State plan under title XXI'' after ``title XIX''.
COORDINATION OF DATA SURVEYS AND REPORTS.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, through the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, shall establish a clearinghouse for the consolidation and coordination of all Federal data bases and reports regarding children's health.