Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The United States lags behind many of the other industrialized nations in understanding the relationship of design principles to the conceptualization and development of high quality products and systems and to research and design methodologies.
Innovative and excellent design is critical to the successful development, manufacturing, and marketing of products and systems.
Since 70 percent or more of the costs of product, process, and system development, manufacture, and use is determined during the initial design stage, design must be a critical factor from the beginning of product development.
A strong domestic design engineering capability can reduce costs and enhance competitiveness.
Excellence in design, including integrating environmental objectives at the beginning of the production process, improves the quality of life by creating useful, safe, and attractive products and systems and by conserving nonrenewable resources through the efficient use of materials and the reduction of the generation of waste.
Information technologies and concurrent engineering processes can aid the concurrent design process.
Information technologies can also provide links among different industry sectors.
Greater efforts should be made to exhibit and promote, both domestically and internationally, well-designed United States products and systems.
The United States, unlike many of its foreign economic competitors, lacks a national strategy to promote and recognize design excellence in its products and systems.
Excellence in design can be enhanced through a combination of efforts of the private and public sectors.
A national design program to promote excellence in the design of United States products and systems can enhance the competitiveness of United States products and systems and expand trade and economic opportunities for the people of the United States.
Purposes.--It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to establish a United States Design Council as an advisory committee within the Department of Commerce; (2) to educate United States businesses with respect to the importance of innovation and excellence in design to competitiveness; (3) to promote programs of research, development, and technology transfer related to promoting understanding of the principles and processes of design and design engineering; and (4) to assist government agencies in developing and encouraging innovation and excellence in design in their own facilities and programs and by suppliers of products and systems.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is established a United States Design Council (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Council'') as an advisory committee within the Department of Commerce to advise the Secretary of Commerce on matters related to design.
The Council shall be composed of 17 members appointed by the Secretary of Commerce as follows: (A) 2 members who are employed as business executives in the fields of product development, manufacturing, and systems development.
2 members who are industrial designers.
4 members who have expertise in information technologies, concurrent engineering, or environmental engineering.
2 members who are architects.
2 members who are graphic designers.
3 members who are employees of Federal agencies which have a specialized interest in innovation and excellence in design.
2 members who are representatives of labor organizations.
Understanding of united states economy.--All members of the Council shall be individuals who have a broad understanding of the United States economy and the international competitive position of the United States.
Recommendations for appointments.--In making appointments under this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall consider recommendations made by appropriate professional and trade associations, and by any other persons concerned with the innovative and excellent design of products and systems.
Terms.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), each member of the Council shall be appointed for a term of three years.
Original appointments.--Of the members originally appointed under this subsection, five members shall be appointed for a term of one year and five members shall be appointed for a term of two years, as designated by the Secretary of Commerce at the time of appointment.
Other terms.--A member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of such member was appointed.
A member may serve after the expiration of the member's term until a successor has taken office.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Council shall not affect the powers of the Council and shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
No member shall be eligible for reappointment during the one-year period following the expiration of the member's term unless such member served on the Council for less than one year.
Chairperson.--The Secretary of Commerce shall designate one member of the Council as Chairperson.
Vice chairperson.--The Council shall elect one of its members to serve as Vice Chairperson.
Prohibition on compensation.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), members of the Council shall serve on the Council without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Council shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Meetings.--The Council shall meet not less than twice a year.
The Council shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Advice and Recommendations.--The Council shall provide advice and recommendations to the Secretary of Commerce on the performance by the Secretary of the following functions: (1) To support, as appropriate, private-sector efforts for the development of voluntary standards for innovation, appropriateness, and excellence in the design of products and systems.
To provide information to United States businesses on the use of design in the strategic planning process and in promoting their competitiveness.
To plan and implement programs which will educate United States businesses and the public with respect to the value of innovation and excellence in design and to encourage such businesses to promote such value in the design and creation of products and systems.
To consult and, to the extent practicable, coordinate its activities with each Federal agency that is concerned with the design of products, processes, and systems.
To develop a repository of information on aspects of design in manufacturing and economic development, and to make the information available for use by the public.
To devise and propose mechanisms by which the design activities of each Federal agency referred to in this Act is made known to, and coordinated with, the activities of each other such Federal agency in a manner that will contribute to the carrying out of this Act.
To acquaint the public with the possibility of careers in design.
To encourage educational institutions to adopt courses in design and in research related to design, and to include materials related to the appreciation of design in various courses of instruction.
To cooperate, to the extent practicable, with State and local governments, international organizations, and private agencies concerned with innovation and excellence in the design of products and systems.
Powers.-- (1) In general.--The Council may prescribe such rules as may be necessary to carry out its functions under this Act.
Information.--The Council may secure directly from a Federal agency such information as the Council may require to carry out its functions under this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Council, the head of the Federal agency shall furnish the information to the Council.
Advisory committees.--The Council may appoint advisory committees to assist the Council in carrying out its functions under this Act.
A member of an advisory committee under this paragraph may not receive compensation for the member's service on the advisory committee.
Mail.--The Council may use the United States mails in the same manner and upon the same conditions as any other Federal agency.
Director; Staff, Experts and Consultants.-- (1) Director.--The Council shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Secretary of Commerce and who shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay payable for grade 15 of the General Schedule set forth in title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--The Council may appoint and fix the pay of any staff in addition to the Director that the Council considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Applicability of civil service laws.--The staff of the Council shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and consultants.--With the approval of the Council, the Director may procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as is authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Other assistance.--As permitted by law and as necessary to carry out this Act, the Department of Commerce shall provide to the Council any staff, available information, and other assistance required by the Council to perform its functions under this Act.
Consultation and Coordination.--In providing advice and recommendations to the Secretary of Commerce under this Act, the Council may-- (1) consult with, and take into account the interests and views of, representatives of United States commerce and industry (including small businesses, science organizations, industrial design organizations, engineering organizations, and labor organizations), educational institutions, consumers, other Federal agencies, State and local governments, nationally recognized organizations that develop and coordinate standards, and any other persons the Council considers appropriate; (2) take into account relevant, ongoing activities in the private and public sectors to avoid the unnecessary duplication of such activities; (3) provide for appropriate procedures pursuant to which persons may, under the auspices of the Council, formulate, recommend, or suggest to the Council specific programs for coordinating innovation and excellence in design in each industry or segment thereof; (4) publicize in an appropriate manner programs and standards proposed under this Act and provide an opportunity for interested persons to submit comments on the programs and standards; (5) consult and cooperate with organizations and persons in the United States who are working to gain international recognition for design as a competitive advantage; and (6) make recommendations to the Congress and the Secretary of Commerce with respect to design issues, including-- (A) the impact of design on workers and on different occupations and industries; (B) the value to consumers of innovation and excellence in design; (C) the impact of design on society and the economy; (D) the effects of design on small businesses; (E) the impact of design on the international competitiveness of the United States; and (F) the appropriateness of, and methods for, using procurement by the Federal Government as a means to effect innovation and excellence in design.
Annual Report.--Each year, the Council shall submit to the Secretary of Commerce and to the Congress a report that summarizes the activities of the Council during the year preceding the year in which the report is submitted.
The report shall include any recommendations the Council considers appropriate.