This Act may be cited as the ``Climate Change Tax Amendments of 1999''.
PERMANENT TAX CREDIT FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGARDING GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION.
In General.--Section 41(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to termination) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Exception for certain research.--Paragraph (1)(B) shall not apply in the case of any qualified research expenses if the research-- ``(A) has as 1 of its purposes the reducing or sequestering of greenhouse gases, and ``(B) has been reported to the Department of Energy under section 1605(b) of the Energy Policy Act of 1992.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies with respect to amounts paid or incurred after the date of enactment of this Act, except that such amendment shall not take effect unless the Climate Change Energy Policy Response Act is enacted into law.
TAX CREDIT FOR REDUCED GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FACILITIES.
Allowance of Reduced Greenhouse Gas Emissions Facilities Credit.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amount of credit) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(4) the reduced greenhouse gas emissions facilities credit.''
Amount of Credit.--Subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rules for computing investment credit) is amended by inserting after section 48 the following: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR REDUCED GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FACILITIES.
In General.--For purposes of section 46, the reduced greenhouse gas emissions facilities credit for any taxable year is the applicable percentage of the qualified investment in a reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility for such taxable year.
Reduced Greenhouse Gas Emissions Facility.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility' means a facility of the taxpayer-- ``(1)(A) the construction, reconstruction, or erection of which is completed by the taxpayer, or ``(B) which is acquired by the taxpayer if the original use of such facility commences with the taxpayer, ``(2) the operation of which-- ``(A) replaces the operation of a facility of the taxpayer, ``(B) reduces greenhouse gas emissions on a per unit of output basis as compared to such emissions of the replaced facility, and ``(C) uses the same type of fuel (or combination of the same type of fuel and biomass fuel) as was used in the replaced facility, ``(3) with respect to which depreciation (or amortization in lieu of depreciation) is allowable, and ``(4) which meets the performance and quality standards (if any) which-- ``(A) have been jointly prescribed by the Secretary and the Secretary of Energy by regulations, ``(B) are consistent with regulations prescribed under section 1605(b) of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, and ``(C) are in effect at the time of the acquisition of the facility.
Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable percentage is one-half of the percentage reduction in greenhouse gas emissions described in subsection (b)(2) and reported and certified under section 1605(b) of the Energy Policy Act of 1992.
Qualified Investment.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `qualified investment' means, with respect to any taxable year, the basis of a reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year, but only with respect to that portion of the investment attributable to providing production capacity not greater than the production capacity of the facility being replaced.
Qualified Progress Expenditures.-- ``(1) Increase in qualified investment.--In the case of a taxpayer who has made an election under paragraph (5), the amount of the qualified investment of such taxpayer for the taxable year (determined under subsection (d) without regard to this subsection) shall be increased by an amount equal to the aggregate of each qualified progress expenditure for the taxable year with respect to progress expenditure property.
Progress expenditure property defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `progress expenditure property' means any property being constructed by or for the taxpayer and which it is reasonable to believe will qualify as a reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility which is being constructed by or for the taxpayer when it is placed in service.
Qualified progress expenditures defined.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Self-constructed property.--In the case of any self-constructed property, the term `qualified progress expenditures' means the amount which, for purposes of this subpart, is properly chargeable (during such taxable year) to capital account with respect to such property.
Non-self-constructed property.--In the case of non-self-constructed property, the term `qualified progress expenditures' means the amount paid during the taxable year to another person for the construction of such property.
Other definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Self-constructed property.--The term `self- constructed property' means property for which it is reasonable to believe that more than half of the construction expenditures will be made directly by the taxpayer.
Non-self-constructed property.--The term `non-self-constructed property' means property which is not self-constructed property.
Construction, etc.--The term `construction' includes reconstruction and erection, and the term `constructed' includes reconstructed and erected.
Only construction of reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility to be taken into account.-- Construction shall be taken into account only if, for purposes of this subpart, expenditures therefor are properly chargeable to capital account with respect to the property.
Election.--An election under this subsection may be made at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
Such an election shall apply to the taxable year for which made and to all subsequent taxable years.
Such an election, once made, may not be revoked except with the consent of the Secretary.''
Recapture.--Section 50(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to other special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(6) Special rules relating to reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility.--For purposes of applying this subsection in the case of any credit allowable by reason of section 48A, the following shall apply: ``(A) General rule.--In lieu of the amount of the increase in tax under paragraph (1), the increase in tax shall be an amount equal to the investment tax credit allowed under section 38 for all prior taxable years with respect to a reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility (as defined by section 48A(b)) multiplied by a fraction whose numerator is the number of years remaining to fully depreciate under this title the reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility disposed of, and whose denominator is the total number of years over which such facility would otherwise have been subject to depreciation.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the year of disposition of the reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility property shall be treated as a year of remaining depreciation.
Property ceases to qualify for progress expenditures.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraph (2) shall apply in the case of qualified progress expenditures for a reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility under section 48A, except that the amount of the increase in tax under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be substituted in lieu of the amount described in such paragraph (2).
Application of paragraph.--This paragraph shall be applied separately with respect to the credit allowed under section 38 regarding a reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility.''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Section 49(a)(1)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(iv) the portion of the basis of any reduced greenhouse gas emissions facility attributable to any qualified investment (as defined by section 48A(d)).''
Section 50(a)(4) of such Code is amended by striking ``and (5)'' and inserting ``, (5), and (6)''.
The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 48 the following: ``Sec.
Credit for reduced greenhouse gas emissions facilities.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
Study of Additional Incentives for Voluntary Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Energy shall jointly study possible additional incentives for, and removal of barriers to, voluntary, non recoupable expenditures for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
For purposes of this subsection, an expenditure shall be considered voluntary and non recoupable if the expenditure is not recoupable-- (A) from revenues generated from the investment, determined under generally accepted accounting standards (or under the applicable rate-of-return regulation, in the case of a taxpayer subject to such regulation), (B) from any tax or other financial incentive program established under Federal, State, or local law, or (C) pursuant to any credit-trading or other mechanism established under any international agreement or protocol that is in force.
Report.--Within 6 months of the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Energy shall jointly report to Congress on the results of the study described in paragraph (1), along with any recommendations for legislative action.
Scope and Impact.-- (1) Policy.--In order to achieve the broadest response for reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and to ensure that the incentives established by or pursuant to this Act do not advantage one segment of an industry to the disadvantage of another, it is the sense of Congress that incentives for greenhouse gas reductions should be available for individuals, organizations, and entities, including both for-profit and non- profit institutions.
Level playing field study and report.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Energy shall jointly study possible additional measures that would provide non-profit entities (such as municipal utilities and energy cooperatives) with economic incentives for greenhouse gas emission reductions comparable to those incentives provided to taxpayers under the amendments made to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 by this Act.
Report.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Energy shall jointly report to Congress on the results of the study described in subparagraph (A), along with any recommendations for legislative action.