This Act may be cited as the ``Texas Reclamation Projects Indebtedness Purchase Act''.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``public agency'' means a State agency or political subdivision of the State of Texas created under the laws of the State of Texas or home rule city created under the laws of the State of Texas; (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior; (3) the term ``present value'' means the calculation of the present value of the unpaid indebtedness of the project, as defined by the project repayment schedule, discounted at the United States Treasury rates on the date of purchase contract execution; (4) the term ``project'' or ``projects'' means the projects identified in section 4 of this Act and includes all features, functions, and property, real and personal, as authorized by Congress for any project in Texas constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation pursuant to Federal Reclamation laws (the Act of June 17, 1902 (32 United States Statutes at Large 388), and Acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto); (5) the term ``non-Federal mitigation costs'' means costs or expenses incurred by the State of Texas or public agency, whether paid directly or incurred as a reduction of anticipated project benefits, not otherwise included as costs to be repaid to the Federal Government, to mitigate environmental impacts of the project pursuant to law; and (6) the term ``current contracting party'' means the public agency which has contracted with the United States for repayment of the indebtedness of the project.
AGREEMENT FOR THE SALE OF INDEBTEDNESS OF BUREAU OF RECLAMATION PROJECTS IN TEXAS.
The Secretary shall enter into an agreement with the current contracting party, or in the alternative, a public agency of the State of Texas, within six months after the enactment of this Act, for the purchase of the projects, whether individual or more than one, according to the following conditions: (1) The purchase price shall be the payment to the United States of monies equal to the present value of the individual projects which the State of Texas desires to purchase.
For projects with identified liabilities, and projects where actual benefits are less than those projected at the time of project authorization, the purchase price shall be discounted to the extent of the identified liability or unrealized benefits, as determined by the State of Texas.
For projects that the Bureau of Reclamation is obligated to pay a portion of maintenance and operating expenses or payments in lieu of taxes, the purchase price shall be discounted at an amount equal to the Bureau of Reclamations' anticipated payment for the next 50 years.
For projects in which the State of Texas or the public agency of the State of Texas assume the responsibility for implementation of Federal nonreimbursable aspects of the project or projects with non-Federal mitigation costs, the purchase price shall be reduced to reflect the additional obligations undertaken or costs incurred.
When the purchase price is paid, the Secretary shall convey to the State of Texas, or the public agency of the State of Texas, all right, title, and interest of the United States to all land and all improvements to the project or projects.
Interests may be retained by the United States to the limited extent those interests must be maintained to implement remaining Federal programs described in paragraph (9).
The State of Texas, or the public agency of the State of Texas, shall assume all liability for operation and maintenance of the purchased project or projects.
The United States shall provide for the performance of work reasonably necessary to provide for the delivery of such project or projects, including all facilities and property, in a reasonably safe and functional condition and in accordance with good maintenance standards.
Upon completion of full payment of the purchase price described in this section and the transfer of a project, the State of Texas, or the public agency of the State of Texas, shall be relieved from compliance with the acreage limitations and other requirements of Reclamation law, and the project beneficiaries shall not thereafter be eligible to receive reclamation benefits available pursuant to the Act of June 17, 1902 (32 United States Statutes at Large 388), and Acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, unless otherwise authorized by Congress.
Upon completion of purchase, the State of Texas, or the public agency of the State of Texas, will assume sole responsibility and liability for the project or projects purchased (or portion thereof) as of the date of conveyance of title and the State of Texas, or the public agency of the State of Texas, will hold the United States harmless and indemnify the United States against any and all claims of damage, except to the extent any title or aspect of project operations has been retained by the United States, and the State of Texas, or the public agency of the State of Texas, will be relieved from any obligation to comply with reclamation rules or regulation applicable to reclamation projects.
The State of Texas, or the public agency of the State of Texas, must assume responsibility for continued implementation of all nonreimbursable aspects of the project originally authorized by Congress.
Existing programs of the National Park Service and Corps of Engineers associated with specific projects shall not be affected by the transfer.
PROJECTS AND PURCHASE PRICE.
The projects for which the Secretary shall execute agreements, and the price which public agencies or the State of Texas shall pay for such projects, based upon the provisions of section 3, are: (1) Canadian River Project authorized by the Act of Congress approved December 29, 1950 (Public Law 81-898), in the amount of $21,187,881.
Title to portions of the project owned by the National Park Service, and portions required for flood control operation by the United States Army Corp of Engineers, shall not be transferred.
Palmetto Bend Project, Texas, authorized by Act of Congress approved October 12, 1968 (Public Law 90-562), in the amount of $33,923,245.
Nueces River Reclamation Project, authorized by the Act of Congress approved October 27, 1974 (Public Law 93-493), in the amount of $30,715,367.
COMPLIANCE WITH CURRENT LAW.
The assumption of Federal nonreimbursable responsibility by the current contracting authority or the State of Texas, or public agency of the State of Texas, is in compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and project purchase review shall not be required pursuant thereto.
Section 213(c) of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982 (43 United States Code 3(c)) shall not apply to the projects covered by this Act.