This Act may be cited as the ``Capitol Visitor Center Authorization Act of 1995''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CAPITOL VISITOR CENTER.
In General.--The Architect of the Capitol, under the direction of the United States Capitol Preservation Commission, is authorized-- (1) to plan, construct, equip, administer, and maintain a Capitol Visitor Center under the East Plaza of the United States Capitol with associated improvements to the Capitol to provide access thereto; and (2) to reconstruct the environs of the East Plaza of the United States Capitol to enhance its attractiveness, safety, and security.
Purpose.--It shall be the purpose of the Capitol Visitor Center to provide reception facilities, educational exhibits, amenities, auditoriums, and other programs and facilities for members of the public visiting the United States Capitol.
Report to Congress.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Architect of the Capitol shall complete engineering and architectural designs and cost estimates for construction of the Capitol Visitor Center and transmit a report on the results thereof to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate, and the United States Capitol Preservation Commission.
Contents.--The report to be transmitted under subsection (a) shall include detailed plans, specifications, and cost estimates for construction of the Capitol Visitor Center.
Plans for Exhibits.--Plans and specifications for the exhibits and equipping of the Capitol Visitor Center shall be completed by the Architect of the Capitol as soon as practicable after the commencement of construction.
General Rule.--The Architect of the Capitol may not begin construction of the Capitol Visitor Center until plans, designs, and cost estimates transmitted under section 3 are approved by resolutions adopted by the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate, respectively.
Building Codes.--The Capitol Visitor Center and associated improvements shall meet design standards applicable under nationally recognized building codes, as determined by the Architect of the Capitol.
During construction, the Architect shall conduct periodic inspections of the Capitol Visitor Center for the purpose of assuring that such standards are being met.
Applicability of Certain Laws.--The Capitol Visitor Center and associated improvements and the construction thereof shall not be subject to any Federal or State law (including laws of the District of Columbia) relating to taxes, building codes, permits, or inspections.
In General.--For the purposes of carrying out section 2(a)(1), the Architect of the Capitol may solicit, receive, accept, hold, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Deposit of Receipts.--The Architect of the Capitol shall deposit into the account established by section 6(a) all monetary gifts received under subsection (a) and all proceeds from the disposition of nonmonetary gifts received under subsection (a).
Treatment Under Tax Laws.--Any gift accepted by the Architect of the Capitol under subsection (a) shall be considered a gift to the United States for the purposes of income, estate, and gift tax laws of the United States.
ACCOUNT IN THE TREASURY.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a separate account entitled ``Architect of the Capitol, Capitol Buildings and Grounds, Capitol Visitor Center, Gifts and Donations'' which shall consist of amounts deposited into the account by the Architect of the Capitol under section 5(b) and amounts credited to the account pursuant to this section.
Availability of Amounts.--Funds in the account established by subsection (a) shall be available to the Architect of the Capitol for carrying out section 2(a)(1) in such amounts as are specified in appropriations Acts.
Such funds shall not be subject to any fiscal year limitation.
Reporting of Transactions.--Receipts, obligations, and expenditures of funds in the account established by subsection (a) shall be reported in annual estimates submitted to Congress by the Architect of the Capitol for the operation and maintenance of the Capitol Buildings and Grounds.
Investment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the account established by subsection (a) as is not, in the judgment of the Secretary, required to meet current withdrawals.
Such investments may be made only in interest- bearing obligations of the United States.
For such purpose, such obligations may be acquired-- (A) on original issue at the issue price; or (B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Sale of obligations.--Any obligation acquired by the account may be sold at the market price.
Interest on certain proceeds.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the account shall be credited to and form part of the account.
The Architect of the Capitol may enter into contracts, using procedures other than competitive procedures, in carrying out section 2(a)(1).
SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF UNITED STATES CAPITOL PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
Delegation of Functions.--The United States Capitol Preservation Commission is authorized to delegate to the Special Committee appointed pursuant to the amendment made by subsection (b) the functions of the Commission under this Act.
Establishment.--Section 801 of the Arizona-Idaho Conservation Act of 1988 (40 United States Code 188a) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Special Committee.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Commission is authorized to establish a Special Committee consisting of 3 Members of Congress as follows: ``(A) One Member of the House of Representatives to be appointed by the Commission.
One Member of the Senate to be appointed by the Commission.
One Member of the House of Representatives or the Senate to be appointed by the 2 members appointed pursuant to subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Chairman; functions.--The Special Committee established pursuant to paragraph (1) shall elect its own chairperson and shall provide the Architect of the Capitol with all necessary oversight and direction in the exercise of the authority granted to the Architect under the Capitol Visitor Center Authorization Act of 1995.''.
General Rule.--Funds for the payment of expenses incurred by the Architect of the Capitol in carrying out section 2(a)(1) shall be derived solely from the account established by section 6(a).
Statutory Construction.--Subsection (a) shall not be construed as limiting the use of any funds for the repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any existing structure of the United States Capitol.