This Act may be cited as the ``Patent Term Restoration Act of 1997''.
Amendment of Title 35.--Effective on the date of the enactment of this Act, section 154 of title 35, United States Code, as amended by the Uruguay Round Agreements Act, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2) of subsection (a), by striking ``and ending'' and all that follows in that paragraph and inserting ``and ending-- ``(A) 17 years from the date of the grant of the patent, or ``(B) 20 years from the date on which the application for the patent was filed in the United States, except that if the application contains a specific reference to an earlier filed application or applications under section 120, 121, or 365(c) of this title, 20 years from the date on which the earliest such patent application was filed, whichever is later.''.
in subsection (c)(1), by striking ``shall be the greater of the 20-year term as provided in subsection (a), or 17 years from grant'' and inserting ``shall be the term provided in subsection (a)''.
Technical Amendment.--Section 534(b) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act is amended by striking paragraph (3).
DEFINITION OF SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES TO PROTECT THE CONFIDENTIALITY STATUS OF APPLICATIONS.
Section 122 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by striking ``as may be determined by the Commissioner'' and inserting ``as in any of the following: ``(1) In the case of an application under section 111(a) for a patent for an invention for which the applicant intends to file or has filed an application for a patent in a foreign country, the Commissioner may publish, at the discretion of the Commissioner and by means determined suitable for the purpose, no more than that data from such application under section 111(a) which will be made or has been made public in such foreign country.
Such a publication shall be made only after the date of the publication in such foreign country.
(A) If the Commissioner determines that a patent application which is filed after the date of the enactment of this paragraph-- ``(i) has been pending more than 5 years from the effective filing date of the application, ``(ii) has not been previously published by the Patent and Trademark Office, ``(iii) is not under any appellate review by the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences, ``(iv) is not under interference proceedings in accordance with section 135(a), ``(v) is not under any secrecy order pursuant to section 181, ``(vi) is not being diligently pursued by the applicant in accordance with this title, and ``(vii) is not in abandonment, the Commissioner shall notify the applicant of such determination.
An applicant which received notice of a determination described in subparagraph (A) may, within 30 days of receiving such notice, petition the Commissioner to review the determination to verify that subclauses (i) through (vii) are all applicable to the applicant's application.
If the applicant makes such a petition, the Commissioner shall not publish the applicant's application before the Commissioner's review of the petition is completed.
If the applicant does not submit a petition, the Commissioner may publish the applicant's application no earlier than 90 days after giving such a notice.
If after the date of the enactment of this paragraph a continuing application has been filed more than 6 months after the date of the initial filing of an application, the Commissioner shall notify the applicant under such application.
The Commissioner shall establish a procedure for an applicant which receives such a notice to demonstrate that the purpose of the continuing application was for reasons other than to achieve a delay in the time of publication of the application.
If the Commissioner agrees with such a demonstration by the applicant, the Commissioner shall not publish the applicant's application.
If the Commissioner does not agree with such a demonstration by the applicant or if the applicant does not make an attempt at such a demonstration within a reasonable period of time as determined by the Commissioner, the Commissioner shall publish the applicant's application.
The Commissioner shall ensure that publications under paragraph (1), (2), or (3) will not result in third-party pre-issuance oppositions which will delay or interfere with the issuance of the patents whose applications' data will be published.