This Act may be cited as the ``Act to Improve the American Diet''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) The Surgeon General of the Public Health Service has stated that dietary patterns with excessive intake of foods high in fat (especially saturated fat), calories, cholesterol and sodium, contribute to the high rates of chronic diseases among Americans.
Reversing such dietary patterns should decrease the incidence of these chronic diseases.
Currently, diet plays a major role in the development of 4 of the top 7 diseases that are killers in the United States: heart disease, cancer, stroke, and diabetes.
According to the Department of Health and Human Services, America's poor diet and sedentary lifestyle contribute to 300,000 to 580,000 deaths each year.
To make significant strides toward improving the health of Americans, greater attention must be made to nutrition education.
The President could provide leadership by giving a higher profile to the importance of a healthy diet.
Good nutrition is one of the most important factors in determining long-term health.
Improvements in the diet of Americans can reduce the health care cost of treating dietary-related diseases and produce a savings of up to $200,000,000,000.
The Department of Health and Human Services and the Preventive Services Task Force have recommended that health care programs for individuals of all ages should include dietary counselling.
Efforts must be made to identify and to remove the barriers to optimal health and nutritional status in high-risk groups, including minority and low-income population groups (using methods that take into consideration their diverse cultural, ethnic and economic backgrounds); and special attention should also be made to pregnant and lactating women, to children, and to the elderly, who have special nutritional needs.
COORDINATION BETWEEN FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, VOLUNTARY ORGANIZATIONS, AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE REGARDING THE NATIONAL PROGRAM FOR A HEALTHY DIET.
In General.--The President shall establish a national program for diet and health in accordance with the purpose described in subsection (b).
Purpose of Program.--The purpose of the National Program is to help coordinate, support, and assist nutrition education activities and programs by State and local governments and by private entities, including educational institutions, voluntary organizations, civic groups, professional associations, business organizations, and other private entities.
Coordination Regarding Intergovernmental Relationships and Public and Private Entities.-- (1) Coordination in federal activities.--The National Program shall assess the extent to which the purpose described in subsection (b) is being carried out by the various departments and agencies of the Federal Government, and shall carry out the activities of the Program in coordination with the departments and agencies involved.
Intergovernmental relationships.--The National Program shall assess the nutrition education activities and programs being carried out by State and local governments and by private entities, and shall help coordinate, support, and assist the activities and programs.
Certain Program Activities.--The activities of the National Program shall include (but are not limited to) the following: (1) Promoting the health of Americans by facilitating and collaborating with Federal, State, local, and private strategies to encourage the American people to eat a healthy diet.
Initiating programs to inform the general public of the importance of a healthy diet and its link to good health and disease prevention.
Enlisting the active support and assistance of individual citizens, civic groups, private enterprise, voluntary organizations and others in efforts to promote and improve the health of all Americans through healthy eating habits.
Inviting appropriate Federal health agencies to participate in the National Program.
Seeking to improve the diets of children, youth, adults, minorities, senior citizens, and low-income individuals by encouraging the development of community-wellness programs and health education programs.
Working with State and local government to develop and implement nutrition education programs.
Assisting health educational agencies at all levels in developing high quality, innovative health programs which emphasize the importance of diet to good health.
Developing cooperative programs with medical, dental, social workers and other similar professional schools and educational associations to encourage the implementation of sound nutrition practices in medical services and education.
Assisting business, industry, government, and labor organizations, and other workplace organizations or groups, in developing and implementing sound nutrition programs to elevate employee health and reduce the financial and human costs resulting from a poor diet.
Increasing awareness among the American people about the importance of producing healthy food and of the availability of healthy food in the supermarkets, food establishments, and food programs, and to encourage food providers to provide and serve healthy meals and products.
Authority Regarding Non-Federal Contributions.--In carrying out activities under the National Program in a community (or other geographic area), the National Program may require that, as a condition of carrying out the Federal activities, non-Federal contributions be provided toward the costs of the activities.
Requirement Regarding Participation of Private Entities.--A private entity may be permitted to sponsor or otherwise participate in a particular activity of the National Program only if the entity does not promote, directly or indirectly, any health-related behavior that is inconsistent with the purpose of such activity.
PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON DIET AND HEALTH.
In General.--The President shall provide for the establishment and operation of a council to be known as the President's Council on Diet and Health.
Duties.--The Council shall provide advice to the President regarding the National Program, including advice on the extent of progress being made toward achieving the goals of the Program, and shall recommend, as necessary, actions to accelerate progress.
The Council shall assist in carrying out the Program, as necessary, and provide advice and guidance to State and local public health officials, and to private entities (including educational, voluntary, and civic groups), on how to promote diet and health.
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The Council shall be composed of-- (A) such Federal officials or employees as the President may designate to serve as members of the Council; and (B) 20 members appointed to the Council by the President from among individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government and who possess appropriate expertise or experience regarding nutrition and health.
Certain requirements.--Of the members of the Council appointed under paragraph (1)(B)-- (A) not fewer than 3 shall be individuals representing a national organization concerned with nutrition and health; and (B) not fewer than 7 shall be individuals who possess professional credentials demonstrating particular expertise regarding food, nutrition, or health, of which 3 individuals shall be knowledgeable on nutrition and health among low-income populations or among one or more racial or ethnic minority groups.
Chair.--The President shall designate an individual or individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government to serve as the chair or chairs of the Council.
A Chair shall serve at the pleasure of the President.
The President shall seek to ensure that the Chair of the Council is an individual who is well-known by the public and who will be an appropriate advocate among the public with respect to obtaining the goals of the National Program.
Terms.--Each of the members of the Council appointed under paragraph (1)(B) shall be appointed for a term of 4 years, except that up to half of the initial appointments, when the Council is first created, may be for 2 years, and may upon the expiration of a term be reappointed by the President.
A member of the Council may continue to serve after the expiration of his or her term until a successor is appointed.
The President may at any time terminate the membership on the Council of any individual for cause.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the membership of the Council does not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Council.
Meetings.--The Council shall meet not less than once each fiscal year.
Compensation and Reimbursement of Expenses.--Members of the Council may not receive compensation for service on the Council.
The members may, in accordance with chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the duties of the Council.
Staff; Administrative Support.-- (1) In general.--The President shall furnish the Council with such staff, quarters, supplies, facilities, and other administrative support as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the Council and assist in carrying out the National Program.
Executive director.--To carry out the National Program, the President shall appoint an executive director for the Council, who shall serve until a new one is appointed.
Seal of Program.--The President shall provide for the development and use of a seal for the National Program.
Termination.--For purposes of section 14(a)(2)(B) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, the Council shall continue in existence until otherwise provided by law after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Requests for Federal Information and Assistance.--The National Program and the Council may upon request receive from Federal agencies such information and other assistance as may otherwise be permitted by law, subject to the availability of funds to comply with the request.
Definitions.--For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Council'' means the council established under section 4(a).
The term ``National Program'' means the program established under section 3(a).
In addition to any other authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose of carrying out this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated to the National Program and the Council for such purpose $300,000 for fiscal year 1995, $500,000 for fiscal year 1996, and $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1997 and each subsequent fiscal year.