This Act may be cited as the ``Investing in our Human Resources Act of 2008''.
BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES FOR TRANSITIONAL ASSISTANCE.
The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE XXII--BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES FOR TRANSITIONAL ASSISTANCE ``SEC.
TRANSITIONAL ASSISTANCE TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Transitional Assistance Trust Fund'', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund as provided in this section.
Transfer to Transitional Assistance Trust Fund of Amounts Equivalent to Certain Taxes.-- ``(1) In general.--There are hereby appropriated to the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, amounts equivalent to the taxes received in the Treasury after September 30, 2009, that the Secretary of the Treasury determines are attributable to Internet gambling.
Method of transfer.--The amounts appropriated by paragraph (1) shall be transferred from time to time from the general fund in the Treasury to the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund.
Such amounts shall be determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of the taxes, specified in paragraph (1) of this subsection, paid to or deposited into the Treasury.
Proper adjustments shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess of or were less than the taxes specified in paragraph (1) of this subsection.
Investment.-- ``(1) In general.--It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to invest such portion of the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund as is not, in his judgment, required to meet current withdrawals.
Such investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States.
For such purpose, such obligations may be acquired-- ``(A) on original issue at the issue price; or ``(B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Sale of obligations.--Any obligation acquired by the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund may be sold by the Secretary of the Treasury at the market price.
Interest on certain proceeds.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund.
Expenditures From Transitional Assistance Trust Fund.-- Amounts in the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund shall be available, as provided by appropriation Acts, for making expenditures-- ``(1) to carry out section 2202; and ``(2) to carry out the Safe Internet Gambling Practices Program established under section 3 of the Investing in our Human Resources Act of 2008.
TRANSITIONAL ASSISTANCE GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--Each State shall be entitled to a payment under this section for each fiscal year in an amount equal to its allotment for such fiscal year, to be used by such State to carry out the State's plan for transitional assistance described in subsection (c), subject to the requirements of this section.
Plan Approval Required.--No State may receive a payment under this section unless the State submits the State's plan for transitional assistance described in subsection (c) to the Secretary and the Secretary approves such plan.
State Plan for Transitional Assistance.--A State plan for transitional assistance is described by this subsection if the plan-- ``(1) provides for expanded education opportunities for individuals who are, or were formerly, in foster care, including streamlining and coordinating education financing opportunities and providing counseling and assistance to such individuals for the purpose of ensuring completion of their academic goals; ``(2) provides for job training opportunities for individuals who are, or were formerly, in foster care; ``(3) provides, primarily through expanding access to and investment in community colleges, for expanded post-secondary education and job training opportunities that lead to a certificate, for individuals who are working in, or had worked in, declining sectors of the economy, as defined by the Secretary, and who want to pursue a new career in a sector of the economy with the potential for high wages and high growth, as defined by the Secretary; and ``(4) provides a subsidy for the use of public transportation by-- ``(A) individuals qualifying for benefits or services under title XX, including the Federal-State Unemployment Insurance Program; and ``(B) individuals participating in programs under the Workforce Investment Act.
Allotment.--The allotment for a fiscal year for a State receiving an allotment for such fiscal year shall be an amount equal to-- ``(1) the amount appropriated for such fiscal year under subsection (f), multiplied by ``(2) the ratio by which the population of the State bears to the population of all the States receiving an allotment for such fiscal year as determined by the Secretary (on the basis of the most recent data available from the Department of Commerce).
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) In foster care.--The term `in foster care' means, with respect to an individual, an individual who is under the care and placement responsibility of the State agency responsible for administering a plan, in connection with such individual, under part B or part E of title IV.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term `State' means the 50 States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year to the Secretary an amount from the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund equal to 90 percent of the total amount deposited into the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund pursuant to section 2201 during the previous fiscal year to carry out this section.''.
SAFE INTERNET GAMBLING PRACTICES PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish a national program to be known as the ``Safe Internet Gambling Practices Program''.
The Safe Internet Gambling Practices Program shall-- (1) promote responsible Internet gambling behavior; and (2) promote the awareness of unsafe Internet gambling practices.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year to the Secretary of Health and Human Services an amount from the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund equal to the amount deposited in the Transitional Assistance Trust Fund during the previous fiscal year not otherwise authorized to be appropriated under section 2202(f) of title XXII of the Social Security Act for such year to carry out this section.