TITLE I This Act may be cited as the ``Land and Liberty Protection Act of 2008''.
TITLE II SECTION 1.
This title may be cited as the ``Protecting Americans From Violent Crime Act of 2008''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The Second Amendment to the Constitution provides that ``the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed''.
Section 2.4(a)(1) of title 36, Code of Federal Regulations, provides that ``except as otherwise provided in this section and parts 7 (special regulations) and 13 (Alaska regulations), the following are prohibited: (i) Possessing a weapon, trap or net, (ii) Carrying a weapon, trap or net, (iii) Using a weapon, trap or net''.
Section 27.42 of title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, provides that, except in special circumstances, citizens of the United States may not ``possess, use, or transport firearms on national wildlife refuges'' of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
The regulations described in paragraphs (2) and (3) prevent individuals complying with Federal and State laws from exercising the second amemdment rights of the individuals while at units of-- (A) the National Park System; and (B) the National Wildlife Refuge System.
The existence of different laws relating to the transportation and possession of firearms at different units of the National Park System and the National Wildlife Refuge System entraps law-abiding gun owners while at units of the National Park System and the National Wildlife Refuge System.
The Federal laws should make it clear that the second amendment rights of an individual at a unit of the National Park System or the National Wildlife Refuge System should not be infringed.
PROTECTING THE RIGHT OF INDIVIDUALS TO BEAR ARMS IN UNITS OF THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM AND THE NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM.
The Secretary of the Interior shall not promulgate or enforce any regulation that prohibits an individual from possessing a firearm including an assembled or functional firearm in any unit of the National Park System or the National Wildlife Refuge System if-- (1) the individual is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm; and (2) the possession of the firearm is in compliance with the law of the State in which the unit of the National Park System or the National Wildlife Refuge System is located.
TITLE III SECTION 1.
This title may be cited as the ``Government Real Estate Accountability and Transparency Act of 2008''.
ANNUAL REPORT DETAILING AMOUNT OF LAND OWNED BY FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND THE COST OF GOVERNMENT LAND OWNERSHIP TO TAXPAYERS.
Annual Report.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), not later than May 15, 2009, and annually thereafter, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (referred to in this section as the ``Director'') shall ensure that a report that contains the information described in subsection (b) is posted on a publicly available website.
Extension relating to certain segment of report.--With respect to the date on which the first annual report is required to be posted under paragraph (1), if the Director determines that an additional period of time is required to gather the information required under subsection (b)(3)(B), the Director may-- (A) as of the date described in paragraph (1), post each segment of information required under paragraphs (1), (2), and (3)(A) of subsection (b); and (B) as of May 15, 2010, post the segment of information required under subsection (b)(3)(B).
Required Information.--An annual report described in subsection (a) shall contain, for the period covered by the report-- (1) a description of the total quantity of-- (A) land located within the jurisdiction of the United States, to be expressed in acres; (B) the land described in subparagraph (A) that is owned by the Federal Government, to be expressed-- (i) in acres; and (ii) as a percentage of the quantity described in subparagraph (A); and (C) the land described in subparagraph (B) that is located in each State, to be expressed, with respect to each State-- (i) in acres; and (ii) as a percentage of the quantity described in subparagraph (B); (2) a description of the total annual cost to the Federal Government for maintaining all parcels of administrative land and all administrative buildings or structures under the jurisdiction of each Federal agency; and (3) a list and detailed summary of-- (A) with respect to each Federal agency-- (i) the number of unused or vacant assets; (ii) the replacement value for each unused or vacant asset; (iii) the total operating costs for each unused or vacant asset; and (iv) the length of time that each type of asset described in clause (i) has been unused or vacant, organized in categories comprised of periods of-- (I) not more than 1 year; (II) not less than 1, but not more than 2, years; and (III) not less than 2 years; and (B) the estimated costs to the Federal Government of the maintenance backlog of each Federal agency, to be-- (i) organized in categories comprised of buildings and structures; and (ii) expressed as an aggregate cost.
Use of Existing Annual Reports.--An annual report required under subsection (a) may be comprised of any annual report relating to the management of Federal real property that is published by a Federal agency.
TITLE IV SECTION 1.
This Act may be cited as the ``No Trespassing Act of 2008''.
The Secretary of the Interior shall not approve a management plan for a National Heritage Area unless the local coordinating entity of the proposed National Heritage Area provides written notification through the United States mail of the designation to each individual who resides, or owns property that is located, in the proposed National Heritage Area.
With respect to each National Heritage Area, no employee of the National Park Service or member of the local coordinating entity of the National Heritage Area (including any designee of the National Park Service or the local coordinating entity) may enter a parcel of private property located in the National Heritage Area without the written consent of the owner of the parcel of property.
TITLE V SECTION 1.
This Act may be cited as the ``Taxpayer Property Protection Act of 2008''.
REQUIRING CITIZEN APPROVAL OF GOVERNMENT LAND GRABS.
In General.--Subject to subsections (b) and (c), the Department of the Interior, the Department of Energy, and the Forest Service, acting individually or in coordination, shall not assume control of any parcel of land located in a State unless the citizens of each political subdivision of the State in which a portion of the parcel of land is located approve the assumption of control by a referendum.
National Emergencies.--The requirement described in subsection (a) shall not apply in the case of a national emergency, as determined by the President.
Private Landowners.--The requirement described in subsection (a) shall not apply in the case of an exchange between a private landowner and the Federal Government of a parcel of land.
Duration of Approval.-- (1) In general.--With respect to a parcel of land described in subsection (a), the approval of the citizens of each political subdivision in which a portion of the parcel of land is located terminates on the date that is 10 years after the date on which the citizens of each political subdivision approve the control of the parcel of land by the Department of the Interior, the Department of Energy, or the Forest Service under that subsection.
Renewal of approval.--With respect to a parcel of land described in subsection (a), the Department of the Interior, the Department of Energy, or the Forest Service, as applicable, may renew, by referendum, the approval of the citizens of each political subdivision in which a portion of the parcel of land is located.
TITLE VI SECTION 1.
This Act may be cited as the ``Do No Harm Act of 2008''.
GUARANTEE OF NO ADVERSE AFFECTS TO CITIZENS AS A RESULT OF A NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA DESIGNATION.
Each National Heritage Area designation shall not take effect until the date on which the President certifies that-- (1) the designation of each proposed National Heritage Area will not cause an adverse impact on-- (A) agricultural or livestock production within the proposed National Heritage Area; (B) energy exploration and production within the proposed National Heritage Area; (C) critical infrastructure located within the proposed National Heritage Area, including the placement and maintenance of-- (i) electric transmission and distribution lines (including related infrastructure); and (ii) natural gas pipelines (including related infrastructure); and (D) the affordability of housing; and (2) with respect to each State in which there is located a proposed National Heritage Area, the total deferred maintenance backlog of the State is an amount not greater than $50,000,000, as reported by the Director of the National Park Service to the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board.