SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``SBA Women's Business Programs Act of 2007''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--NATIONAL WOMEN'S BUSINESS COUNCIL Sec.
Annual studies on problems hindering the success of women entrepreneurs.
TITLE II--WOMEN'S BUSINESS CENTERS Sec.
Women's business center awards to be made public.
TITLE I--NATIONAL WOMEN'S BUSINESS COUNCIL SEC.
ANNUAL STUDIES ON PROBLEMS HINDERING THE SUCCESS OF WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS.
Section 409 of the Women's Business Ownership Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 7109) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c); and (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following: ``(b) Problems Hindering the Success of Women Entrepreneurs.--The Council shall conduct at least one study per year that evaluates the problems hindering the success of women entrepreneurs.
The Council shall select the topic for the study in consultation with the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate.''.
Section 406(d)(4) of the Women's Business Ownership Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 7106(d)(4)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, and on a biannual basis (notwithstanding paragraph (6)) submit to the President and to the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate and the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives a report containing a description of, and the status of, such initiatives, policies, programs, and plans''.
TITLE II--WOMEN'S BUSINESS CENTERS SEC.
Section 29(b) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 656(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The Administrator may provide financial assistance to private nonprofit organizations to conduct projects for the benefit of small business concerns owned and controlled by women.
The projects shall provide-- ``(A) financial assistance, including training and counseling in how to apply for and secure business credit and investment capital, preparing and presenting financial statements, and managing cash flow and other financial operations of a business concern; ``(B) management assistance, including training and counseling in how to plan, organize, staff, direct, and control each major activity and function of a small business concern; and ``(C) marketing assistance, including training and counseling in identifying and segmenting domestic and international market opportunities, preparing and executing marketing plans, developing pricing strategies, locating contract opportunities, negotiating contracts, and utilizing varying public relations and advertising techniques.
Tiers.--The Administrator shall provide assistance under paragraph (1) in three tiers of assistance as follows: ``(A) The first tier shall be to conduct a 5-year project in a situation where a project has not previously been conducted.
Such a project shall be in a total amount of not more than $150,000 per year.
The second tier shall be to conduct a 3-year project in a situation where a first-tier project is being completed.
Such a project shall be in a total amount of not more than $100,000 per year.
The third tier shall be to conduct a 3-year project in a situation where a second-tier project is being completed.
Such a project shall be in a total amount of not more than $100,000 per year.
Third-tier grants are renewable subject to established eligibility criteria as well as criteria in subsection (b)(4).
Allocation of funds.--Of the amounts made available for assistance under this subsection, the Administrator shall allocate-- ``(A) at least 40 percent for first-tier projects under paragraph (2)(A); ``(B) 20 percent for second-tier projects under paragraph (2)(B); and ``(C) the remainder for third-tier projects under paragraph (2)(C).
Benchmarks for third-tier projects.--In awarding third-tier projects under paragraph (2)(C), the Administrator shall use benchmarks based on socio-economic factors in the community and on the performance of the applicant.
The benchmarks shall include-- ``(A) the total number of women served by the project; ``(B) the proportion of low income women and socio- economic distribution of clients served by the project; ``(C) the proportion of individuals in the community that are socially or economically disadvantaged (based on median income); ``(D) the future fundraising and service coordination plans; ``(E) the diversity of services provided; and ``(F) regional distribution within the 10 districts of the Administration.''.
Section 29(c)(1) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 656(c)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B); and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(A) For the first and second years of the project, 1 non-Federal dollar for each 2 Federal dollars.
Each year after the second year of the project-- ``(i) 1 non-Federal dollar for each Federal dollar; or ``(ii) if the center is in a community at least 50 percent of the population of which is below the median income, 1 non-Federal dollar for each 2 Federal dollars.''.
Section 29(c) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 656(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Termination.--An organization that has conducted a project under this subsection-- ``(A) is not eligible to conduct another such project; and ``(B) may continue thereafter to use the women's business center logo only with the consent of the Administrator.''.
WOMEN'S BUSINESS CENTER AWARDS TO BE MADE PUBLIC.
Section 29(g)(2)(B)(ii)(V) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 656(g)(2)(B)(ii)(V)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, and make available to the public the award made to each applicant so selected''.
Passed the House of Representatives June 18, 2007.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.