This Act may be cited as the ``Equal Employment Opportunity Complaint Data Disclosure Act''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``agency'' means an Executive agency, a military department, the United States Postal Service, the Postal Rate Commission, and any other governmental entity (within the jurisdiction of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission) which the Commission may by regulation specify, but does not include the General Accounting Office; (2) the term ``basis of alleged discrimination'' shall have the meaning given such term under section 5; and (3) the term ``issue of alleged discrimination'' shall have the meaning given such term under section 5.
DATA TO BE POSTED BY EMPLOYING AGENCIES.
In General.--Each agency shall post on its public Web site, in the time, form, and manner prescribed under section 5 (in conformance with the requirements of this section), summary statistical data relating to equal employment opportunity complaints filed with such agency by employees or former employees of, or applicants for employment with, such agency.
Content Requirements.--The data posted by an agency under this section shall include, for the then current fiscal year, the following: (1) The number of complaints filed with the agency in such fiscal year.
The number of individuals filing those complaints (including as the agent of a class).
The number of individuals who filed 2 or more of those complaints.
The number of complaints (described in paragraph (1)) in which each of the various bases of alleged discrimination is alleged.
The number of complaints (described in paragraph (1)) in which each of the various issues of alleged discrimination is alleged.
The average length of time, for each step of the process, it is taking the agency to process complaints (taking into account all complaints pending for any length of time in such fiscal year, whether first filed in such fiscal year or earlier).
Average times under this paragraph shall be posted-- (A) for all such complaints; (B) for all such complaints in which a hearing before an administrative judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is not requested; and (C) for all such complaints in which a hearing before an administrative judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is requested.
The total number of final agency actions rendered in such fiscal year involving a finding of discrimination and, of that number-- (A) the number and percentage that were rendered without a hearing before an administrative judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; and (B) the number and percentage that were rendered after a hearing before an administrative judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Of the total number of final agency actions rendered in such fiscal year involving a finding of discrimination-- (A) the number and percentage involving a finding of discrimination based on each of the respective bases of alleged discrimination; and (B) of the number specified under subparagraph (A) for each of the respective bases of alleged discrimination-- (i) the number and percentage that were rendered without a hearing before an administrative judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; and (ii) the number and percentage that were rendered after a hearing before an administrative judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Of the total number of final agency actions rendered in such fiscal year involving a finding of discrimination-- (A) the number and percentage involving a finding of discrimination in connection with each of the respective issues of alleged discrimination; and (B) of the number specified under subparagraph (A) for each of the respective issues of alleged discrimination-- (i) the number and percentage that were rendered without a hearing before an administrative judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; and (ii) the number and percentage that were rendered after a hearing before an administrative judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
(A) Of the total number of complaints pending in such fiscal year (as described in the parenthetical matter in paragraph (6)), the number that were first filed before the start of the then current fiscal year.
With respect to those pending complaints that were first filed before the start of the then current fiscal year-- (i) the number of individuals who filed those complaints; and (ii) the number of those complaints which are at the various steps of the complaint process.
Timing and Other Requirements.-- (1) Current year data.--Data posted under this section for the then current fiscal year shall include both-- (A) interim year-to-date data, updated monthly; and (B) final year-end data.
Data for prior years.--The data posted by an agency under this section for a fiscal year (both interim and final) shall also include, for each item under subsection (b), such agency's corresponding year-end data for each of the 5 immediately preceding fiscal years (or, if not available for all 5 years, for however many of those 5 years for which they are available).
DATA TO BE POSTED BY THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION.
In General.--The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission shall post on its public Web site, in the time, form, and manner prescribed under section 5 for purposes of this section, summary statistical data relating to-- (1) hearings requested before an administrative judge of the Commission on complaints described in section 3; and (2) appeals filed with the Commission from final agency actions on complaints described in section 3.
Specific Requirements.--The data posted under this section shall, with respect to the hearings and appeals described in subsection (a), include summary statistical data corresponding to that described in paragraphs (1) through (10) of section 3(b), and shall be subject to the same timing and other requirements as set forth in section 3(c).
Coordination.--The data required under this section shall be in addition to the data the Commission is required to post under section 3 as an employing agency.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission shall prescribe any regulations necessary to carry out this Act.
This Act shall take effect 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.