This Act may be cited as the ``21st Century Job Opportunities Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Since the beginning of 2001, the private sector has lost more than 3 million jobs.
The number of unemployed has risen in 49 states and national unemployment levels are over 6 percent, the highest in nearly a decade.
Today, 9.4 million people are out of work and an additional 4.5 million people work part-time because they are unable to find a full-time job.
In addition, by the year 2010 there will be an estimated shortage of 12 million workers with at least some college education.
Sixty-eight percent of the fastest growing jobs require at least some college education.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to establish a temporary emergency program to assist workers who have been laid off and who require immediate education and training to successfully re- enter the workforce.
POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION BENEFITS FOR DISLOCATED WORKERS.
Subpart 1 of part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by inserting after section 401 (20 United States Code 1070a) the following new section: ``SEC.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible unemployed individual' means an individual who-- ``(1) was, on or after March 1, 2001, employed full-time or part-time; ``(2) became unemployed after such date; and ``(3) on the date of application for a grant under this section, has been unemployed for at least 3 months in the preceding 6 months.
Benefits Authorized.-- ``(1) Program authority and method of distribution.--For each fiscal year through fiscal year 2009, the Secretary shall pay to each eligible institution such sums as may be necessary to pay to each eligible unemployed individual for each academic year during which that individual is in attendance at an institution of higher education, as an undergraduate, a Job Assistance Grant in the amount for which that individual is eligible, as determined pursuant to subsection (c).
Not less than 85 percent of such sums shall be advanced to eligible institutions prior to the start of each payment period and shall be based upon an amount requested by the institution as needed to pay eligible unemployed individuals until such time as the Secretary determines and publishes in the Federal Register with an opportunity for comment, an alternative payment system that provides payments to institutions in an accurate and timely manner, except that this sentence shall not be construed to limit the authority of the Secretary to place an institution on a reimbursement system of payment.
Direct payments permitted.--Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the Secretary from paying directly to eligible unemployed individuals, in advance of the beginning of the academic term, an amount for which they are eligible, in cases where the eligible institution elects not to participate in the disbursement system required by paragraph (1).
Name of grants.--Grants made under this section shall be known as `Job Opportunities Grants'.
Purpose and Amount of Grants.-- ``(1) Purpose.--The Jobs Opportunities Grants program is a temporary emergency program established to assist American workers who have been laid off and who require additional education and training to successfully re-enter the workforce.
Maximum grants.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount of the Job Assistance Grant for an eligible unemployed individual under this section shall be the sum of the individual's tuition and fees not to exceed for any award year the maximum Pell Grant under section 401(b)(2)(A) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070a(b)(2)(A)) for such award year.
Part time attendance.--In any case where an eligible unemployed individual attends an institution of higher education on less than a full-time basis (including an individual who attends an institution of higher education on less than a half-time basis) during any academic year, the amount of the Job Assistance Grant to which that student is entitled shall be reduced in proportion to the degree to which that student is not so attending on a full-time basis, in accordance with a schedule of reductions established by the Secretary for the purposes of this division, computed in accordance with this section.
Such schedule of reductions shall be established by regulation and published in the Federal Register.
Minimum grant.--No Job Assistance Grant shall be awarded to an individual under this section if the amount of that grant for that student as determined under this subsection for any academic year is less than $400, except that an individual who is eligible for a Job Assistance Grant that is equal to or greater than $200 but less than $400 shall be awarded a Job Assistance Grant of $400.
Multiple grants.-- ``(A) The Secretary may allow, on a case-by-case basis, an individual to receive 2 Job Opportunities Grants during a single award year, if-- ``(i) the student is enrolled full-time in an associate or baccalaureate degree program of study that is 2 years or longer at an eligible institution that is computed in credit hours; and ``(ii) the student completes course work toward completion of an associate or baccalaureate degree that exceeds the requirements for a full academic year as defined by the institution.
The Secretary shall promulgate regulations implementing this paragraph.
Period of Eligibility for Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--The period during which an individual may receive Job Opportunities Grants shall be the 5 academic years.
Multiple institution grants prohibited.--No student is entitled to receive Job Assistance Grant payments concurrently from more than one institution or from the Secretary and an institution.
Applications for Grants.--The Secretary shall from time to time set dates by which eligible unemployed individuals shall file applications for Job Opportunities Grants under this section.
Each such individual desiring a Job Assistance Grant for any year shall file an application therefor containing such information and assurances as the Secretary may deem necessary to enable the Secretary to carry out the functions and responsibilities of this section.
The Secretary shall grant or deny an application for a Job Assistance Grant within 3 months after the date on which it is submitted.
Distribution of Grants to Students.--Payments under this section shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary for such purpose, in such manner as will best accomplish the purpose of this section.
Any disbursement allowed to be made by crediting the eligible unemployed individual's account shall be limited to tuition and fees and, in the case of institutionally owned housing, room and board.
The student may elect to have the institution provide other such goods and services by crediting the student's account.
Insufficient Appropriations.--If, for any fiscal year, the funds appropriated for payments under this section are insufficient to satisfy fully all entitlements, as calculated under subsection (c) (but at the maximum grant level specified in such appropriation), the Secretary shall promptly transmit a notice of such insufficiency to each House of the Congress, and identify in such notice the additional amount that would be required to be appropriated to satisfy fully all entitlements (as so calculated at such maximum grant level).
Use of Excess Funds.-- ``(1) If, at the end of a fiscal year, the funds available for making payments under this section exceed the amount necessary to make the payments required under this section to eligible students by 15 percent or less, then all of the excess funds shall remain available for making payments under this section during the next succeeding fiscal year.
If, at the end of a fiscal year, the funds available for making payments under this section exceed the amount necessary to make the payments required under this section to eligible students by more than 15 percent, then all of such funds shall remain available for making such payments but payments may be made under this paragraph only with respect to entitlements for that fiscal year.