This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Fairness in the Workplace Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) there is an increasing trend toward the use of part- time workers; (2) part-time jobs often have no or limited health or pension benefits and few labor protections; (3) there is a trend toward the creation of more part-time jobs than full-time jobs; (4) questions have been raised regarding the impact of part-time employment on wage levels, benefits, earning potential, and productivity; and (5) a Federal commission should be established to conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to the impact of part- time employment on wage levels, benefits, earning potential, and productivity and to study the practice of providing different wage and benefit levels to part-time and full-time workers.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on Fairness in the Workplace (hereafter referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members of whom-- (1) 3 shall be appointed by the President; (2) 3 shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, upon the recommendation of the Majority and Minority Leaders of the Senate; and (3) 3 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting as directed by the President.
Meetings.--After the initial meeting, the Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive study of the impact of part-time employment in the United States.
Matters to be studied.--The matters to be studied by the Commission under paragraph (1) shall include-- (A) a review of the trend toward creation of more part-time than full-time jobs; (B) an assessment of the relationship between part- time work and wage levels, benefits, earning potential, and productivity; and (C) a review of the practice of providing different wage and benefit levels to part-time and full-time workers.
Report.--No later than 12 months after the Commission holds its first meeting, the Commission shall submit a report on the study to the President and Congress.
The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out its duties of this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Committee, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not otherwise an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for a position at level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Each member of the Commission who is otherwise an officer or employee of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for services as an officer or employee of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of service for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment and termination of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the Commission.
Compensation.--The executive director shall be compensated at a rate not to exceed the rate payable for a position at level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
The Chairperson may fix the compensation of other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for such personnel may not exceed the rate payable for a position at level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee, with the approval of the head of the appropriate Federal agency, may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status, benefits, or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for a position at level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Any sums appropriated shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submission of its report under section 4(b).