This Act may be cited as the ``Defense of Freedom Education Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) In order to preserve and defend freedom and civilization, especially in these challenging times, future generations of Americans must be taught to understand their full significance and value, and the threats with which they are faced.
Basic knowledge of United States and Western history is essential to full and informed participation in civic life and to the larger vibrancy of the American experiment in self- government, binding together a diverse people into a single Nation with a common purpose.
American citizens who lack knowledge of the organizing principles of Western civilization will also lack a true understanding and appreciation of the democratic principles that define and sustain America as a free people, such as liberty, justice, tolerance, government by the consent of the governed, and equality under the law.
America's colleges and universities are bellwethers of national priorities and values, setting standards for the whole of the United States education system and sending signals to students, teachers, parents, and public schools about what every educated citizen in a democracy must know.
Most of the Nation's colleges and universities no longer require United States history or systematic study of Western civilization as a prerequisite to graduation.
Distinguished historians and intellectuals fear that without a common civic memory and a common understanding of the remarkable individuals, events, and ideals that have shaped the Nation, the people in the United States risk losing much of what it means to be an American, as well as the ability to fulfill the fundamental responsibilities of citizens in a democracy.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To establish and strengthen post-secondary education programs emphasizing the nature, history and philosophy of free institutions, the nature of Western civilization, and the nature of the threats to freedom from totalitarianism in all its forms.
To develop innovative teacher education programs designed to equip teachers to more effectively impart a knowledge of the nature of free institutions, the threats to free institutions, and the content of Western civilization to elementary, middle and high school teachers.
For purposes of this Act: (1) American founding.--The term ``American founding'' means a field of study in an institution of higher education that-- (A) encompasses part or all of the period of American history between the years 1607 through 1865, with particular emphasis on the years 1763-1865; (B) focuses on the major events, issues and historical personages of this period; (C) examines the historical antecedents of the major events, issues and historical personages described in subparagraph (B); or (D) conforms with other criteria that the secretary may prescribe.
Defense of freedom.--The term ``defense of freedom'' means fields of study in an institution of higher education that-- (A) examines potent political threats to free institutions (as such term is defined in this Act), including communism, fascism, national socialism, and nihilism; or (B) examines human tendencies that threaten free institutions, including tribalism, racism, caste consciousness, and zealotry; or (C) examines world history in the period 1901 through 2001, with particular emphasis on the years 1914 to the present, in order to understand the challenges of maintaining a free society while resisting totalitarian movements of global ambition.
Eligible institution.-- (A) In general.--The term ``eligible institution'' means-- (i) institutions of higher education; (ii) specific programs within an institution of higher education; (iii) foundations associated with institutions of higher education or with specific programs within an institution of higher education; or (iv) other nonprofit organizations participating in, or supporting, the development of academic programs described in section 2.
Special rule.--Organizations described in subparagraph (A)(iv) may apply to award subgrants to eligible institutions at the discretion of, and subject to the oversight of, the Secretary.
Grants to such organizations shall not be subject to the limitations of section 4(f).
Free institution.--The term ``free institution'', for the purposes of this Act, means institutions characteristic of Western Civilization, such as democracy, universalism, individual rights market economics, religious freedom and tolerance, and freedom of thought and inquiry.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the same meaning given that term under section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Western civilization.--The term ``western civilization'' means a field of study in an institution of higher education that-- (A) encompasses part or all of the period of European history between 500 B.C.
and the present day; (B) encompasses part or all of the period of American history between 1607 and the present day; (C) focuses on major events, issues, and historical personages of the period described in subparagraphs (A) and (B); and (D) examines the historical antecedents of the major events, issues, and historical personages described in subparagraph (C); or (E) examines the development of free institutions characteristic of Western civilization, as such term is defined in this Act; (F) examines the intellectual, cultural, political and religious underpinnings of Western civilization, such as the scientific enterprise, entrepreneurship, political pluralism, egalitarianism, moral universalism, and the belief in the possibility of progress; (G) examines the characteristic negative features of Western civilization, such as totalitarianism and social Darwinism; (H) examines the interaction of the West with other civilizations, the Western debt to other civilizations, and the comparative study of high civilization; or (I) conforms with other criteria that the Secretary may prescribe.
GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE INSTITUTIONS.
In General.--From amounts appropriated to carry out this Act, the Secretary shall provide, on a competitive basis, grants to eligible institutions which shall be used for one or more of the following: (1) Research, planning, and coordination activities devoted to the ends of this Act.
Design and implementation of courses and the development of new, and supporting of existing, centers devoted to the ends of this Act.
Research and publication costs of relevant readers and other course materials devoted to the ends of this Act.
General expenses associated with carrying out this section.
Salaries and expenses of faculty teaching in undergraduate and graduate programs focused on the American founding, defense of freedom, and Western civilization.
Support of graduate and postgraduate fellowships for scholars in the fields related to the American founding, the defense of freedom, and Western civilization.
Development of teacher education programs that-- (A) stress content mastery in history or government; and (B) stress civic education preparation, including the history and philosophy of free institutions, and the study of Western civilization).
Selection Criteria.--In selecting eligible institutions for grants under this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall establish criteria by regulation.
Required Criteria.--In establishing criteria under subsection (b), the Secretary shall consider the following selection criteria in making grants: (1) Educational value, and relevance to one or more purpose described in section 2 of the proposed project.
Qualification of key personnel.
Budget and cost effectiveness.
Identification of need for the project.
Potential institutional impact of the project.
Institutional commitment to the project.
Grant Application.--An eligible institution that desires to receive a grant under this Act shall submit to the Secretary an application therefor at such time or times, or in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may prescribe by regulation.
Such application shall set forth-- (1) a program of activities for carrying out the purposes described in section 2 in such detail as will enable the Secretary to determine the degree to which such program will accomplish such purpose; and (2) such other policies, procedures, and assurances as the Secretary may require by regulation.
Grant Review.--The Secretary shall establish procedures for reviewing and evaluating grants and contracts made or entered into under such programs.
Grant Awards.--For the purposes of this Act, the Secretary shall award grants of not less than $400,000 and not more than $6,000,000 to eligible institutions.
Multiple Awards.--For the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may award more than one grant to an eligible institution.
For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated-- (1) $140,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; and (2) such sums as may be necessary for each of the succeeding 5 fiscal years.
This Act shall take effect on September 1, 2002.