This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Business Training Centers Act of 1996''.
WOMEN'S BUSINESS TRAINING CENTERS.
Section 29 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 656) is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
The Administration may provide financial assistance to private organizations to conduct five-year projects for the benefit of small business concerns owned and controlled by women.
The projects shall provide-- ``(1) financial assistance, including training and counseling in how to apply for and secure business credit and investment capital, preparing and presenting financial statements, and managing cashflow and other financial operations of a business concern; ``(2) management assistance, including training and counseling in how to plan, organize, staff, direct and control each major activity and function of a small business concern; and ``(3) marketing assistance, including training and counseling in identifying and segmenting domestic and international market opportunities, preparing and executing marketing plans, developing pricing strategies, locating contract opportunities, negotiating contracts, and utilizing varying public relations and advertising techniques.
(1) As a condition of receiving financial assistance authorized by this section, the recipient organization shall agree to obtain, after its application has been approved and notice of award has been issued, cash contributions from non-Federal sources as follows: ``(A) in the first and second years, 1 non-Federal dollar for each 2 Federal dollars; ``(B) in the third year, 1 non-Federal dollar for each Federal dollar; and ``(C) in the fourth and fifth years, 2 non-Federal dollars for each Federal dollar.
Up to one-half of the non-Federal sector matching assistance may be in the form of in-kind contributions which are budget line items only, including but not limited to office equipment and office space.
The financial assistance authorized pursuant to this section may be made by grant, contract, or cooperative agreement and may contain such provision, as necessary, to provide for payments in lump sum or installments, and in advance or by way of reimbursement.
The Administration may disburse up to 25 percent of each year's Federal share awarded to a recipient organization after notice of the award has been issued and before the non-Federal sector matching funds are obtained.
If any recipient of assistance fails to obtain the required non-Federal contribution during any project, it shall not be eligible thereafter for advance disbursements pursuant to paragraph (3) during the reminder of that project, or for any other project for which it is or may be funded.
In addition, prior to approving assistance to such organization for any other projects, the Administration shall specifically determine whether the Administration believes that the recipient will be able to obtain the requisite non-Federal funding and enter a written finding setting forth the reasons for making such determination.
Each applicant organization initially shall submit a five- year plan on proposed fundraising and training activities, and a recipient organization may receive financial assistance under this program for a maximum of five years per site.
The Administration shall evaluate and rank applicants in accordance with predetermined selection criteria that shall be stated in terms of relative importance.
Such criteria and their relative importance shall be made publicly available and stated in each solicitation for applications made by the Administration.
The criteria shall include-- ``(1) the experience of the applicant in conducting programs or on-going efforts designed to impart or upgrade the business skills of women business owners or potential owners; ``(2) the present ability of the applicant to commence a project within a minimum amount of time; and ``(3) the ability of the applicant to provide training and services to a representative number of women who are both socially and economically disadvantaged.
For the purposes of this section, the term small business concern, either `start-up' or existing, owned and controlled by women includes any small business concern-- ``(1) which is at least 51 percent owned by one or more women; and ``(2) the management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more women.
There are authorized to be appropriated $8,000,000 per year to carry out the projects authorized by this section.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Administration may use such expedited acquisition methods as it deems appropriate to achieve the purposes of this section, except that it shall ensure that all eligible sources are provided a reasonable opportunity to submit proposals.
The Administration shall prepare and transmit a biennial report to the Committees on Small Business of the Senate and House of Representatives on the effectiveness of all projects conducted under the authority of this section.
Such report shall provide information concerning-- ``(1) the number of individuals receiving assistance; ``(2) the number of start-up business concerns formed; ``(3) the gross receipts of assisted concerns; ``(4) increases or decreases in profits of assisted concerns; and ``(5) the employment increases or decreases of assisted concerns.
Office of Women's Business Ownership.--There is hereby established within the Administration an Office of Women's Business Ownership, which shall be responsible for the administration of the Administration's programs for the development of women's business enterprises, as such term is defined in section 408 of the Women's Business Ownership Act of 1988.
The Office of Women's Business Ownership shall be administered by an Assistant Administrator, who shall be appointed by the Administrator.