This Act may be cited as the ``Government Performance and Results Act Technical Amendments of 1998''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO STRATEGIC PLANS.
Content of Strategic Plans.--Section 306(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting before the semicolon ``, that is explicitly linked to the statutory or other legal authorities of the agency''; (2) in paragraph (2), by inserting before the semicolon ``, that are explicitly linked to the statutory or other legal authorities of the agency''; and (3) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (5), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (6) and inserting a semicolon, and by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(7) a specific identification of any agency functions and programs that are similar to those of more than one component of the agency or those of other agencies, and an explanation of coordination and other efforts the agency has undertaken within the agency or with other agencies to ensure that such similar functions and programs are subject to complementary goals, strategies, and performance measures; ``(8) a description of any major management problems (including but not limited to programs and activities at high risk for waste, abuse, or mismanagement) affecting the agency that have been documented by the inspector general of the agency (or a comparable official, if the agency has no inspector general), the General Accounting Office, and others, and specific goals, strategies, and performance measures to resolve those problems; and ``(9) an assessment by the head of the agency of the adequacy and reliability of the data sources and information and accounting systems of the agency to support its strategic plans under this section and performance plans and reports under sections 1115 and 1116 (respectively) of title 31, and, to the extent that material data or system inadequacies exist, an explanation by the head of the agency of how the agency will resolve them.''.
Resubmission of Agency Strategic Plans.--Section 306 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``submitted,'' and all that follows through the end of the subsection and inserting the following: ``submitted.
The strategic plan shall be updated, revised, and resubmitted to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Congress by not later than September 30 of 1998 and of every third year thereafter.
''; and (2) in subsection (d), by inserting ``and updating'' after ``developing'', and by adding at the end thereof: ``The agency head shall provide promptly to any committee or subcommittee of the Congress any draft versions of a plan or other information pertinent to a plan that the committee or subcommittee requests.''.
Format for Strategic Plans.--Section 306 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (g), and by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection: ``(f)(1) The strategic plan shall be a single document that covers the agency as a whole and addresses each of the elements required by this section on an agencywide basis.
The head of an agency shall format the strategic plans of the agency in a manner that clearly demonstrates the linkages among the elements of the plan.
(A) The head of each executive department shall submit with the departmentwide strategic plan a separate component strategic plan for each of the major mission-related components of the department.
Such a component strategic plan shall address each of the elements required by this section.
The head of an agency that is not an executive department shall submit separate component plans in accordance with subparagraph (A) to the extent that doing so would, in the judgment of the head of the agency, materially enhance the usefulness of the strategic plan of the agency.''.
Limited Applicability to Federal Reserve Board and Banks.--(1) Section 306(g) of title 5, United States Code (as redesignated by subsection (c)), is amended by inserting ``(including the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve banks, but only with respect to operations and functions that are not directly related to the establishment and conduct of the monetary policy of the United States)'' after ``105''.
Such section is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b), the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve banks shall not be required to submit a strategic plan under this section to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO PERFORMANCE PLANS AND PERFORMANCE REPORTS.
Governmentwide Program Performance Reports.--Section 1116 of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (g); and (2) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection: ``(f)(1) No later than March 31, 2000, and no later than March 31 of each year thereafter, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall prepare and submit to the Congress an integrated Federal Government performance report for the previous fiscal year.
In addition to such other content as the Director determines to be appropriate, each report shall include actual results and accomplishments under the Federal Government performance plan required by section 1105(a)(29) of this title for the fiscal year covered by the report.''.
Inspector General Review of Agency Performance Plans and Performance Reports.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Inspector general review of agency performance plans and performance reports ``(a) The inspector general of each agency (or a comparable official designated by the head of the agency, if the agency has no inspector general) shall develop and implement a plan to review the implementation by the agency of the requirements of sections 1115 and 1116 of this title and section 306 of title 5.
The plan shall include examination of the following: ``(1) Agency efforts to develop and use performance measures for determining progress toward achieving agency performance goals and program outcomes described in performance plans prepared under section 1115 of this title and performance reports submitted pursuant to section 1116 of this title.
Verification and validation of selected data sources and information collection and accounting systems that support agency performance plans and performance reports and agency strategic plans pursuant to section 306 of title 5.
(1) In developing the review plan and selecting specific performance indicators, supporting data sources, and information collection and accounting systems to be examined under subsection (a), each inspector general (or designated comparable official, as applicable) shall consult with appropriate congressional committees and the head of the agency, including in determining the scope and course of review pursuant to paragraph (2).
In determining the scope and course of review, consistent with available resources, each inspector general (or designated comparable official, as applicable) shall emphasize those performance measures associated with programs or activities for which-- ``(A) there is reason to believe there exists a high risk of waste, fraud, or mismanagement; and ``(B) based on the assessment of the inspector general, review of the controls applied in developing the performance data is needed to ensure the accuracy of those data.
Each agency inspector general (or designated comparable official, as applicable) shall submit the review plan to the agency head at least annually, beginning no later than October 31, 1998.
In the case of reviews by an agency inspector general, such submission shall be made as part of the semiannual reports required under section 5 of the Inspector General Act of 1978.
Not later than 30 days after the date of the submission of the review plan to the agency head under this subsection, the agency head shall submit the review plan to Congress.
Each agency inspector general (or designated comparable official, as applicable) shall conduct reviews under the plan submitted under subsection (c), and submit findings, results, and recommendations based on those reviews to the head of the agency, by not later than April 30 and October 31 of each year.
In the case of reviews by an agency inspector general, such submission shall be made as part of the semiannual reports required under section 5 of the Inspector General Act of 1978.
Not later than 30 days after the date of the submission of the findings, results, and recommendations to the head of the agency under this subsection, the agency head shall submit the findings, results, and recommendations to Congress.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 1115(f) of title 31, United States Code, is amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by striking ``1119'' and inserting ``1120''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1120.
Inspector general review of agency performance plans and performance reports.''.
Requirement To Use Full Costs as Performance Indicator.-- Section 1115(a)(4) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, which shall include determination of the full costs (as that term is used in the most recent Managerial Cost Accounting Standards of the Federal Financial Accounting Standards) of each program activity''.
Limited Applicability to Federal Reserve Board and Banks.--(1) Section 1115 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve banks-- ``(1) shall not be required to submit a performance plan to the Director of the Office of Management and the Budget under this section; and ``(2) shall submit to Congress, not later than March 1 of each year, a performance plan containing the information described in subsection (a), but only with respect to operations and functions that are not directly related to the establishment and conduct of the monetary policy of the United States.''.
Section 1116 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Notwithstanding subsection (a), the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve banks shall not be required to submit a report on program performance to the President under this section.''.
LIMITATION ON AUTHORITY TO EXEMPT THE COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY.
Section 1117 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, except that the Director may not exempt the Council on Environmental Quality''.
SUBMISSION OF AGENCY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
Section 3515(a) of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``1997'' and inserting ``1999''; and (2) by inserting ``the Congress and'' after ``and submit to''.
Passed the House of Representatives March 12, 1998.
Attest: Robin H. Carle, Clerk.