The Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the establishment of the Lowell National Historical Park in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and for other purposes'' approved June 5, 1978 (92 United States Statutes at Large 290; 16 United States Code 410cc et sequentes), is amended as follows: (1) In section 103(a)(2), by striking ``$33,600,000'' and inserting ``$43,930,000''.
The amendment made by this paragraph shall take effect on October 1, 1994.
In section 203, by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(c) Loan and Grant Agreements.--Upon termination of the Commission, the Secretary, acting through the National Park Service, shall assume all responsibilities of the Commission for administration and oversight of the loan and grant agreements under section 303.''.
In section 205, by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(e) Leasing Authority.--(1) In addition to other available authorities, the Secretary may, in his discretion, negotiate and enter into leases, as appropriate, with any person, firm, association, organization, corporation or governmental entity for the use of any property within the Park and Preservation District in accordance with the General Management Plan and any of the purposes set forth in section 1 of this Act.
Any leases entered into under this subsection shall be subject to such procedures, terms, conditions and restrictions as the Secretary deems necessary.
The Secretary is authorized to negotiate and enter into leases or other agreements, at fair market value and without regard to section 321 of chapter 314 of the Act of June 30, 1932 (40 United States Code 303b).
For purposes of any such lease or other agreements, the Secretary may adjust the rental by taking into account any amounts to be expended by the lessee for preservation, maintenance, restoration, improvement, repair and related expenses with respect to the leased properties.
Surplus proceeds from leases entered into under section 111 of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470h-3) with respect to property in the Park and Preservation District, and all proceeds from all other leases entered into under this subsection, shall be retained by the Secretary, remain available until expended, and, subject to appropriation, be used to offset the costs of preservation, interpretation, restoration, maintenance, improvement, repair, and related expenses, including administration related to such expenses, incurred by the Secretary with respect to properties within the Park and Preservation District, with the balance used to offset other costs incurred by the Secretary in the administration of the Park.
Each lessee of a lease entered into under this subsection shall keep such records as the Secretary may prescribe to enable the Secretary to determine that all terms of the lease have been, and are being, faithfully performed.
The Secretary shall annually prepare and submit to Congress a report on property leased under this subsection.''.
In section 301(i), by striking ``seventeen'' and inserting ``22''.
In section 303(a), by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows: ``(1) The loan to the corporation shall have a maturity of 35 years.
At the end of such period, the corporation shall repay to the Secretary of the Treasury (in a lump sum) for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury the full amount of the loan and any additional amounts accruing to the corporation pursuant to this subsection excepting principal and interest losses occasioned by loan defaults after all reasonable efforts at collection have been completed plus those amounts expended by the Corporation for reasonable administrative expenses.
The Commission is further authorized to renegotiate the terms and conditions respecting loan repayment of the agreement dated December 8, 1980, with the Lowell Development and Financial Corporation.
The authority provided in this paragraph shall be available only to the extent that appropriations for a subsidy cost, as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, are made in advance.''.
In section 305(g), by inserting before the period at the end thereof ``for administration by the National Park Service in accordance with the general management plan''.
By adding after section 307 the following: ``SEC.
Establishment of Advisory Committee.--Upon the termination of the Commission, the Secretary shall establish a committee to be known as the Lowell National Historical Park Advisory Committee (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Advisory Committee').
Membership.--The Advisory Committee shall be composed of 15 members appointed by the Secretary.
Chairperson.--The Advisory Committee shall designate one of its members as Chairperson.
Quorum.--Eight members of the Advisory Committee shall constitute a quorum.
The Advisory Committee shall act and advise by affirmative vote of a majority of the members voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present.
The Advisory Committee shall meet on a regular basis.
Notice of meetings and agenda shall be published in local newspapers which have a distribution which generally covers the area affected by the park and preservation district.
Advisory Committee meetings shall be held at locations and in such a manner as to ensure adequate public involvement.
Functions.--The Advisory Committee shall advise the Secretary on the operation, maintenance, development, and programming of the park and preservation district.
Support and Technical Services.--In order to provide staff support and technical services to assist the Advisory Committee in carrying out its duties under this Act, upon request of the Advisory Committee, the Secretary is authorized to detail any personnel of the National Park Service to the Advisory Committee.
Per Diem.--Members of the Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Government service under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
FACA.--The provisions of section 14(b) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code Appendix; 86 United States Statutes at Large 776), are hereby waived with respect to the Advisory Committee.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Advisory Committee shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Any member may serve after the expiration of his term until his successor is appointed.
Termination.--The Advisory Committee shall terminate on June 5, 2010.
Deadline.--No later than January 1, 1996, the Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct the audit described in subsection (b) and submit to Congress a report concerning the results of such audit.
Audit.--The audit required by subsection (a) shall deal only with those activities and expenditures authorized by this Act and shall-- ``(1) review the authorities of the National Park Service and the Lowell Historic Park Advisory Commission and compare them with those of similar units of the National Park System; ``(2) undertake a detailed assessment of all major Federal expenditures made by the National Park Service and the Lowell Historic Park Advisory Commission; ``(3) examine all loans made by the Lowell Development and Financial Corporation related to the Lowell National Historical Park and document the status of those loans which have not been fully repaid; ``(4) identify the extent of non-Federal investment that has been generated because of Federal spending authorized by this Act; and ``(5) review all Federal activities and expenditures associated with renovating the Nesmith House and give the current status of that effort.''.
By adding at the end the following: ``TITLE IV--BUY AMERICAN ``SEC.
PURCHASE OF AMERICAN MADE EQUIPMENT AND PRODUCTS.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that, to the greatest extent practicable, all equipment and products purchased with funds made available pursuant to this Act should be American made.
Notice Requirement.--In providing financial assistance to, or entering into any contract with, any entity using funds made available pursuant to this Act, the Commission, to the greatest extent practicable, shall provide to such entity a notice describing the statement made in subsection (a) by the Congress.''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 26, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.