This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Members' Pension Limitation Act of 1995''.
CIVIL SERVICE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
Limitation.-- (1) In general.--Section 8334(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Deductions and withholdings from the pay of a Member may not be made with respect to any pay period beginning-- ``(A) after such Member has completed 5 years of civilian service; or ``(B) in the case of a Member whose service (as of the effective date of the Congressional Members' Pension Limitation Act of 1995) exceeds the limitation set forth in subparagraph (A), after such effective date.
Any contributions under the second sentence of paragraph (1) shall be payable to the same extent and in the same manner as if this paragraph had not been enacted.''.
Technical and conforming amendments.-- (A) Deposits.--Section 8334(c) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``A deposit under this subsection may not be made with respect to any service for which deductions have not been made by reason of subsection (a)(3).''.
Eligibility.--Subsection (c) of section 8333 of title 5, United States Code, is repealed.
Thrift Savings Plan.--Paragraph (2) of section 8351(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``(2) An'' and inserting ``(2)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), an''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(B)(i) In the case of a Member-- ``(I) as to whom deductions from pay may not be made by reason of section 8332(a)(3), and who has 12 years of member service or less, the level of individual or Government contributions allowable shall be the percentage specified in section 8432(a) or (c), as the case may be; or ``(II) who has more than 12 years of member service, the level of individual contributions allowable shall be the percentage specified in section 8432(a), but no Government contribution under section 8432(c) shall be allowable.
The Executive Director (appointed under section 8474(a)) shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this subparagraph, including-- ``(I) provisions under which a Member may elect to change such Member's level of contributions to the Thrift Savings Fund whenever any change is to take effect under clause (i) in the level of individual or Government contributions allowable; and ``(II) provisions under which written notice shall be given to a Member with respect to any such change, as well as any election allowable under subclause (I) in connection therewith.''.
FEDERAL EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
Limitation.--Section 8422(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3)(A) Notwithstanding paragraph (2), deductions and withholdings from the pay of a Member may not be made-- ``(i) with respect to any pay period beginning-- ``(I) after such Member has completed 5 years of civilian service; or ``(II) in the case of a Member whose service (as of the effective date of the Congressional Members' Pension Limitation Act of 1995) exceeds the limitation set forth in subclause (I), after such effective date; or ``(ii) if that individual first becomes a Member on or after the effective date of the Congressional Members' Pension Limitation Act of 1995.
Any period of service for which deductions may not be made by reason of subparagraph (A) shall be excluded from the total period of service used in any computation under section 8415 or any other provision of this chapter (as identified by the Office in regulations) which relates to benefits based on the service of such Member.''.
Thrift Savings Plan.--Section 8432(c) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4)(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, no contribution under paragraph (1) or (2) may be made on behalf of any Member who has more than 12 years of member service.
The Executive Director (appointed under section 8474(a)) shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this paragraph, including-- ``(i) provisions under which a Member may elect to change such Member's level of contributions to the Thrift Savings Fund whenever such Member's eligibility for Government contributions is to terminate under subparagraph (A); and ``(ii) provisions under which written notice shall be given to a Member with respect to any such termination of eligibility for Government contributions, as well as any election allowable under clause (i) in connection therewith.
For the purpose of this paragraph, the term `member service' means service as a Member.''.
MEMBERS UNDER FERS WHO WERE FORMERLY UNDER CSRS.
Section 302 of the Federal Employees' Retirement System Act of 1986 (5 United States Code 8331 note) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e)(1) In the case of a Member with respect to whom any benefits would be computed under subsection (a)(3), for purposes of applying sections 8422(a)(3) (relating to a limitation on the making of deductions and withholdings from pay) and 8432(c)(4) (relating to contributions to the Thrift Savings Plan) of title 5, United States Code, any service which would be creditable for any purpose under subsection (a)(1) shall be taken into account.
Regulations to carry out this subsection shall be prescribed-- ``(A) by the Office of Personnel Management, with respect to such section 8422(a)(3); and ``(B) by the Executive Director (appointed under section 8474(a)), with respect to such section 8432(c)(4).''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect as of the first day of the first Congress beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.