This Act may be cited as the ``Airline Passenger Bill of Rights Act of 1999''.
In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Air carrier passenger protection ``(a) Use of Single Flight Number.--No air carrier may use a single flight number to denote a flight that the air carrier knows will involve a change in aircraft between segments of the flight.
Delay, Cancellation, or Diversion.-- ``(1) Explanation required.--An announcement by an air carrier of (A) a delay or cancellation of a flight, or (B) a diversion of a flight to an airport other than the airport at which the flight is scheduled to land, shall include an explanation of the reason or reasons for the delay, cancellation, or diversion.
Prohibition on false or misleading explanations.--No air carrier shall provide an explanation under paragraph (1) that the air carrier knows or has reason to know is false or misleading.
Excessive Departure and Arrival Delay.-- ``(1) Liability imposed.--An air carrier shall be liable to each passenger on an aircraft for an excessive departure or arrival delay of the aircraft.
Amount of liability.-- ``(A) Delays of more than 2 but less than 3 hours.--If the excessive departure or arrival delay is more than 2 but less than 3 hours, the amount of liability under paragraph (1) shall be 200 percent of the price paid by the passenger for transportation by the air carrier.
Delays of 3 hours or more.--If the excessive departure or arrival delay is 3 hours or more, the amount of liability under paragraph (1) shall be-- ``(i) the amount determined under subparagraph (A), plus ``(ii) an additional 100 percent of the price paid by the passenger for such transportation multiplied by the number of hours (or portion thereof) that such period exceeds 3 hours.
Excessive departure or arrival delay.--In paragraph (1), the term `excessive departure or arrival delay' means a period of time in excess of 2 hours-- ``(A) in the case of departure delay, beginning when the door of an aircraft is closed at an airport and ending when the aircraft takes off from the airport or when the door of the aircraft is open for deplaning of passengers at the airport; and ``(B) in the case of arrival delay, beginning upon touchdown of an aircraft at an airport and ending when the door of the aircraft is open for deplaning of passengers at the airport.
Departure delays caused by air traffic control directives.--Notwithstanding paragraph (3), a departure delay in excess of 2 hours shall not be treated as an excessive departure delay for purposes of paragraph (1) if the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration determines that the departure delay was the result of an air traffic control directive and that the carrier did not receive notification that it would receive such directive prior to the scheduled departure time of the flight.
Economic Cancellations.-- ``(1) Nonsafety cancellations.--If, on the date a flight of an air carrier is scheduled, the carrier cancels the flight for reasons other than safety, the carrier shall provide to each passenger that has purchased air transportation on the flight-- ``(A) air transportation in a timely manner to the destination for which such passenger purchased the air transportation; and ``(B) a refund of the amount paid for the air transportation.
Patterns of practice.-- ``(A) Notification of secretary.--If an air carrier cancels a flight, the air carrier shall submit to the Secretary of Transportation, in writing before the 30th day following the date of cancellation of the flight, the following information with respect to the flight: ``(i) The flight number.
The date and scheduled time of departure of the flight.
The percentage of seats on the flight that would have been filled, as of the date of cancellation, if the flight was not canceled.
Periodic reviews.--The Secretary shall periodically review information submitted under subparagraph (A) by each air carrier to determine if there is a pattern of the air carrier canceling a specific flight or canceling flights that are undersold.
Investigation.--If the Secretary determines under subparagraph (B) that there is a pattern of an air carrier canceling a specific flight or canceling flights that are undersold, the Secretary shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the air carrier is canceling the flight or flights for reasons other than safety.
Restitution.--If, as a result of an investigation under subparagraph (C), the Secretary determines that a flight is canceled by an air carrier for reasons other than safety, the carrier shall provide a refund to each passenger who purchased air transportation for that flight equal to the amount they paid for that air transportation even if the carrier provided the air transportation to those passengers.
Undersold defined.--In this section, a flight of an air carrier is undersold as of a certain date if 70 percent or more of the seats on the flight are not purchased on or before such date.
Limitation on cancellations for reasons other than safety.--In this subsection, a flight shall not be treated as being canceled for reasons other than safety if the flight is canceled because of, among other things, an insufficient number of crew, weather, or mechanical problems that prevent the safe operation of the flight or prevent the flight from operating in accordance with regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Lost Baggage.--If an air carrier finds baggage or property that has on it the name of an individual, the carrier shall make a good faith effort to find the individual and return the baggage or property to the individual.
Limitation on Security Screenings.--No air carrier or airport may conduct or have conducted a security procedure at an airport in a manner that results in a child under 2 years of age being separated from the child's parent or guardian without the consent of the parent or guardian.
Code Sharing.--No air carrier, foreign air carrier, or ticket agent may sell air transportation in the United States for a flight that bears a designator code of a carrier other than the carrier that will provide the air transportation unless the air carrier, foreign air carrier, or ticket agent selling the air transportation first informs the person purchasing the air transportation that the carrier providing the air transportation will be a carrier other than the carrier whose designator code is used to identify the flight.
Air Carrier Pricing Policies.--An air carrier may not-- ``(1) prohibit a person (including a governmental entity) that purchases air transportation from only using a portion of the air transportation purchased (including using the air transportation purchased only for 1-way travel instead of round-trip travel); and ``(2) assess an additional fee on or charge to-- ``(A) such a person; or ``(B) any ticket agent that sold the air transportation to such person.
Frequent Flyer Awards.--Upon request of any person (including a governmental entity), an air carrier shall disclose the number or percentage of seats that the carrier intends to make available on a specific date for use by a person redeeming an award under a frequent flyer program of the carrier on any route in air transportation provided by the carrier.
Regulations.--The Secretary may issue regulations to carry out this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 41715 the following: ``41716.
Air carrier passenger protection.''.
Section 46301(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6) by inserting ``Maximum penalty for violations relating to air service termination notices.--'' before ``Notwithstanding''; (2) by aligning paragraph (6) with paragraph (5) of such section; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) Maximum penalty for violations relating to single flight number requirement.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the maximum civil penalty for an air carrier violating section 41716(a) with respect to a flight of an air carrier shall be an amount determined by multiplying the maximum amount of a civil penalty under paragraph (1) by the number of passengers on the flight.
Maximum penalty for violations relating to explanations of delays, cancellations, and diversions.-- Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the maximum civil penalty for an air carrier violating section 41716(b) with respect to a flight of an air carrier shall be an amount determined by multiplying the maximum amount of a civil penalty under paragraph (1) by the number of passengers who paid for transportation on the flight.''.
Study.--The Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a study to determine if air carriers are providing, during changes of planes, a level of supervision of unaccompanied children under 12 years of age that is sufficient to ensure the safety of such children.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report containing the results of the study conducted under this section.