DECEPTIVE GAMES OF CHANCE MAILINGS ELIMINATION.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Deceptive Games of Chance Mailings Elimination Act of 1998''.
Nonmailable Matter.-- (1) In general.--Section 3001 of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsections (j) and (k) as subsections (k) and (l), respectively; and (B) by inserting after subsection (i) the following: ``(j)(1) Matter otherwise legally acceptable in the mails that constitutes a solicitation or offer in connection with the sales promotion for a product or service or the promotion of a game of skill that includes the chance or opportunity to win anything of value and that contains words or symbols that suggest the recipient will, or is likely to, receive anything of value, shall conform with requirements prescribed in regulations issued by the Postmaster General.
Matter not in conformance with the regulations prescribed under paragraph (1) shall not be carried or delivered by mail and shall be disposed of as the Postal Service directs.
Regulations prescribed under paragraph (1) shall require, at a minimum, that-- ``(A) promotion of games of chance mailings contain notification or disclosure statements, with sufficiently large and noticeable type to be effective notice to recipients that-- ``(i) any recipient is not obligated to purchase a product in order to win; ``(ii) sets out the chances of winning accurately; and ``(iii) advises that purchases do not enhance the recipient's chances of winning; ``(B) games of chance mailings shall be clearly labeled to-- ``(i) identify such mailings as games of chance mailings; and ``(ii) prohibit misleading statements representing that recipients are guaranteed winners; and ``(C) solicitations in games of chance mailings may not represent that the recipient is a member of a selected group whose chances of winning are enhanced as a member of that group.''.
False representations.--Section 3005(a) of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in the first sentence by striking ``section 3001 (d), (h), or (i)'' and inserting ``section 3001 (d), (h), (i), or (j)''; and (B) in the second sentence by striking ``section 3001 (d), (h), or (i)'' and inserting ``section 3001 (d), (h), (i), or (j)''.
Administrative Subpoenas.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 30 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Administrative subpoenas ``(a) Authorization of Use of Subpoenas by Postmaster General.--In any investigation conducted under this chapter, the Postmaster General may require by subpoena the production of any records (including books, papers, documents, and other tangible things which constitute or contain evidence) which the Postmaster General finds relevant or material to the investigation.
Service.--(1) A subpoena issued under this section may be served by a person designated under section 3061 of title 18 at any place within the territorial jurisdiction of any court of the United States.
Any such subpoena may be served upon any person who is not to be found within the territorial jurisdiction of any court of the United States, in such manner as the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure prescribe for service in a foreign country.
To the extent that the courts of the United States may assert jurisdiction over such person consistent with due process, the United States District Court for the District of Columbia shall have the same jurisdiction to take any action respecting compliance with this section by such person that such court would have if such person were personally within the jurisdiction of such court.
Service of any such subpoena may be made by a Postal Inspector upon a partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity by-- ``(A) delivering a duly executed copy thereof to any partner, executive officer, managing agent, or general agent thereof, or to any agent thereof authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process on behalf of such partnership, corporation, association, or entity; ``(B) delivering a duly executed copy thereof to the principal office or place of business of the partnership, corporation, association, or entity; or ``(C) depositing such copy in the United States mails, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, duly addressed to such partnership, corporation, association, or entity at its principal office or place of business.
Service of any subpoena may be made upon any natural person by-- ``(A) delivering a duly executed copy to the person to be served; or ``(B) depositing such copy in the United States mails by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, duly addressed to such person at his residence or principal office or place of business.
A verified return by the individual serving any such subpoena setting forth the matter of such service shall be proof of such service.
In the case of service by registered or certified mail, such return shall be accompanied by the return post office receipt of delivery of such subpoena.
Enforcement.--(1) Whenever any person, partnership, corporation, association, or entity fails to comply with any subpoena duly served upon him, the Postmaster General may request that the Attorney General seek enforcement of the subpoena in the district court of the United States for any judicial district in which such person resides, is found, or transacts business, and serve upon such person a petition for an order of such court for the enforcement of this section.
Whenever any petition is filed in any district court of the United States under this section, such court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter so presented, and to enter such order or orders as may be required to carry into effect the provisions of this section.
Any final order entered shall be subject to appeal under section 1291 of title 28.
Any disobedience of any final order entered under this section by any court shall be punished as contempt.
Disclosure.--Any documentary material provided pursuant to any subpoena issued under this section shall be exempt from disclosure under section 552 of title 5.''.
Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Postal Service shall promulgate regulations setting out the procedures the Postal Service will use to implement this subsection.
Technical and conforming amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 30 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``3016.
Administrative Civil Penalties for Nonmailable Matter Violations.--Section 3012 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e)(1) In any proceeding in which the Postal Service issues an order under section 3005(a), the Postal Service may assess civil penalties in an amount of $10,000 per violation for each mailing of nonmailable matter as defined under any provision of this chapter.
The Postal Service shall prescribe regulations to carry out the subsection.