This Act may be cited as the ``Sarah Weber Home Infusion Consumer Protection Act of 1995''.
LICENSING OF PROVIDERS OF HOME INFUSION THERAPY SERVICES.
Requirement.-- (1) License requirement.--No person shall provide (or arrange for the provision of) home infusion therapy services in a State unless the person is licensed by the State in accordance with this section to provide (or arrange for the provision of) such services.
Licensing procedure.--No State shall license a person to provide (or arrange for the provision of) home infusion therapy services unless the State finds that the person meets the standards for licensing established under this section.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply in the case of an individual providing home infusion therapy services without compensation for himself or herself or for a family or household member.
Standards.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish standards for the licensing of persons providing (or arranging for the provision of) home infusion therapy services consistent with this subsection.
Supervision.--A person licensed under this section shall only provide (or arrange for the provision of) home infusion therapy services to an individual who is under the care of a physician and under a plan established and periodically reviewed by a physician.
Provider qualifications.--A person shall not be licensed consistent with this section unless the person-- (A) has been determined to be capable of providing, or arranging for the provision of, home infusion therapy services; (B) maintains clinical records on all individuals for whom the person provides (or arranges for the provision of) such services; (C) adheres to written protocols and policies with respect to the provision (or arrangement for the provision) of services; (D) makes services available (as needed) 7 days a week on a 24-hour basis; (E) coordinates all home infusion therapy services with the patient's physician; (F) conducts a quality assessment and assurance program, including drug regimen review and coordination of patient care; (G) assures that only trained (or licensed if necessary) personnel provide infusion products (and any other service for which training is required to safely provide the service); (H) assumes responsibility for the quality of services provided by others under arrangements with such person; (I) establishes appropriate protocols and explains such protocols clearly to patients before the initiation of a treatment plan; (J) is certified to be a home health agency for purposes of title XVIII of the Social Security Act or meets the requirements to be so certified; and (K) meets such other requirements as the Secretary may determine are necessary (i) to assure the safe and effective provision of home infusion therapy services, and (ii) respecting the quality of the provision of such services and the charges for such services.
A protocol referred to in subparagraph (I) shall include a provision for appropriate notification of individuals receiving home infusion therapy services in the event of the cancellation of the provision of those services.
Enforcement.-- (1) Providers.--Any person who provides (or arranges for the provision of) home infusion therapy services in violation of subsection (a)(1) is subject to a civil money penalty (in an amount specified by the Secretary, but not to exceed $10,000) for each such violation.
The Secretary may file an action to enjoin persons from violating subsection (a)(1).
States.--The Secretary shall establish a process for determining whether or not a State is complying with the requirement of subsection (a)(2).
Before determining that a State has not established a licensing system that complies with such requirement, the Secretary shall provide the State with notice and opportunity to respond and correct any deficiencies identified by the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriations; State Grants; Licensing Fees.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary such amounts as may be necessary for the Secretary to carry out this section.
Startup grants.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to States in order to enable those States initially to establish the licensing system required under subsection (a)(2).
Licensing fees.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as preventing a State from requiring payment of a fee from a provider as a condition of licensing under subsection (a)(1) in order to reimburse the State for the costs of operating the licensing system provided under subsection (a)(2).
LIMITATION ON PHYSICIAN REFERRALS.
General Rule.--Except as provided in this section, if a physician (or an immediate family member of such physician) has a financial relationship with an entity described in section 1877(a)(2) of the Social Security Act, then the physician may not make a referral to the entity for the furnishing of home infusion therapy services.
Incorporation of Medicare Physician Ownership and Referral Provisions.--The provisions of subsections (b) through (h) of section 1877 of the Social Security Act (other than subsections (f) and (g)(1)) shall apply with respect to subsection (a) of this section in the same manner as they apply to section 1877(a) of such Act.
In applying the previous sentence, any reference to a ``designated health service'' is deemed to be a reference to home infusion therapy services.
Treatment of Prescription as a Referral.--In applying subsection (b) and in addition to section 1877(h)(5) of the Social Security Act, the prescription of a drug to be administered through home infusion constitutes a ``referral'' by a ``referring physician''.
HOME INFUSION THERAPY SERVICES DEFINED.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``home infusion therapy services'' means the nursing, pharmacy, and related services, including medical supplies, intravenous fluids, delivery, and equipment, required for the provision of therapeutic agents to patients by parenteral administration, including intravenous, intra-arterial, subcutaneous, epidural, intrathecal, intramuscular, and peritoneal infusion, by an enteral feeding tube for the purpose of improving or maintaining an individual's health condition in the individual's residence.
STUDY OF MEDICARE IN-HOME COVERAGE OF CERTAIN INFUSION THERAPY SERVICES.
In General.--The Secretary shall conduct a study of the feasibility and economic impact of covering under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act on an in-home basis those infusion therapy services that would otherwise be covered under part A of such title.
Report.--The Secretary shall submit to Congress, by not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, a report on the study conducted under subsection (a).
Such report shall include such recommendations respecting coverage of home infusion therapy services under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act as the Secretary deems appropriate.
Licensing Requirement.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), section 2(a) shall apply to home infusion therapy services provided on or after the first day of the first month that begins more than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, without regard to whether or not the Secretary Services issues final regulations to carry out such section by such date.
Exception where state legislation required.--In the case of a State which the Secretary determines requires State legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds) in order for the State to provide for the licensing required under section 2(a)(2), section 2(a) shall not apply in the State for home infusion therapy services provided before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.
Limitation on Referrals.--Section 3 shall apply to referrals made after December 31, 1995.