Congress finds the following: (1) The 50-mile Hanford Reach-- (A) is the last free-flowing nontidal segment of the Columbia River in the United States; and (B) has been preserved in a relatively natural condition because of its location within the Hanford Nuclear Reservation.
Public Law 100-605 (102 United States Statutes at Large 3043) required an analysis of protection alternatives for the Hanford Reach and a report to Congress by the Secretary of the Interior, who concluded in the Hanford Reach Final Environmental Impact Statement dated June 1994 that the Hanford Reach should be designated as a recreational river under the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1271 et sequentes).
The Hanford Reach is a vital migration corridor for anadromous fish and contains some of the most productive spawning areas in the Northwest United States, producing an estimated 80 percent of the Columbia Basin's fall chinook salmon and healthy runs of naturally spawning steelhead trout, sturgeon, and other highly valued fish species.
The Hanford Reach provides important habitat for wintering and migrating wildlife, including waterfowl, bald eagles, deer, elk, and numerous Federal and State-listed threatened and endangered plant and animal species, some of which are found nowhere else.
The shoreline area known as White Bluffs and the pristine conditions of the Hanford Reach offer scenic beauty and opportunities for solitude and recreation, including hunting, fishing, boating, hiking, swimming, and wildlife observation, in close proximity to the cites of Richland, Pasco, and Kennewick, Washington.
The Hanford Reach and its salmon runs have been important to mid-Columbia Native Americans for subsistence, cultural, and religious purposes for more than 10,000 years, and there are 150 registered archaeological sites in the area.
The southern shore of the Hanford Reach chronicles the history of-- (A) the Manhattan Project; (B) defense nuclear production during the cold war; and (C) early Euro-American settlement of the area.
The White Bluffs and adjacent shoreline areas are significant paleontological resources and rich with fossilized remains from the Pliocene period.
Protection of the Hanford Reach as a component of the national wild and scenic rivers system could enhance local revenues from outdoor recreation and increase economic investment in the cites of Richland, Pasco, and Kennewick, Washington, by highlighting the quality of life and natural amenities of the area.
Economic activities along the river corridor in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, such as agriculture, power production and transmission, and water withdrawal, are compatible with the designation of the Hanford Reach as a recreational river under the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1271 et sequentes).
Designation of the Hanford Reach as a recreational river under such Act cannot be changed except by a subsequent Act of Congress.
Designation of the Hanford Reach as a recreational river under such Act can facilitate, and make less costly, the remediation of contaminated areas of the Hanford Nuclear Reservation by-- (A) establishing future land use within the river corridor; and (B) helping to ensure the Federal commitment to the cleanup of the Hanford Site.
The Hanford Reach has special significance as an outdoor laboratory and classroom and offers a singular opportunity for government agencies, Indian tribes, and community organizations to develop a partnership around an education and interpretation program focused on the area's unique natural and human history.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to protect the natural, cultural, scenic, and recreational resources of the Hanford Reach of the Columbia River by designating the Hanford Reach as a recreational river under the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1271 et sequentes); (2) to encourage education and interpretation of the Hanford Reach; and (3) to protect the land adjacent to the Hanford Reach.
DESIGNATION OF THE HANFORD REACH OF THE COLUMBIA RIVER AS A RECREATIONAL RIVER UNDER THE WILD AND SCENIC RIVERS ACT.
Designation.--Section 3(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(160) Hanford Reach, Columbia River, Washington.--Subject to section 3A, the river segment from river mile 346.5 to river mile 396 of the Hanford Reach of the Columbia River, Washington, as a recreational river.''.
Special Requirements.--The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act is amended by inserting after section 3 (16 United States Code 1274) the following: ``SEC.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO HANFORD REACH, COLUMBIA RIVER, WASHINGTON.
Definition.--In this section, the term `Hanford Reach recreational river' means the river segment of the Hanford Reach of the Columbia River, Washington, designated as a recreational river by section 3(a)(160).
Management.--The Secretary of the Interior shall manage the Hanford Reach recreational river as a recreational river in accordance with this Act, the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd et sequentes), and other applicable law.
Prohibition on Alteration of Designation.--Nothing in this Act or any other law authorizes the Secretary of the Interior or any other governmental officer to alter the designation of the Hanford Reach recreational river as a recreational river under this Act.
Management Plan Commission.-- ``(1) Membership.--There shall be a 15-member management commission for the Hanford Reach recreational river, which shall be comprised of representatives of each of the following: ``(A) The Department of the Interior, the Department of Commerce, and the Department of Energy.
The Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Department of Ecology, and the Department of Community, Trade, and Economic Development of the State of Washington.
The Washington counties of Benton, Franklin, and Grant.
Certain Indian tribes in the State of Washington, including the Umatilla Indian tribe, the Nez Perce Indian tribe, and the Yakama Nation.
Members of the public interested in conservation, recreation, and business.
Appointment.--Members of the management commission described in paragraph (1)(E) shall be-- ``(A) nominated by persons residing in the vicinity of the Hanford Reach recreational river; and ``(B) appointed by the Governor of Washington.
Supermajority requirement.--All Commission decisions shall be adopted with a vote of at least 10 of the members of the Commission.
Development of Management Plan.--The management commission shall be responsible for developing the management plan for the Hanford Reach recreational river.
In developing and periodically revising the plan, the management commission shall-- ``(1) provide opportunity for public participation; ``(2) recognize recreation as an outstandingly remarkable value of the Hanford Reach recreational river and give recreation a high management priority, along with protection of natural, cultural, and scenic resources; ``(3) coordinate and cooperate with State, local, and tribal governments, public school districts, and other entities in the development and implementation of educational and interpretive programs related to the Hanford Reach recreational river; ``(4) determine how an educational and interpretive center for the Hanford Reach recreational river, with appropriate exhibit, conference, and support facilities, can be constructed or incorporated into a compatible community facility; and ``(5) determine how recreational tourism efforts associated with the Hanford Reach recreational river can be coordinated through a community-based visitor and convention bureau.
Prohibition on Inclusion of Privately Owned Land.-- ``(1) Prohibition.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), only public land adjacent to the Hanford Reach recreational river, and no privately owned land, may be included in the Hanford Reach recreational river.
Limited acquisition authority.--As part of the management plan for the Hanford Reach recreational river, the management commission shall develop a strategy for acquiring private land, by purchase, conservation easement, lease, or donation, from persons willing to convey private land in the area defined by the applicable environmental impact statement.
Relationship to Access Corridors.--Access corridors for the Hanford Reach recreational river in existence on the date of enactment of this section shall be retained.
Relationship to Other Laws and Authorities.--The designation of the Hanford Reach recreational river shall not-- ``(1) prohibit or approve relicensing of any hydroelectric facility by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; ``(2) affect any law, agreement, plan, or policy in effect on the date of enactment of this section regarding water rights or instream flows on the designated river segment; ``(3) prohibit the operation or maintenance of any energy, transmission, water intake, or water outfall facility in existence on the date of enactment of this section; ``(4) prohibit the modification, repair, or replacement of any energy, transmission, water intake, or water outfall facility so long as there is no substantial impact on the natural, cultural, or scenic resources of the Hanford Reach recreational river and adjacent land area; ``(5) establish or impose remediation requirements more restrictive than those that would apply but for the designation; ``(6) prohibit construction of temporary facilities necessary for the remediation and restoration of contaminated areas within the view shed of the Hanford Reach recreational river; or ``(7) relieve the Secretary of Energy from any obligation or other liability at the Hanford Nuclear Reservation under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes), and other applicable law imposing any similar obligation or other liability on the Secretary of the Interior.
Rivershore Restoration and Enhancement.--The Secretary of the Army, acting through the Chief of Engineers of the Army Corps of Engineers, in cooperation and coordination with the heads of other relevant Federal agencies and State and local governments, shall develop a comprehensive plan of improvement for the levees and other rivershore areas downstream of the Hanford Reach recreational river in the vicinity of the cites of Richland, Pasco, and Kennewick, Washington, including-- ``(1) restoration and enhancement of fish and wildlife habitat; ``(2) recreation; ``(3) river access; and ``(4) overall aesthetics.''.
Existing Undesignated Paragraphs; Removal of Duplication.-- Section 3(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking the first undesignated paragraph after paragraph (156), relating to Elkhorn Creek, Oregon; and (2) by designating the three remaining undesignated paragraphs after paragraph (156) as paragraphs (157), (158), and (159), respectively.
CONSOLIDATION OF BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT HOLDINGS, HANFORD NUCLEAR RESERVATION.
Study of Exchange Options.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Energy shall-- (1) study the consolidation of parcels of land administered by the Bureau of Land Management on the Hanford Nuclear Reservation; and (2) prepare to exchange lands on completion of documents required under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes).
Objectives.--The objectives of the land exchange under subsection (a) shall be-- (1) to clear title to parcels of land along the railroad in the southeast corner of the Hanford Nuclear Reservation and in the area known as the ``200 Area'' for industrial development; (2) to protect wildlife and native plants; and (3) to preserve cultural sites important to Native Americans.