SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Consumer Phone Record Security Act of 2006''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Fraud and related activity in connection with obtaining customer proprietary network information.
Enforcement by Federal Trade Commission.
Concurrent enforcement by Federal Communications Commission.
Protection of customer proprietary network information.
FRAUD AND RELATED ACTIVITY IN CONNECTION WITH OBTAINING CUSTOMER PROPRIETARY NETWORK INFORMATION.
Unauthorized Access or Use of CPNI.--It is unlawful for any person-- (1) to obtain, or attempt to obtain, an individual's customer proprietary network information without authorization from the individual to whom the information relates by-- (A) making false or fraudulent statements or representations to an employee or customer of a telecommunications carrier; (B) providing false documentation to a telecommunications carrier; or (C) accessing customer accounts of a telecommunications carrier via the Internet; or (2) to cause, or attempt to cause, an individual's customer proprietary network information to be disclosed to any other person without authorization from the individual to whom the information relates.
Unauthorized Sale of Customer Proprietary Network Information.--Except as otherwise authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, customer proprietary network information without affirmative written authorization from the individual to whom the information relates.
Solicitation To Obtain Customer Proprietary Network Information.--It is unlawful for any person to request that another person obtain customer proprietary network information from a telecommunications carrier, knowing that the other person will obtain the information from the telecommunications carrier in any manner that is unlawful under subsection (a).
Law Enforcement Exception.--Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from obtaining customer proprietary network information from a telecommunications carrier if-- (1) the officer, employee, or agent is acting within his or her scope of employment; (2) the officer, employee, or agent is authorized by law to obtain the information; and (3) the information may lawfully be disclosed to the officer pursuant to court order or other legal authority.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Customer proprietary network information.--The term ``customer proprietary network information'' has the meaning given that term in section 222(i)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 222(i)(1))).
Law enforcement officer.--The term ``law enforcement officer'' has the meaning given that term in section 232(7) of title 18, United States Code.
Telecommunications carrier.--The term ``telecommunications carrier'' has the meaning given that term in section 222(i)(8) of the Communications Act of 1947 (47 United States Code 222(i)(8)).
ENFORCEMENT BY FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION.
In General.--Except as provided in sections 4, 5, and 6 of this Act, this Act shall be enforced by the Federal Trade Commission.
Violation Treated as an Unfair or Deceptive Act or Practice.-- Violation of section 2 shall be treated as an unfair or deceptive act or practice proscribed under a rule issued under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)(1)(B)).
Actions by the Commission.--The Commission shall prevent any person from violating this Act in the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 41 et sequentes) were incorporated into and made a part of this Act.
Any person that violates section 2 is subject to the penalties and entitled to the privileges and immunities provided in the Federal Trade Commission Act in the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act were incorporated into and made a part of this Act.
Additional Penalty.--In addition to any other penalty prescribed by law-- (1) a civil penalty of not more than $11,000 shall be imposed for each violation of section 2 of this Act; and (2) a violation of section 2 of this Act with respect to the customer network proprietary information of an individual shall be treated as a separate violation from a violation of section 2 of this Act with respect to the customer network proprietary information of any other individual.
CONCURRENT ENFORCEMENT BY FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.
The Federal Communications Commission shall enforce section 2.
For purposes of enforcement of that section by the Commission, a violation of that section is deemed to be a violation of a provision of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 151 et sequentes) rather than a violation of the Federal Trade Commission Act.
In General.--A State, as parens patriae, may bring a civil action on behalf of its residents in an appropriate district court of the United States to enforce section 2 or to impose the civil penalties authorized by section 3, whenever the chief legal officer of the State has reason to believe that the interests of the residents of the State have been or are being threatened or adversely affected by a violation of this Act or a regulation under this Act.
Notice.--The State shall serve written notice on the Federal Trade Commission and the Federal Communications Commission of any civil action under subsection (a) prior to initiating such civil action.
The notice shall include a copy of the complaint to be filed to initiate such civil action, except that if it is not feasible for the State to provide such prior notice, the State shall provide such notice immediately upon instituting such civil action.
Authority To Intervene.--Upon receiving the notice required by subsection (b), either Commission may intervene in such civil action and upon intervening-- (1) be heard on all matters arising in such civil action; and (2) file petitions for appeal of a decision in such civil action.
Construction.--For purposes of bringing any civil action under subsection (a), nothing in this section shall prevent the chief legal officer of a State from exercising the powers conferred on that officer by the laws of such State to conduct investigations or to administer oaths or affirmations or to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documentary and other evidence.
Venue; Service of Process.-- (1) Venue.--An action brought under subsection (a) shall be brought in a district court of the United States that meets applicable requirements relating to venue under section 1391 of title 28, United States Code.
Service of process.--In an action brought under subsection (a)-- (A) process may be served without regard to the territorial limits of the district or of the State in which the action is instituted; and (B) a person who participated in an alleged violation that is being litigated in the civil action may be joined in the civil action without regard to the residence of the person.
In General.--An individual whose customer proprietary network information has been obtained, used, or sold in violation of section 2 may file a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the person who committed the violation.
Remedies.--A court in which such a civil action has been brought may-- (1) impose a civil penalty of not more than $11,000 for each violation of this Act with respect to the plaintiff's customer proprietary network information; and (2) provide such additional relief as the court deems appropriate, including the award of court costs, investigative costs, and reasonable attorney's fees.
Limitation.--Nothing in this section authorizes an individual to bring a civil action against a telecommunications carrier (as defined in section 222(i)(8) of the Communications Act of 1947 (47 United States Code 222(i)(8))).
PROTECTION OF CUSTOMER PROPRIETARY NETWORK INFORMATION.
In General.--Section 222 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 222) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i); and (2) by inserting after subsection (g) the following: ``(h) Protection of Customer Proprietary Network Information.-- ``(1) In general.--A telecommunications carrier shall-- ``(A) implement a system by which the carrier can determine whether an individual has authorized access to, or the release of, an individual's customer proprietary network information before it is made available to third parties; ``(B) ensure that personnel with access to customer proprietary network information are trained as to when they are and are not authorized to use customer proprietary network information and have a disciplinary process in effect for disciplining personnel for misuse of customer proprietary network information; ``(C) maintain for at least 1 year a record of any sales or marketing campaign conducted by carrier or its affiliates that uses customer proprietary network information; ``(D) maintain for at least 1 year a record of each instance in which customer proprietary network information was disclosed or provided to the customer or third parties, or where third parties were allowed access to customer proprietary network information, in the sales or marketing campaign that includes-- ``(i) a description of the sales or marketing campaign in which the information was used; ``(ii) the specific customer proprietary network information that was used in the campaign; and ``(iii) a description of the products and services that were offered as a part of the campaign; ``(E) establish a supervisory review process regarding compliance with this subsection for outbound marketing situations and maintain for at least 1 year a record of its compliance; ``(F) require an officer or agent of the carrier to sign a compliance certificate on an annual basis stating that the officer or agent has personal knowledge that the carrier has established operating procedures that are adequate to ensure compliance with this subsection; and ``(G) submit to the Commission annually-- ``(i) a copy of the certificate required by subparagraph (F); and ``(ii) a plan that reflects its compliance with the requirements of this subsection.
Annual FCC Reports.--The Commission shall transmit a report to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce annually on the compliance of telecommunications carriers with the requirements of this subsection.''.
Definitions.--Section 222(i) of the Communications Act of 1934 (as redesignated by subsection (a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(8) Telecommunications carrier.--The term `telecommunications carrier'-- ``(A) has the meaning given that term by section 3(44); but ``(B) includes a provider of IP-enabled voice service.
IP-enabled voice service.--The term `IP-enabled voice service' means the provision of real-time 2-way voice communications offered to the public, or such classes of users as to be effectively available to the public, transmitted through customer premises equipment using TCP/IP protocol, or a successor protocol, for a fee (whether part of a bundle of services or separately) with 2-way interconnection capability such that the service can originate traffic to, and terminate traffic from, the public switched telephone network.''.
Regulations.--Within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Communications Commission shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to implement section 222(i)(8) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 222(i)(8)), as added by subsection (b) of this section, including the application of section 222 of that Act with the expanded definition of telecommunications carrier.