VietNow, a nonprofit corporation organized under the laws of the State of Illinois, is recognized and granted a Federal charter.
The corporation shall have only the powers granted to it through its bylaws and articles of incorporation filed in the States in which it is incorporated and subject to the laws of such States.
The purposes of the corporation are the purposes provided in its articles of incorporation and shall include-- (1) increasing community awareness of the problems encountered by Vietnam era veterans; and (2) helping to solve the unique physical, social, and psychological problems of Vietnam era veterans and their families.
With respect to service of process, the corporation shall comply with the laws of the States in which it is incorporated and those States in which it carries on its activities in furtherance of its corporate purposes.
Eligibility for membership in the corporation and the rights and privileges of members of the corporation shall be as provided in the bylaws and articles of incorporation of the corporation.
The composition of the board of directors of the corporation and the responsibilities of the board shall be as provided in the articles of incorporation of the corporation and in conformity with the laws of the States in which it is incorporated.
The officers of the corporation and the election of the officers shall be as provided in the bylaws and articles of incorporation of the corporation and in conformity with the laws of the States in which it is incorporated.
Use of Income and Assets.--No part of the income or assets of the corporation may inure to the benefit of any member, officer, or director of the corporation or be distributed to any such individual during the life of this charter.
This subsection may not be construed to prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to the officers and employees of the corporation or reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses in amounts approved by the board of directors.
Loans.--The corporation may not make any loan to any member, officer, director, or employee of the corporation.
Issuance of Stock and Payment of Dividends.--The corporation may not issue any shares of stock or declare or pay any dividends.
Claims of Federal Approval.--The corporation may not claim the approval of the Congress or the authorization of the Federal Government for any of its activities.
Corporate Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as a corporation organized and incorporated under the laws of Illinois.
The corporation shall be liable for the acts of its officers, directors, employees, and agents whenever such individuals act within the scope of their authority.
MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
Books and Records of Account.--The corporation shall keep correct and complete books and records of account and minutes of any proceeding of the corporation involving any of its members, the board of directors, or any committee having authority under the board of directors.
Names and Addresses of Members.--The corporation shall keep at its principal office a record of the names and addresses of all members having the right to vote in any proceeding of the corporation.
Right To Inspect Books and Records.--All books and records of the corporation may be inspected by any member having the right to vote in any proceeding of the corporation, or by any agent or attorney of such member, for any proper purpose at any reasonable time.
Application of State Law.--This section may not be construed to contravene any applicable State law.
AUDIT OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS.
The first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for audit of accounts of private corporations established under Federal law'', approved August 30, 1964 (36 United States Code 1101), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``VietNow.''.
The corporation shall annually submit to the Congress a report concerning the activities of the corporation during the preceding fiscal year.
The annual report shall be submitted on the same date as the report of the audit required by section 11.
The annual report may not be printed as a public document.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``corporation'' means VietNow.
The term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
The corporation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation as provided in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The charter granted in this Act shall expire if the corporation fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act.