CONGRESSIONAL STATEMENT OF POLICY.
It is the sense of the Congress that the President should make freedom of religion one of the major objectives of United States foreign policy with respect to China.
As part of this policy, the Department of State should raise in every relevant bilateral and multilateral forum the issue of individuals imprisoned, detained, confined, or otherwise harassed by the Chinese Government on religious grounds.
In its communications with the Chinese Government, the Department of State should provide specific names of individuals of concern and request a complete and timely response from the Chinese Government regarding the individuals' whereabouts and condition, the charges against them, and sentence imposed.
The goal of these official communications should be the expeditious release of all religious prisoners in China and Tibet and the end of the Chinese Government's policy and practice of harassing and repressing religious believers.
PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR THE PARTICIPATION OF CERTAIN CHINESE OFFICIALS IN CONFERENCES, EXCHANGES, PROGRAMS, AND ACTIVITIES.
Prohibition.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for fiscal years after fiscal year 1997, no funds appropriated or otherwise made available for the Department of State, the United States Information Agency, and the United States Agency for International Development may be used for the purpose of providing travel expenses and per diem for the participation of nationals of the People's Republic of China described in paragraphs (1) and (2) in conferences, exchanges, programs, and activities: (1) The head or political secretary of any of the following Chinese Government-created or approved organizations: (A) The Chinese Buddhist Association.
The Chinese Catholic Patriotic Association.
The National Congress of Catholic Representatives.
The Chinese Catholic Bishops' Conference.
The Chinese Protestant ``Three Self'' Patriotic Movement.
The China Christian Council.
The Chinese Taoist Association.
The Chinese Islamic Association.
Any military or civilian official or employee of the Government of the People's Republic of China who carried out or directed the carrying out of any of the following policies or practices: (A) Formulating, drafting, or implementing repressive religious policies.
Imprisoning, detaining, or harassing individuals on religious grounds.
Promoting or participating in policies or practices which hinder religious activities or the free expression of religious beliefs.
Certification.-- (1) Each Federal agency subject to the prohibition of subsection (a) shall certify in writing to the appropriate congressional committees no later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 90 days thereafter, that it did not pay, either directly or through a contractor or grantee, for travel expenses or per diem of any national of the People's Republic of China described in subsection (a).
Each certification under paragraph (1) shall be supported by the following information: (A) The name of each employee of any agency of the Government of the People's Republic of China whose travel expenses or per diem were paid by funds of the reporting agency of the United States Government.
The procedures employed by the reporting agency of the United States Government to ascertain whether each individual under subparagraph (A) did or did not participate in activities described in subsection (a)(2).
The reporting agency's basis for concluding that each individual under subparagraph (A) did not participate in such activities.
Definition of Appropriate Congressional Committees.--For purposes of this section the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives.
CERTAIN OFFICIALS OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA INELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE VISAS AND EXCLUDED FROM ADMISSION.
Requirement.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any national of the People's Republic of China described in section 2(a)(2) (except the head of state, the head of government, and cabinet level ministers) shall be ineligible to receive visas and shall be excluded from admission into the United States.
Waiver.--The President may waive the requirement in subsection (a) with respect to an individual described in such subsection if the President-- (1) determines that it is vital to the national interest to do so; and (2) provides written notification to the appropriate congressional committees (as defined in section 2(c)) containing a justification for the waiver.
Sections 2 and 3 shall cease to have effect 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives November 6, 1997.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.