Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``FHA Multifamily Housing Flexible Disposition Act of 1993''.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are: (1) To balance the need to reimburse the general insurance fund of the Department of Housing and Urban Development through the disposition of multifamily housing projects with the goal of preserving housing for low-income households.
To provide housing to households with mixed incomes that are capable of paying the operating and debt service costs of such housing.
To explore different approaches to disposing of such housing, including the use of Federal housing rental subsidies, Federal housing mortgage insurance, risk-sharing arrangements, purchase money mortgages, and low-income housing tax credits, or combinations thereof.
To maintain to the maximum extent possible the low- income character of such housing while disposing of such properties in an economically viable manner.
In General.--Consistent with the purposes set forth in section 1 and for a period of 18 months from the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') may dispose of multifamily housing projects that are-- (1) owned by the Secretary; or (2) being foreclosed upon by the Secretary; without regard to the provisions of section 203 of the Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978 (12 United States Code 1701z-11).
Sale to Local Governments and State Agencies.-- (1) Notice.-- (A) In general.--Within a reasonable period of time after acquiring title to a multifamily housing project, the Secretary shall provide written notice to-- (i) the unit of general local government the jurisdiction of which includes such project; and (ii) the State housing finance agency, or other appropriate agency, of the State in which such project is located.
Contents.--The notice provided under paragraph (1) shall contain basic information about the project, including its location, the number of units (identified by number of bedrooms), and information relating to the estimated fair market value of the project.
Expression of serious interest.--Not later than 60 days after receiving notice under paragraph (1), a unit of general local government or State agency may provide the Secretary with written notice of its serious interest in the property.
Such notice of serious interest shall be in such form and include such information as the Secretary may prescribe.
Notice of readiness for sale.--Upon the expiration of the 60-day period referred to in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall provide written notice to any unit of general local government or State agency that has expressed serious interest in the property.
Such notice shall specify the minimum terms and conditions for the sale of the property.
Offers and acceptance.-- (A) Offers.--A unit of general local government or State agency has 45 days after the date notice is received under paragraph (3) to make a bona fide offer to purchase the property.
Nonprofit organizations.--An offer under this paragraph may be made in conjunction with a nonprofit organization.
Acceptance.--The Secretary shall accept an offer that complies with the terms and conditions prescribed by the Secretary under paragraph (3).
Sale to Other Purchasers.--If, after expiration of the periods of time referred to in paragraphs (2) and (4)(A) of subsection (b), as applicable, no purchaser has expressed serious interest or made a bona fide offer to purchase the property, the Secretary may sell the property to any purchaser.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this Act the term ``multifamily housing project'' has the same meaning as in section 203(i)(1) of the Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978 (12 United States Code 1701z-11(i)(1)).
Not later than 90 days after the expiration of the 18-month period following the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Congress a report describing the various methods of disposition of multifamily housing projects that have been undertaken pursuant to this Act and any recommendations for administrative or legislative action to further the purposes of this Act.