This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Havens for Children Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Family violence does not necessarily cease when family victims are legally separated by divorce or otherwise not sharing a household.
According to a 1996 report by the American Psychological Association, custody and visitation disputes are more frequent when there is a history of domestic violence.
Family violence often escalates following separation and divorce, and child custody and visitation arrangements become the new forum for the continuation of abuse.
According to a 1996 report by the American Psychological Association, fathers who batter mothers are twice as likely to seek sole custody of their children.
In these circumstances, if the abusive father loses custody he is more likely to continue the threats to the mother through other legal actions.
Some perpetrators of violence use the children as pawns to control the abused party and to commit more violence during separation or divorce.
In one study, 34 percent of women in shelters and callers to hotlines reported threats of kidnapping, 11 percent reported that the batterer had kidnapped the child for some period, and 21 percent reported that threats of kidnapping forced the victim to return to the batterer.
Approximately 90 percent of children in homes in which their mothers are abused witness the abuse.
Children who witness domestic violence may exhibit more aggressive, antisocial, fearful, and inhibited behaviors.
Such children display more anxiety, aggression and temperamental problems.
Women and children are at an elevated risk of violence during the process of separation or divorce.
Fifty to 70 percent of men who abuse their spouses or partners also physically abuse their children.
Up to 75 percent of all domestic assaults reported to law enforcement agencies were inflicted after the separation of the couple.
In one study of spousal homicide, over \1/2\ of the male defendants were separated from their victims.
Seventy-three percent of battered women seeking emergency medical services do so after separation.
The National Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges includes the option of visitation centers in their Model Code on Domestic and Family Violence.
Purposes.--The purposes of section 2 are-- (1) to protect children from the trauma of witnessing or experiencing violence, sexual abuse, neglect, abduction, rape, or death during parent and child visitation and visitation exchanges; (2) to protect victims of domestic violence from experiencing further violence, abuse, and threats during child visitation or visitation exchanges; and (3) to provide an ongoing safe haven for parents and children during visitation or visitation exchanges to promote continuity and stability.
GRANTS TO STATES TO PROVIDE FOR SUPERVISED VISITATION CENTERS.
Grants to States.--The Attorney General may award grants to States to enable States to enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with public or private nonprofit entities to assist such entities in establishing and operating supervised visitation centers for the purposes of facilitating supervised visitation and visitation exchange.
At least 50 percent of all grants awarded under this subsection shall be used by State grantees for contracts and cooperative agreements with nonprofit, nongovernmental entities.
Considerations.--In awarding grants under paragraph (1), the Attorney General shall take into account and in awarding contracts and cooperative agreements a State which received such a grant shall take into account-- (1) the number of families to be served by the proposed visitation center to be established under the grant; (2) the extent to which supervised visitation centers serve underserved populations as that term is defined in section 2003(7) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796gg-2(7)); (3) the extent to which the applicant demonstrates cooperation and collaboration with nonprofit, nongovernmental entities in the local community served, including the State domestic violence coalition centers and other local shelters and programs for domestic violence victims, including programs providing legal assistance to domestic violence victims; and (4) the extent to which the applicant demonstrates coordination or collaboration with State and local court systems, including mechanisms for communication and referral.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Amounts provided under a grant under subsection (a) or provided by a State grantee under a contract or cooperative agreement shall be used to establish supervised visitation centers and for the purposes described in section 1(b).
In using such amounts, grantees and persons awarded a contract or cooperative agreement shall target the economically disadvantaged and those individuals who could not otherwise afford such visitation services.
Individuals shall be permitted to use the services provided by the center on a sliding fee basis.
Regulations and applicant requirements.--The Attorney General shall award grants to States and States shall enter into contracts and cooperative agreements under such grants in accordance with such regulations as the Attorney General may promulgate.
The Attorney General shall give priority in awarding grants and States shall give priority in awarding contracts and cooperative agreements under such grants to States that consider domestic violence in making a custody decision.
An applicant awarded a grant from the Attorney General or an applicant awarded a contract or cooperative agreement by a State grantee shall-- (A) demonstrate recognized expertise in the area of family violence and a record of high quality service to victims of domestic violence; (B) demonstrate collaboration with and support of the State domestic violence coalition and local domestic violence shelter or program in the locality in which the supervised visitation center will be operated; and (C) provide long-term supervised visitation and visitation exchange services to promote continuity and stability.
Reporting.--Not later than 60 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Attorney General shall report to Congress information concerning-- (1) the number of individuals served and the number of individuals turned away from services categorized by State, the number of individuals from underserved populations served or turned away from such services, and the type of presenting problems that underlie the need for supervised visitation or visitation exchange, such as domestic violence, child abuse emotional or other physical abuse, or a combination of such factors; (2) the numbers of supervised visitations or visitation exchanges ordered during custody determinations under a separation or divorce decree or protection order, through child protection services, or through other social services agencies; (3) the process by which children or abused partners are protected during visitations, temporary custody transfers and other activities for which the supervised visitation centers are created; (4) safety and security problems occurring during the reporting period during supervised visitations or at visitation centers including the number of parental abduction cases; (5) the number of parental abduction cases in a judicial district using supervised visitation services, both as identified in criminal prosecution and custody violations; and (6) any other appropriate information designated in regulations promulgated by the Attorney General.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--For the purpose of awarding grants under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $75,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, $85,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and $95,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
Distribution.--Of the amounts appropriated under subparagraph (A) for each fiscal year, not less than 95 percent shall be used to award grants.