SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR NON-CLINICAL TESTING EXPENSES FOR NEGLECTED DISEASE TREATMENTS.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
NON-CLINICAL TESTING EXPENSES FOR NEGLECTED DISEASE TREATMENTS.
In General.--For purposes of section 38, the credit determined under this section for the taxable year is an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified non-clinical research expenses for the taxable year.
Qualified Non-clinical Research Expenses.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified non-clinical research expenses' means the amounts which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year which would be described in subsection (b) of section 41 if such subsection were applied with the modifications set forth in paragraph (2).
Modifications.--For purposes of paragraph (1), subsection (b) of section 41 shall be applied by substituting `non-clinical research' for `qualified research' each place it appears in paragraphs (2) and (3) of such subsection.
Donation of rights to treatment required.--No credit shall be allowed under this section with respect to qualified non-clinical research expenses for a taxable year unless-- ``(A) during such taxable year, or in a previous taxable year, the taxpayer has made a charitable contribution of a license for the treatment with respect to which such qualified non-clinical research expenses were paid or incurred and either-- ``(i) the charitable contribution has the same meaning as defined in section 170(c) and such charitable contribution is made to a charitable organization where the charitable organization licensee researches, develops, or administers treatments for neglected conditions or diseases, or ``(ii) the charitable contribution is made to a foreign government or any subdivision or organization owned by the foregoing, but only if the contribution is made for exclusively public purposes, ``(B) the only commercial rights retained by the taxpayer with respect to such treatment are for an indication which is not a neglected condition or disease, and ``(C) no deduction has been allowed under any provision of this title with respect to such contribution.
Definition and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Non-clinical research.--The term `non-clinical research' means any research relating to the development of a treatment for a neglected disease or condition to the extent such research is not human clinical testing with respect to such treatment.
Neglected disease or condition.--The term `neglected disease or condition' means any of the following: ``(A) African trypanosomiasis.
Any other infectious disease for which there is no significant market in developed nations and disproportionately affects poor and marginalized populations as determined and designated by regulation by the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Certain rules made applicable.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 41(f), paragraph (4) of section 41(d), and subsections (b)(1)(C) and (c) of section 45C shall apply for purposes of this section.
Treatment as trade or business expense.--For purposes of this section and section 174 whether a qualified non- clinical research expense (determined after the application of this paragraph) is paid or incurred in connection with the taxpayer's trade or business shall be determined without regard to any contribution of licensing rights described in subsection (b)(3).
Expenses for which credits are allowable.--For purposes of this section, the limitations under section 280C are not applicable for purposes of determining whether an expense is deductible or chargeable to a capital account.''.
Credit To Be Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code (relating to current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (34), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (35) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(36) the neglected disease credit determined under section 45R.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Non-clinical testing expenses for neglected disease treatments.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2009.