This Act may be cited as the ``FBI Reform Commission Act of 2001''.
CREATION OF THE FBI REVIEW COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established the FBI Review Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Mission Statement.-- (1) In general.--The mission of the Commission shall be to conduct a thorough, independent, and comprehensive examination of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (in this Act referred to as the ``FBI'').
Focus.--The Commission shall focus its examination on-- (A) systemic and structural aspects of the FBI; (B) the FBI's relationship with other law enforcement entities; and (C) recommendations for improving the performance of the FBI.
Membership and Administrative Provisions.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members of whom-- (A) 2 members shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate; (B) 2 members shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate; (C) 2 members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (D) 2 members shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives; and (E) 4 members shall be appointed by the President, including 1 who shall serve as the Chair of the Commission.
Qualifications.--Members of the Commission shall be-- (A) chosen on the basis of expertise in law enforcement and management, integrity, impartiality, and good judgment; and (B) individuals who are not, at the time appointed to the Commission, elected or appointed officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Balance.--The Commission shall reflect, to the maximum extent possible, fair and equitable representation of various points of view with respect to the matters to be studied by the Commission under subsection (d)(1).
Terms of appointment.-- (A) Date.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original member was appointed.
Meetings.-- (A) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all of the members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold meetings.
Duties.-- (1) Study.--The Commission shall complete a thorough study and review of-- (A) the methods used by the FBI to store and securely maintain information, including-- (i) any methods of securing information from theft and inadvertent release; (ii) the efficacy of information systems used to gather and maintain information; and (iii) any practices and procedures governing the classification and declassification of information; (B) the manner in which the FBI trains and monitors personnel, including-- (i) any methods of ensuring compliance with relevant laws, regulations, and FBI procedures; (ii) any methods of holding FBI agents accountable for wrongdoing; (iii) the treatment of FBI agents and employees who report wrongdoing in the FBI; (iv) any training and monitoring regarding the handling of information; and (v) any training and monitoring regarding the use of deadly force; (C) the manner in which the FBI initiates, organizes, coordinates, and conducts investigations; (D) the allocation of the FBI's resources and the manner in which resource allocation decisions are made and reviewed; (E) the FBI's interaction with State and other Federal law enforcement agencies; (F) the efficacy of external and internal FBI oversight mechanisms; (G) the advisability of altering the FBI's current structure and organization; and (H) such other matters as the Commission determines appropriate.
Recommendations.--After completing the study under paragraph (1), the Commission shall develop recommendations regarding each matter studied, including recommendations-- (A) of any actions Congress should take to address the Commission's findings; (B) of any actions the FBI should take to address the Commission's findings; and (C) for further study, examination, or action by Congress, the FBI, or any other relevant entity.
Advice, assistance, and testimony.--To carry out the study under paragraph (1) and to develop the recommendations under paragraph (2), the Commission shall solicit advice, assistance, and experts in the areas of-- (A) information security; (B) business management and organization; (C) Federal law enforcement agencies; (D) State and local law enforcement; (E) foreign and domestic intelligence; and (F) any other areas determined relevant by the Commission.
Report.-- (A) Final report.-- (i) In general.--Not later than 9 months after the date on which all of the members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall submit a final report to Congress, the FBI, and the Attorney General.
Contents.--The report under clause (i) shall contain-- (I) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission regarding the matters studied under paragraph (1); (II) a detailed statement of the recommendations developed under paragraph (2); and (III) any dissenting or minority opinions of the members of the Commission.
Interim reports.-- (i) In general.--The Commission may determine whether any matter to be studied under paragraph (1) or any recommendation developed under paragraph (2), shall be the subject of an interim report to be submitted before the submission of the final report required under subparagraph (A).
Submission of interim reports.--Any interim reports prepared under clause (i) shall be submitted to-- (I) Congress; (II) the FBI; (III) the Attorney General; and (IV) any other individual or organization determined relevant by the Commission.
Accessibility.-- (i) In general.--Both the final report required under subparagraph (A) and any interim reports prepared under subparagraph (B), shall be accessible to members of the general public and to government officials to the greatest extent possible without compromising national security, the health or safety of an individual, or the integrity of an ongoing investigation.
Confidentiality.--The Commission may designate portions of any report prepared under this paragraph confidential to ensure national security, the health or safety of an individual, or the integrity of an ongoing investigation.
Powers of the Commission.-- (1) Hearings.-- (A) In general.--The Commission may hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate to carry out this Act.
Oaths and affirmations.--The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Rules and procedures.--The Commission may establish rules and procedures governing its proceedings as consistent with this Act.
Accessibility.-- (i) In general.--Any hearing held by the Commission shall be open to the public.
Closed hearings.--The Commission may decide to close to the public any hearing when necessary to protect national security, the health and safety of an individual, or the integrity of an ongoing investigation.
Powers of members and agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action this Act authorizes the Commission to take.
Information from federal agencies.-- (A) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Furnishing information.--Upon request of the Chair of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish the information under subparagraph (A) to the Commission, unless so doing would threaten national security, the health or safety of an individual, or the integrity of an ongoing investigation.
Commission Personnel Matters.-- (1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Commission shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Administrative support services.--Upon request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Staff.-- (A) In general.--The Commission may, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to chapter 51, and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting the final report required under subsection (d)(4)(A).
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
Appropriated funds to remain available.--Any funds appropriated to carry out this Act shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.