This Act may be cited as the ``John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley National Historical Park Establishment Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish the John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley National Historical Park-- (1) to help preserve, protect, and interpret the nationally significant resources in the Blackstone River Valley that exemplify the industrial heritage of the John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley National Heritage Corridor for the benefit and inspiration of future generations; (2) to support the preservation, protection, and interpretation of the urban, rural, and agricultural landscape features (including the Blackstone River and Canal) of the region that provide an overarching context for the industrial heritage of the National Heritage Corridor; (3) to educate the public about-- (A) the industrial history of the National Heritage Corridor; and (B) the significance of the National Heritage Corridor to the past and present; and (4) to support and enhance the network of partners who will continue to engage in the protection, improvement, management, and operation of key resources and facilities throughout the National Heritage Corridor.
In this Act: (1) Map.--The term ``map'' means the map entitled ``John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley National Historical Park'', numbered NEFA962/111015 and dated October, 2011.
National heritage corridor.--The term ``National Heritage Corridor'' means the John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley National Heritage Corridor.
Park.--The term ``Park'' means the John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley National Historical Park established under section 4.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the States of Massachusetts and Rhode Island.
ESTABLISHMENT OF JOHN H. CHAFEE BLACKSTONE RIVER VALLEY NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Establishment.--There is established in the States a unit of the National Park System, to be known as the ``John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley National Historical Park''.
Boundaries.--The Park shall be comprised of the following sites and districts, as generally depicted on the map: (1) Old Slater Mill National Historic Landmark District.
Hopedale Village Historic District.
Blackstone River and the tributaries of Blackstone River.
Availability of Map.--The map shall be available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
Acquisition of Land.--The Secretary may acquire land or interests in land within the boundaries of the Park by-- (1) donation; (2) purchase with donated or appropriated funds; or (3) exchange.
Administration.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall administer the Park in accordance with-- (A) this Act; (B) the laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including-- (i) the National Park Service Organic Act (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes); and (ii) the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes); and (C) any cooperative agreements entered into under subsection (f).
General management plan.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date on which funds are made available to carry out this Act, the Secretary shall prepare a general management plan for the Park-- (i) in consultation with the States; and (ii) in accordance with-- (I) any cooperative agreements entered into under subsection (f); and (II) section 12(b) of the National Park System General Authorities Act (16 United States Code 1a-7(b)).
Requirements.--To the maximum extent practicable, the plan prepared under subparagraph (A) shall consider ways to use pre-existing and/or planned facilities and recreational opportunities in the National Heritage Corridor, including-- (i) the Blackstone Valley Visitor Center, Pawtucket, RI; (ii) Captain Wilbur Kelly House, Blackstone River State Park, Lincoln, RI; (iii) the Museum of Work and Culture, Woonsocket, RI; (iv) River Bend Farm/Blackstone River and Canal Heritage State Park, Uxbridge, MA; and (v) Worcester Blackstone Visitors Center, located at the former Washburn-Moen wire factory, Worcester, MA.
Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the States, political subdivisions of the States, nonprofit organizations (including Blackstone River Valley National Heritage Corridor, Inc.), and private property owners to provide technical assistance and interpretation in the Park and the National Heritage Corridor.
Financial Assistance.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary may provide financial assistance, on a matching basis, for the conduct of resource protection activities in the National Heritage Corridor.