This Act may be cited as the ``Multiparty, Multiforum Trial Jurisdiction Act of 2002''.
MULTIPARTY, MULTIFORUM JURISDICTION OF DISTRICT COURTS.
Basis of Jurisdiction.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 85 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Multiparty, multiforum jurisdiction ``(a) In General.--The district courts shall have original jurisdiction of any civil action involving minimal diversity between adverse parties that arises from a single accident, where at least 75 natural persons have died in the accident at a discrete location, if-- ``(1) a defendant resides in a State and a substantial part of the accident took place in another State or other location, regardless of whether that defendant is also a resident of the State where a substantial part of the accident took place; ``(2) any two defendants reside in different States, regardless of whether such defendants are also residents of the same State or States; or ``(3) substantial parts of the accident took place in different States.
Limitation of Jurisdiction of District Courts.--The district court shall abstain from hearing any civil action described in subsection (a) in which-- ``(1) the substantial majority of all plaintiffs are citizens of a single State of which the primary defendants are also citizens; and ``(2) the claims asserted will be governed primarily by the laws of that State.
Special Rules and Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) minimal diversity exists between adverse parties if any party is a citizen of a State and any adverse party is a citizen of another State, a citizen or subject of a foreign state, or a foreign state as defined in section 1603(a) of this title; ``(2) a corporation is deemed to be a citizen of any State, and a citizen or subject of any foreign state, in which it is incorporated or has its principal place of business, and is deemed to be a resident of any State in which it is incorporated or licensed to do business or is doing business; ``(3) the term `injury' means-- ``(A) physical harm to a natural person; and ``(B) physical damage to or destruction of tangible property, but only if physical harm described in subparagraph (A) exists; ``(4) the term `accident' means a sudden accident, or a natural event culminating in an accident, that results in death incurred at a discrete location by at least 75 natural persons; and ``(5) the term `State' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any territory or possession of the United States.
Intervening Parties.--In any action in a district court which is or could have been brought, in whole or in part, under this section, any person with a claim arising from the accident described in subsection (a) shall be permitted to intervene as a party plaintiff in the action, even if that person could not have brought an action in a district court as an original matter.
Notification of Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation.-- A district court in which an action under this section is pending shall promptly notify the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation of the pendency of the action.''.
Conforming amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 85 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1369.
Venue.--Section 1391 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) A civil action in which jurisdiction of the district court is based upon section 1369 of this title may be brought in any district in which any defendant resides or in which a substantial part of the accident giving rise to the action took place.''.
Removal of Actions.--Section 1441 of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (e) by striking ``(e) The court to which such civil action is removed'' and inserting ``(f) The court to which a civil action is removed under this section''; and (2) by inserting after subsection (d) the following: ``(e)(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, a defendant in a civil action in a State court may remove the action to the district court of the United States for the district and division embracing the place where the action is pending if-- ``(A) the action could have been brought in a United States district court under section 1369 of this title; or ``(B) the defendant is a party to an action which is or could have been brought, in whole or in part, under section 1369 in a United States district court and arises from the same accident as the action in State court, even if the action to be removed could not have been brought in a district court as an original matter.
The removal of an action under this subsection shall be made in accordance with section 1446 of this title, except that a notice of removal may also be filed before trial of the action in State court within 30 days after the date on which the defendant first becomes a party to an action under section 1369 in a United States district court that arises from the same accident as the action in State court, or at a later time with leave of the district court.
Whenever an action is removed under this subsection and the district court to which it is removed or transferred under section 1407(j) has made a liability determination requiring further proceedings as to damages, the district court shall remand the action to the State court from which it had been removed for the determination of damages, unless the court finds that, for the convenience of parties and witnesses and in the interest of justice, the action should be retained for the determination of damages.
Any remand under paragraph (2) shall not be effective until 60 days after the district court has issued an order determining liability and has certified its intention to remand the removed action for the determination of damages.
An appeal with respect to the liability determination of the district court may be taken during that 60-day period to the court of appeals with appellate jurisdiction over the district court.
In the event a party files such an appeal, the remand shall not be effective until the appeal has been finally disposed of.
Once the remand has become effective, the liability determination shall not be subject to further review by appeal or otherwise.
Any decision under this subsection concerning remand for the determination of damages shall not be reviewable by appeal or otherwise.
An action removed under this subsection shall be deemed to be an action under section 1369 and an action in which jurisdiction is based on section 1369 of this title for purposes of this section and sections 1407, 1697, and 1785 of this title.
Nothing in this subsection shall restrict the authority of the district court to transfer or dismiss an action on the ground of inconvenient forum.''.
Service of Process.-- (1) Other than subpoenas.-- (A) In general.--Chapter 113 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Service in multiparty, multiforum actions ``When the jurisdiction of the district court is based in whole or in part upon section 1369 of this title, process, other than subpoenas, may be served at any place within the United States, or anywhere outside the United States if otherwise permitted by law.''.
Table of sections.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 113 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``1697.
Service in multiparty, multiforum actions.''.
Service of subpoenas.-- (A) In general.--Chapter 117 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Subpoenas in multiparty, multiforum actions ``When the jurisdiction of the district court is based in whole or in part upon section 1369 of this title, a subpoena for attendance at a hearing or trial may, if authorized by the court upon motion for good cause shown, and upon such terms and conditions as the court may impose, be served at any place within the United States, or anywhere outside the United States if otherwise permitted by law.''.
Table of sections.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 117 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``1785.
Subpoenas in multiparty, multiforum actions.''.
The amendments made by section 2 shall apply to a civil action if the accident giving rise to the cause of action occurred on or after the 90th day after the date of enactment of this Act.