This Act may be cited as the ``Montgomery GI Bill for the 21st Century Act''.
EXCLUSION OF BASIC PAY CONTRIBUTIONS FOR PARTICIPATION IN BASIC EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN COMPUTATIONS ON STUDENT FINANCIAL AID.
Exclusion.--Subchapter II of chapter 30 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Exclusion of basic pay contributions in certain computations on student financial aid ``(a) In General.--The expected family contribution computed under section 475, 476, or 477 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1087oo, 1087pp, 1087qq) for a covered student shall be decreased by $1,200 for the applicable year.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `academic year' has the meaning given the term in section 481(a)(2) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1088(a)(2)).
The term `applicable year' means the first academic year for which a student uses entitlement to basic educational assistance under this chapter.
The term `covered student' means any individual entitled to basic educational assistance under this chapter whose basic pay or voluntary separation incentives was or were subject to reduction under section 3011(b), 3012(c), 3018(c), 3018A(b), or 3018B(b) of this title.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3020 the following new item: ``3020A.
Exclusion of basic pay contributions in certain computations on student financial aid.''.
OPPORTUNITY FOR ENROLLMENT IN BASIC EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS WHO PARTICIPATED OR WERE ELIGIBLE TO PARTICIPATE IN POST-VIETNAM ERA VETERANS EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
Opportunity for Enrollment.--Section 3018C(e) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``or (3)'' after ``paragraph (2)''; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) as paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), respectively; (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph (3): ``(3) A qualified individual referred to in paragraph (1) is also an individual who meets each of the following requirements: ``(A) The individual is a participant in the educational benefits program under chapter 32 of this title as of the date of the enactment of the Montgomery GI Bill for the 21st Century Act, or was eligible to participate in such program, but had not participated in that program or any other educational benefits program under this title, as of that date.
The individual meets the requirements of subsection (a)(3).
The individual, when discharged or released from active duty, is discharged or released therefrom with an honorable discharge.
''; (4) in paragraph (5), as so redesignated, by striking ``paragraph (3)(A)(ii)'' and inserting ``paragraph (4)(A)(ii)''; and (5) in paragraph (6), as so redesignated, by inserting ``, or individuals eligible to participate in that program who have not participated in that program or any other educational benefits program under this title,'' after ``chapter 32 of this title''.
Conforming and Clerical Amendments.--(1) The heading of such section is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Opportunity to enroll: certain VEAP participants; certain individuals eligible for participation in VEAP''.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 30 of such title is amended by striking the item relating to section 3018C and inserting the following new item: ``3018C.
Opportunity to enroll: certain VEAP participants; certain individuals eligible for participation in VEAP.''.
COMMENCEMENT OF 10-YEAR DELIMITING PERIOD FOR VETERANS, SURVIVORS, AND DEPENDENTS WHO ENROLL IN TRAINING PROGRAM.
Veterans.--Section 3031 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``through (g), and subject to subsection (h)'' and inserting ``through (h), and subject to subsection (i)''; (2) by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i); and (3) by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection (h): ``(h) In the case of an individual eligible for educational assistance under this chapter who, during the 10-year period described in subsection (a) of this section, enrolls in a program of training under this chapter, the period during which the individual may use the individual's entitlement to educational assistance under this chapter expires on the last day of the 10-year period beginning on the first day of the individual's pursuit of such program of training.''.
Eligible Children.--Subsection (a) of section 3512 of such title is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6)(B), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) if the person enrolls in a program of special restorative training under subchapter V of this chapter, such period shall begin on the first day of the person's pursuit of such program of special restorative training.''.
Eligible Surviving Spouses.--Subsection (b) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, any eligible person (as defined in section 3501(a)(1)(B) or (D)(ii) of this title) who, during the 10-year period described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, enrolls in a program of special restorative training under subchapter V of this chapter may be afforded educational assistance under this chapter during the 10-year period beginning on the first day of the individual's pursuit of such program of special restorative training.''.
AVAILABILITY OF EDUCATION BENEFITS FOR PAYMENT FOR NATIONAL ADMISSIONS EXAMS AND NATIONAL EXAMS FOR CREDIT AT INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION.
Covered Exams.--Sections 3452(b) and 3501(a)(5) of title 38, United States Code, are each amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such term also includes national tests for admission to institutions of higher learning or graduate schools (such as the SAT, LSAT, GRE, and GMAT exams) and national tests providing an opportunity for course credit at institutions of higher learning (such as the AP exam).''.
Amount of Payment.-- (1) Chapter 30.--Section 3032 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g)(1) Subject to paragraph (3), the amount of educational assistance payable under this chapter for a national test for admission or national test providing an opportunity for course credit at institutions of higher learning described in section 3452(b) of this title is the amount of the fee charged for the test.
The number of months of entitlement charged in the case of any individual for a test described in paragraph (1) is equal to the number (including any fraction) determined by dividing the total amount of educational assistance paid such individual for such test by the full-time monthly institutional rate of educational assistance, except for paragraph (1), such individual would otherwise be paid under subsection (a)(1), (b)(1), (d), or (e)(1) of section 3015 of this title, as the case may be.
In no event shall payment of educational assistance under this subsection for a test described in paragraph (1) exceed the amount of the individual's available entitlement under this chapter.''.
Chapter 32.--Section 3232 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) Subject to paragraph (3), the amount of educational assistance payable under this chapter for a national test for admission or national test providing an opportunity for course credit at institutions of higher learning described in section 3452(b) of this title is the amount of the fee charged for the test.
The number of months of entitlement charged in the case of any individual for a test described in paragraph (1) is equal to the number (including any fraction) determined by dividing the total amount of educational assistance paid such individual for such test by the full-time monthly institutional rate of educational assistance, except for paragraph (1), such individual would otherwise be paid under this chapter.
In no event shall payment of educational assistance under this subsection for a test described in paragraph (1) exceed the amount of the individual's available entitlement under this chapter.''.
Chapter 34.--Section 3482 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i)(1) Subject to paragraph (3), the amount of educational assistance payable under this chapter for a national test for admission or national test providing an opportunity for course credit at institutions of higher learning described in section 3452(b) of this title is the amount of the fee charged for the test.
The number of months of entitlement charged in the case of any individual for a test described in paragraph (1) is equal to the number (including any fraction) determined by dividing the total amount of educational assistance paid such individual for such test by the full-time monthly institutional rate of educational assistance, except for paragraph (1), such individual would otherwise be paid under this chapter.
In no event shall payment of educational assistance under this subsection for a test described in paragraph (1) exceed the amount of the individual's available entitlement under this chapter.''.
Chapter 35.--Section 3532 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g)(1) Subject to paragraph (3), the amount of educational assistance payable under this chapter for a national test for admission or national test providing an opportunity for course credit at institutions of higher learning described in section 3501(a)(5) of this title is the amount of the fee charged for the test.
The number of months of entitlement charged in the case of any individual for a test described in paragraph (1) is equal to the number (including any fraction) determined by dividing the total amount of educational assistance paid such individual for such test by the full-time monthly institutional rate of educational assistance, except for paragraph (1), such individual would otherwise be paid under this chapter.
In no event shall payment of educational assistance under this subsection for a test described in paragraph (1) exceed the amount of the individual's available entitlement under this chapter.''.
INCREASE IN MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF HOME LOAN GUARANTY FOR CONSTRUCTION AND PURCHASE OF HOMES AND ANNUAL INDEXING OF AMOUNT.
Maximum Loan Guaranty Based on 100 Percent of Freddie Mac Conforming Loan Rate.--Section 3703(a)(1) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``$60,000'' each place it appears in subparagraphs (A)(i)(IV) and (B) and inserting ``the maximum guaranty amount (as defined in subparagraph (C))''.
Definition.--Such section is further amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) In this paragraph, the term `maximum guaranty amount' means the dollar amount that is equal to 25 percent of the Freddie Mac conforming loan limit limitation determined under section 305(a)(2) of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 United States Code 1454(a)(2)) for a single-family residence, as adjusted for the year involved.