This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Home Health Beneficiary Equity and Payment Simplification Act of 1999''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Research has shown that medicare beneficiaries who are in need of home health services that are covered under the medicare program generally fall into 1 of the 4 following categories: (A) Post-hospital, short-stay beneficiaries.
Medically stable, long-stay beneficiaries.
Medically complex, long-stay beneficiaries.
Medically unstable and complex, extremely high- use beneficiaries.
The interim payment system for home health services under the medicare program, enacted as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and amended by title V of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (contained in Division J of Public Law 105-277), is having the following unintended consequences: (A) The sickest, most frail medicare beneficiaries are losing access to medically necessary home health services that are otherwise covered under the medicare program.
Many high quality, cost-effective home health agencies have had per beneficiary limits under the interim payment system set so low that such agencies are finding it impossible to continue to provide home health services under the medicare program.
Many home health agencies are being subjected to aggregate per beneficiary limits under the interim payment system that do not accurately reflect the current patient mix of such agencies, thereby making it impossible for such agencies to compete with similarly situated home health agencies.
Medicare beneficiaries that reside in certain States and regions of the country have far less access to home health services under the medicare program than individuals who have identical medical conditions but reside in other States or regions of the country.
The health status of home health beneficiaries varies significantly in different regions of the country, creating differing needs for home health services.
PAYMENTS TO HOME HEALTH AGENCIES UNDER MEDICARE.
Revision of Prospective Payment System.-- (1) In general.--Section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) (as amended by section 5101 of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (contained in Division J of Public Law 105-277)) is amended-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``for portions of cost reporting periods occurring on or after October 1, 2000'' and inserting ``for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1999''; and (B) in subsection (b), by striking the last sentence of paragraph (1) and all that follows and inserting the following: ``(2) Payment basis.-- ``(A) In general.--The prospective payment amount to be paid to a home health agency under this section for all of the home health services (including medical supplies) provided to a beneficiary under this title during the 12-month period beginning on the date that such services are first provided by such agency to such beneficiary pursuant to a plan for furnishing such services (and for each subsequent 12-month period that services are provided under such plan) shall be an amount equal to the applicable amount specified in subparagraph (B) for the fiscal year in which the 12- month period begins.
Applicable amount.--Subject to subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E) and paragraph (5), for purposes of this subsection, the applicable amount is equal to-- ``(i) $2,603 for a beneficiary described in subparagraphs (A) and (E) of paragraph (3); ``(ii) $3,335 for a beneficiary described in paragraph (3)(B); ``(iii) $4,228 for a beneficiary described in paragraph (3)(C); and ``(iv) $21,864 for a beneficiary described in paragraph (3)(D).
Annual update.-- ``(i) In general.--The applicable amount specified in subparagraph (B) shall be adjusted for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2001) in a prospective manner specified by the Secretary by the home health market basket percentage increase applicable to the fiscal year involved.
Home health market basket percentage increase.--For purposes of clause (i), the term `home health market basket percentage increase' means, with respect to a fiscal year, a percentage (estimated by the Secretary before the beginning of the fiscal year) determined and applied with respect to the mix of goods and services included in home health services in the same manner as the market basket percentage increase under section 1886(b)(3)(B)(iii) is determined and applied to the mix of goods and services comprising inpatient hospital services for the fiscal year.
Area wage adjustment.-- ``(i) In general.--The portion of the applicable amount specified in subparagraph (B) (as updated under subparagraph (C)) that the Secretary estimates to be attributable to wages and wage-related costs shall be adjusted for geographic differences in such costs by an area wage adjustment factor for the area in which the home health agency is located.
Establishment of area wage adjustment factors.--The Secretary shall establish area wage adjustment factors that reflect the relative level of wages and wage- related costs applicable to the furnishing of home health services in a geographic area compared to the national average applicable level.
Such factors may be the factors used by the Secretary for purposes of section 1886(d)(3)(E).
Medical supplies.--The applicable amount specified in subparagraph (B) shall be adjusted for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2001) in a prospective manner specified by the Secretary by the percentage increase (as determined by the Secretary) in the average costs of medical supplies (as described in section 1861(m)(5)) for the fiscal year involved.
Description of beneficiaries.-- ``(A) Post-hospital, short-stay beneficiary.--A beneficiary described in this subparagraph is a beneficiary under this title who-- ``(i) has experienced at least one 24-hour hospitalization within the 14-day period immediately preceding the date that the beneficiary is first provided services by the home health agency; ``(ii) suffers from 1 or more illnesses or injuries which are post-operative or post- trauma; and ``(iii) has a prognosis of a prompt and substantial recovery.
Medically stable, long-stay beneficiary.--A beneficiary described in this subparagraph is a beneficiary under this title who-- ``(i) has not been admitted to a hospital within the 6-month period immediately preceding the date that the beneficiary is first provided services by the home health agency; ``(ii) suffers from 1 or more illnesses or injuries requiring acute medical treatment or management in the home; and ``(iii) is experiencing 1 or more impairments in activities of daily living.
Medically complex, long-stay beneficiary.--A beneficiary described in this subparagraph is a beneficiary under this title who-- ``(i) has experienced 2 or more hospitalizations or admissions to skilled nursing facilities within the 12-month period immediately preceding the date that the beneficiary is first provided services by the home health agency; ``(ii) suffers from 1 or more illnesses or injuries requiring acute medical treatment or management in the home; and ``(iii) is experiencing 1 or more impairments in activities of daily living.
Medically unstable and complex, extremely high-use beneficiaries.--A beneficiary described in this subparagraph is a beneficiary under this title who-- ``(i) has experienced 2 or more hospitalizations or admissions to skilled nursing facilities within the 6-month period immediately preceding the date that the beneficiary is first provided services by the home health agency; ``(ii) suffers from 1 or more illnesses or injuries requiring acute medical treatment or management in the home; and ``(iii) is experiencing 2 or more impairments in activities of daily living.
Other beneficiaries.--A beneficiary described in this subparagraph is a beneficiary under this title who is not otherwise described in subparagraphs (A) through (D).
Determination.-- ``(A) In general.--The determination of which of the subparagraphs under paragraph (3) applies to a beneficiary under this title shall be based on the diagnosis and assessment of a physician who shall have no financial relationship with the home health agency that is receiving payments under this title for the provision of home health services to such beneficiary.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, any financial relationship shall be determined under rules similar to the rules with respect to referrals under section 1877.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall issues regulations to assist physicians in making the determination described in subparagraph (A).
Additional payment amount.--The Secretary may increase the applicable amount specified in paragraph (2)(B) to be paid to a home health agency if the Secretary determines that such agency is-- ``(A) experiencing higher than average costs for providing home health services as compared to other similarly situated home health agencies; or ``(B) providing home health services that are not reflected in the determination of the applicable amount.
Notice of prospective payment rate.--Not later than July 1 of each year (beginning in 2000), the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register the applicable amount to be paid to home health agencies for home health services provided to a beneficiary under this title during the fiscal year beginning October 1 of the year.
Proration of prospective payment amounts.--If a beneficiary elects to transfer to, or receive services from, another home health agency within the period covered by the prospective payment amount, the payment shall be prorated between the home health agencies involved.''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) (as amended by section 5101 of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (contained in Division J of Public Law 105-277)) is amended-- (A) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows: ``(c) Requirement for Payment Information.--With respect to home health services furnished on or after October 1, 1998, no claim for such a service may be paid under this title unless the claim has the unique identifier (provided under section 1842(r)) for the physician who prescribed the services or made the certification described in section 1814(a)(2) or 1835(a)(2)(A).
''; and (B) by striking subsection (d).
Change in effective date.--Section 4603(d) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (42 United States Code 1395fff note) (as amended by section 5101(c)(2) of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (contained in Division J of Public Law 105-277)) is amended by striking ``October 1, 2000'' and inserting ``October 1, 1999''.
Elimination of contingency 15 percent reduction.-- Subsection (e) of section 4603 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (42 United States Code 1395fff note) is repealed.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
Payment Rates Based on Location of Home Health Agency Rather Than Patient.-- (1) Conditions of participation.--Section 1891 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395bbb) is amended by striking subsection (g).
Wage adjustment.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(iii) (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(iii)) is amended by striking ``service is furnished'' and inserting ``agency is located''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to services provided on or after October 1, 1999.