This Act may be cited as the ``Airport Medical Assistance Act of 2000''.
AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS IN AIRPORT TERMINALS.
Withdrawal of Notice.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall withdraw the notice of decision of the Administration published in the Federal Register on June 6, 2000 (65 Fed.
35971), relating to automatic external defibrillators at airports.
Publication of Regulations.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator shall issue regulations to require automatic external defibrillators in terminals at airports with 100,000 or more annual enplanements.
Deadlines.--The Administrator shall issue-- (A) proposed regulations under paragraph (1) not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act; and (B) final regulations under paragraph (1) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Guidelines.--The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall establish guidelines with respect to the provision and use of automated external defibrillators in terminals at airports.
Information.--The guidelines shall contain information concerning the following: (1) The extent to which automated external defibrillators may be operated by lay persons.
The number of defibrillators required for airports of different sizes.
The appropriate placement of defibrillators at airports, taking into account the security needs of airports and response time for victims.
Such other factors as the Administrator determines appropriate.
Recommended Procedures.--The guidelines shall contain recommended procedures for the following: (1) Implementing training programs, in coordination with appropriate licensed professionals, on the role of cardiopulmonary resuscitation and the use of automated external defibrillators.
Proper maintenance and testing of automated external defibrillators.
Ensuring coordination with local emergency medical systems regarding placement, use, and type of automated external defibrillators.
Such other areas as the Administrator determines appropriate.
Publication.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall publish the guidelines in the Federal Register.
GOOD SAMARITAN PROTECTIONS REGARDING EMERGENCY USE OF AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS AT AIRPORTS.
Persons Using AEDs.--Except as provided by subsection (c), any person who uses an automated external defibrillator device on a victim of a perceived medical emergency at an airport is immune from civil liability for any harm resulting from the use of the device.
Persons Acquiring AEDs.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided by subsection (c), in addition to a person who uses an automated external defibrillator device on a victim of a perceived medical emergency at an airport, any person who acquired the device is immune from civil liability for any harm resulting from the use of the device, if the harm was not due to the failure of the person who acquired the device-- (A) to notify local emergency response personnel or other appropriate entities of the most recent placement of the device within a reasonable period of time after the device was placed; (B) to properly maintain and test the device; or (C) except as provided by paragraph (2), to provide appropriate training in the use of the device to an employee or agent of the acquirer when the employee or agent was the person who used the device on the victim.
Exceptions to training requirements.--The requirement of paragraph (1)(C) shall not apply if-- (A) the employee or agent who used the device was not an employee or agent who would have been reasonably expected to use the device; or (B) the period of time elapsing between the engagement of the person as an employee or agent and the occurrence of the harm (or between the acquisition of the device and the occurrence of the harm, in any case in which the device was acquired after such engagement of the person) was not a reasonably sufficient period in which to provide the training.
Inapplicability of Immunity.--Immunity under subsection (a) or (b) does not apply to a person if the harm involved was caused by willful or criminal misconduct, gross negligence, reckless misconduct, or a conscious, flagrant indifference to the rights or safety of the victim who was harmed.
Applicability of State Laws.--With respect to a class of persons for which this section provides immunity from civil liability, this section supersedes the law of a State only to the extent that the State has no law or regulation that provides persons in such class with immunity for civil liability arising from the use by such persons of automated external defibrillator devices in emergency situations (within the meaning of the State law or regulation involved).
ELIGIBILITY FOR AIP FUNDING.
Section 47102(3)(B) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (viii); (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (ix) and inserting ``; and'; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(x) automatic external defibrillators, as defined in section 6 of the Airport Medical Assistance Act of 2000.''.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Airport.--The term ``airport'' has the meaning given such term in section 40102 of title 49, United States Code.
Automated external defibrillator.--The term ``automated external defibrillator'' means a defibrillator that-- (A) is commercially distributed in accordance with the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; (B) is capable of recognizing the presence or absence of ventricular fibrillation, and is capable of determining without intervention by the user of the defibrillator whether defibrillation should be performed; (C) upon determining that defibrillation should be performed, is able to deliver an electrical shock to an individual; and (D) in the case of a defibrillator that may be operated in either an automated or a manual mode, is set to operate in the automated mode.
Perceived medical emergency.--The term ``perceived medical emergency'' means circumstances in which the behavior of an individual leads a reasonable person to believe that the individual is experiencing a life-threatening medical condition that requires an immediate medical response regarding the heart or other cardiopulmonary functioning of the individual.
Person.--The term ``person'' includes a governmental entity.