This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Lending and Credit Availability Act of 1993''.
LOAN GUARANTEES IN QUALIFIED STATES.
Participation Authority.--Section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(22) Loan guarantees in qualified states.-- ``(A) In general.--The Administration shall, in accordance with the requirements of this paragraph, participate on a guaranteed basis in loans under this subsection to small business concerns in qualified States.
Guarantee amounts.--In agreements to participate on a guaranteed basis in loans described in subparagraph (A), such participation by the Administration shall be-- ``(i) not less than 90 percent of the balance of the loan outstanding at the time of disbursement, if the loan is not less than $200,000, nor more than $500,000; and ``(ii) not less than 95 percent of the balance of the loan outstanding at the time of disbursement, if the loan is less than $200,000.
Temporary waiver of guarantee fees.-- ``(i) First 2 fiscal years.--In each of the first 2 fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, the Administration shall waive any guarantee fee in connection with a loan described in subparagraph (A).
Remaining fiscal years.--In the 3rd, 4th, and 5th fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, the Administration may collect a guarantee fee in connection with a loan described in subparagraph (A) in an amount equal to not more than 1 percent of the outstanding balance of the guaranteed amount of the loan.
Any such fee shall be payable by the participating lending institution and may be charged to the borrower.
Retention of fee percentage by lenders.--In order to encourage lending institutions to make loans to small business concerns in qualified States, the Administration shall permit lending institutions to retain, on loans described in subparagraph (A) of $200,000 or less, \1/2\ of any fee to be paid to the Administration under subparagraph (C)(ii).
Presumption.--For a loan described in subparagraph (A), any reasonable doubt as to the ability of an applicant to repay the loan shall be resolved in favor of the applicant.
Applicability.--The provisions of this paragraph shall be in effect in each of the first 5 fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of this paragraph.
For such period, provisions of this section which are inconsistent with this paragraph shall not apply.
Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph, the following definitions apply: ``(i) Insured depository institution.--The term `insured depository institution'-- ``(I) has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and ``(II) includes an insured credit union, as defined in section 101 of the Federal Credit Union Act.
State.--The term `State' means each of the several States and the District of Columbia.
Qualified state.--The term `qualified State' means any State in which-- ``(I) during the 12-month period ending on the date of enactment of this paragraph, 1 or more insured depository institutions having combined total assets of not less than $100,000,000 closed due to an inability to meet the demands of depositors; or ``(II) during the 12-month period ending on the date of enactment of this paragraph, 2 or more insured depository institutions having combined total assets of not less than $150,000,000 closed due to an inability to meet the demands of depositors.