This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Heritage Conservation Act''.
SPECIAL LIMITATION FOR CERTAIN CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS OF ELIGIBLE FARMERS AND RANCHERS.
In General.--Section 170(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to percentage limitations of individuals) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G) and inserting after subparagraph (E) the following: ``(F) Special limitation with respect to contributions described in subparagraph (a) of capital gain property by eligible farmers or ranchers.-- ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding subparagraph (C), in the case of a charitable contribution described in subparagraph (A) of capital gain property (as defined in subparagraph (C)) of an eligible farmer or rancher who makes an election under clause (ii), the total amount of contributions of such property which may be taken into account under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed 100 percent of the taxpayer's contribution base for such year.
For purposes of this subsection, contributions of capital gain property to which this subparagraph applies shall be taken into account after all other charitable contributions.
Election.-- ``(I) In general.--A taxpayer may make an election under this clause to take the deduction under subsection (a) for any contribution described in clause (i) for a 15-consecutive- taxable-year period.
Effect of election.--A taxpayer may only make 1 election under this clause.
Such election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
Eligible farmer or rancher.--For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `eligible farmer or rancher' means a taxpayer-- ``(I) whose gross income from the trade or business of farming (within the meaning of section 2032A(e)(5)) is at least 51 percent of the taxpayer's gross income for the taxable year, and ``(II) in the case of a C corporation, the stock of which is not publicly traded on a recognized exchange.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 170(b)(1)(C)(i) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``or (E)'' after ``subparagraph (D)''.
The second sentence of section 170(b)(1)(D) of such Code is amended by inserting ``(other than charitable contributions to which subparagraph (F) applies)'' before the period.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made in taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
MODIFICATIONS TO ENCOURAGE CONTRIBUTIONS OF CAPITAL GAIN REAL PROPERTY MADE FOR CONSERVATION PURPOSES.
Exclusion From Percentage Limitation.--Section 170(b)(1)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special limitation with respect to contributions described in subparagraph (A) of capital gain property) is amended by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v) and by inserting after clause (iii) the following: ``(iv) Clauses (i) and (ii) shall not apply to a contribution of capital gain property which is a qualified conservation contribution (as defined in subsection (h)).''.
Unlimited Carryover for Certain Conservation Contributions of Capital Gain Property.--Paragraph (1) of section 170(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to carryover of excess contributions) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(C) Unlimited carryover for certain conservation contributions.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to a contribution described in subsection (b)(1)(C)(iv).
If the amount of the contribution described in subsection (b)(1)(C)(iv), payment of which is made within the taxable year, exceeds the taxpayer's contribution base for the taxable year, such excess shall be treated as a contribution so described paid in each succeeding taxable year, in order of time.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made in taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASE IN CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTION LIMIT FOR FARMERS AND RANCHERS DOING BUSINESS IN CORPORATE FORM.
In General.--Section 170(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to percentage limitation of individuals), as amended by section 2(a), is amended by redesignating subparagraph (G) as subparagraph (H) and by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following: ``(G) Certain farmers and ranchers.--An eligible farmer or rancher (as defined in subparagraph (F)) shall be treated as an individual for purposes of this section with respect to any qualified conservation contribution.''
Conforming Amendment.--Section 170(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``corporation,'' and inserting ``corporation (other than a corporation that is an eligible farmer or rancher as defined in paragraph (1)(F) with respect to a qualified conservation contribution),''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to donations of qualified conservation contributions (as defined in section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) made after the date of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending after such date.