This Act may be cited as the ``Alternative Fuels Tax Incentives Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1)(A) Since 1994, the United States has imported over half its oil.
Without efforts to mitigate this dependence on foreign oil, the percentage of oil imported is expected to grow to all- time highs.
This reliance on foreign oil presents a national security risk, which Congress should address through policy changes designed to increase the use of domestically-available alternative transportation fuels.
(A) The importing of a majority of the oil used in the United States contributes negatively to the balance of trade of the United States.
Assuring the Nation's economic security demands the development and promotion of domestically-available alternative transportation fuels.
More widespread use of alternative-fuels vehicles will help alleviate any adverse environmental consequences that may result from the Nation's dependence on oil as a transportation fuel.
In order to encourage the purchase of alternative fuel vehicles by individuals and businesses, the installation of alternative fueling infrastructure by fuel suppliers, and the use of alternative fuels in business and personal transportation, tax credits are temporarily needed to make buying and operating alternative fuels vehicles economically viable compared with conventional fuel vehicles.
(A) In the short-term, United States alternative fuel policy must be made fuel neutral.
Fuel neutrality will foster private innovation and commercialization using the most technologically feasible and economic fuels available.
This will allow market forces to decide the alternative fuel winners and losers.
CREDIT FOR ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLES.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.)
is amended by inserting after section 30A the following: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLES.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the incremental cost of any qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable percentage with respect to any qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle is-- ``(1) 50 percent, plus ``(2) 35 percent, if such vehicle-- ``(A) has a gross weight vehicle rating of less than 14,000 pounds, and ``(i) has received a certificate of conformity under the Clean Air Act and meets or exceeds the most stringent standard available for certification under the Clean Air Act for that make and model year vehicle (other than a zero emission standard), or ``(ii) has received an order certifying the vehicle for sale in California and meets or exceeds the most stringent standard available for certification under the laws of the State of California for that make and model year vehicle (other than a zero emission standard), or ``(B) has a gross weight vehicle rating of 14,000 or more pounds, and ``(i) has received a certificate of conformity under the Clean Air Act at emissions levels that are not more than 50 percent of the standard applicable to a vehicle of that make and model year, or ``(ii) has received an order certifying the vehicle for sale in California at emissions levels that are not more than 50 percent of the standard applicable under the laws of the State of California to a vehicle of that make and model year.
Incremental Cost.--For purposes of this section, the incremental cost of any qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle is equal to the amount of the excess of the manufacturer's suggested retail price for such vehicle over such price for a gasoline or diesel fuel motor vehicle of the same model, to the extent such amount does not exceed-- ``(1) $5,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of not more than 8,500 pounds, ``(2) $10,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 8,500 pounds but not more than 14,000 pounds, ``(3) $25,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 14,000 pounds but not more than 26,000 pounds, and ``(4) $50,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 26,000 pounds.
Qualified Alternative Fuel Motor Vehicle Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle' means any motor vehicle-- ``(1) which is only capable of operating on an alternative fuel, ``(2) the original use of which commences with the taxpayer, and ``(3) which is acquired by the taxpayer for use or to lease, but not for resale.
Application With Other Credits.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(1) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and sections 27, 29, and 30, over ``(2) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Alternative fuel.--The term `alternative fuel' means compressed natural gas, liquefied natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, hydrogen, and any liquid at least 85 percent of the volume of which consists of methanol.
Motor vehicle.--The term `motor vehicle' has the meaning given such term by section 30(c)(2).
Reduction in basis.--For purposes of this subtitle, the basis of any property for which a credit is allowable under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit so allowed (determined without regard to subsection (e).
No double benefit.--The amount of any deduction or credit allowable under this chapter for any incremental cost taken into account in computing the amount of the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit attributable to such cost.
Leased vehicles.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to a leased motor vehicle unless the lease documents clearly disclose to the lessee the specific amount of any credit otherwise allowable to the lessor under subsection (a).
Recapture.--The Secretary shall, by regulations, provide for recapturing the benefit of any credit allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any property which ceases to be property eligible for such credit.
Property used outside united states, etc., not qualified.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to any property referred to in section 50(b) or with respect to the portion of the cost of any property taken into account under section 179.
Election to not take credit.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any vehicle if the taxpayer elects to not have this section apply to such vehicle.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any property placed in service after December 31, 2007.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 1016(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (26), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (27) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(28) to the extent provided in section 30B(f)(3).''.
Section 53(d)(1)(B)(iii) of such Code is amended by inserting ``, or not allowed under section 30B solely by reason of the application of section 30B(e)(2)'' before the period.
Section 55(c)(2) of such Code is amended by inserting ``30B(e),'' after ``30(b)(3)''.
Section 6501(m) is amended by inserting ``30B(f)(8),'' after ``30(d)(4),''.
The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 30A the following: ``Sec.
Credit for alternative fuel vehicles.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2000, in taxable years ending after such date.
MODIFICATION OF CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
Amount of Credit.-- (1) In general.--Section 30(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to allowance of credit) is amended by striking ``10 percent of''.
Limitation of credit according to type of vehicle.-- Section 30(b) of such Code (relating to limitations) is amended-- (A) by striking paragraphs (1) and (2) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(1) Limitation according to type of vehicle.--The amount of the credit allowed under subsection (a) for any vehicle shall not exceed the greatest of the following amounts applicable to such vehicle: ``(A) In the case of a vehicle with a rated top speed not exceeding 50 miles per hour, the lesser of-- ``(i) 10 percent of the cost of the vehicle, or ``(ii) $4,250.
In the case of a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating not exceeding 8,500 pounds and a rated top speed exceeding 50 miles per hour, $4,250.
In the case of a vehicle capable of a driving range of at least 100 miles on a single charge of the vehicle's rechargeable batteries and measured pursuant to the urban dynamometer schedules under appendix I to part 86 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, $6,375.
In the case of a vehicle capable of a payload capacity of at least 1000 pounds, $6,375.
In the case of a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating exceeding 8,500 but not exceeding 14,000 pounds, $8,500.
In the case of a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating exceeding 14,000 but not exceeding 26,000 pounds, $21,250.
In the case of a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating exceeding 26,000 pounds, $42,500.
'', and (B) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 53(d)(1)(B)(iii) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 30(b)(3)(B)'' and inserting ``section 30(b)(2)(B)''.
Section 55(c)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``30(b)(3)'' and inserting ``30(b)(2)''.
Qualified Electric Vehicle.--Section 30(c)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining qualified electric vehicle) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) which is powered primarily by an electric motor drawing current from rechargeable batteries, fuel cells which generate electrical current from an alternative fuel (as defined in section 30B(f)(1)), or other portable sources of electrical current generated on board the vehicle from an alternative fuel (as so defined),''.
Additional Special Rules.--Section 30(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(5) No double benefit.--The amount of any deduction or credit allowable under this chapter for any cost taken into account in computing the amount of the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit attributable to such cost.
Leased vehicles.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to a leased motor vehicle unless the lease documents clearly disclose to the lessee the specific amount of any credit otherwise allowable to the lessor under subsection (a).''.
Extension.--Section 30(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``2004'' and inserting ``2007''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2000, in taxable years ending after such date.
CREDIT FOR RETAIL SALE OF ALTERNATIVE FUELS AS MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by inserting after section 40 the following: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR RETAIL SALE OF ALTERNATIVE FUELS AS MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the alternative fuel retail sales credit of any taxpayer for any taxable year is 25 cents for each gasoline gallon equivalent of alternative fuel sold at retail by the taxpayer during such year as a fuel to propel any qualified motor vehicle.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Alternative fuel.--The term `alternative fuel' means compressed natural gas, liquefied natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, hydrogen, and any liquid at least 85 percent of the volume of which consists of methanol.
Gasoline gallon equivalent.--The term `gasoline gallon equivalent' means, with respect to any alternative fuel, the amount (determined by the Secretary) of such fuel having a Btu content of 114,000.
Qualified motor vehicle.--The term `qualified motor vehicle' means any motor vehicle (as defined in section 179A(e)(2)) which meets any applicable Federal or State emissions standards with respect to each fuel by which such vehicle is designed to be propelled.
Sold at retail.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `sold at retail' means the sale, for a purpose other than resale, after manufacture, production, or importation.
Use treated as sale.--If any person uses alternative fuel as a fuel to propel any qualified motor vehicle (including any use after importation) before such fuel is sold at retail, then such use shall be treated in the same manner as if such fuel were sold at retail as a fuel to propel such a vehicle by such person.
No Double Benefit.--The amount of any deduction or credit allowable under this chapter for any fuel taken into account in computing the amount of the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit attributable to such fuel.
Pass-Thru in the Case of Estates and Trusts.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, rules similar to the rules of subsection (d) of section 52 shall apply.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any fuel sold at retail after December 31, 2007.''.
Credit Treated as Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(13) the alternative fuel retail sales credit determined under section 40A(a).''.
Transitional Rule.--Section 39(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to transitional rules) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(9) No carryback of section 40a credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the alternative fuel retail sales credit determined under section 40A(a) may be carried back to a taxable year ending before January 1, 2001.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 40 the following: ``Sec.
Credit for retail sale of alternative fuels as motor vehicle fuel.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to fuel sold at retail after December 31, 2000, in taxable years ending after such date.
EXTENSION OF DEDUCTION FOR CERTAIN REFUELING PROPERTY.
In General.--Section 179A(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``2004'' and inserting ``2007''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 179A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to qualified clean-fuel vehicle property defined) is amended by striking paragraph (3).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2000, in taxable years ending after such date.