This Act may be cited as the ``Nurse-Managed Health Clinic Investment Act of 2007''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Nurse-managed health clinics (referred to in this section as ``NMHCs'') offer their patients primary care based on the nursing model, which emphasizes the protection, promotion, and optimization of health along with the prevention of illness, and the alleviation of suffering in conjunction with diagnosis and treatment.
Nurses are advocates and educators providing care for individuals, families, communities, and populations.
More than 200 NMHCs are currently in operation across the United States.
These clinics record over 2,000,000 client encounters annually.
NMHCs meet the Institute of Medicine's definition of safety-net provider by providing care regardless of their patient's ability to pay.
A substantial share of their patient mix is made up of uninsured individuals, Medicaid recipients, and other vulnerable populations.
A recent study funded by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services reported that more than 45 percent of the payor mix for NMHCs is uninsured, and 37 percent are Medicaid recipients.
NMHCs provide a medical home for the underserved, and are viable partners with the Federal Government to reduce health disparities.
They provide a full range of health care services, including primary care, health promotion, disease prevention, and behavioral health care to the residents of rural and urban underserved communities.
Because NMHCs are often located in public housing developments, senior living arrangements, schools, and community centers, they help remove barriers preventing access to care and are instrumental in addressing and eliminating the factors contributing to health disparities.
Nurse-managed clinics are playing an ever-increasing role in the Nation's health care safety-net, and are currently being under-utilized and under-funded by both Federal and State governments.
Lack of adequate funding has caused 39 percent of the NMHCs established between 1993 and 2001 to close.
These clinics are frequently the only source of health care for their patients.
These closures have had a negative impact on the ability of the underserved to access primary care.
The goal of this Act is to provide NMHCs with access to a stable source of funding that will enable them to continue expanding primary care services in underserved communities, while reducing the level of health disparities suffered by vulnerable populations.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to fund the development and operation of nurse-managed health clinics to-- (1) provide comprehensive and accessible primary health care services to vulnerable populations living in underserved communities around the Nation; and (2) reduce the level of health disparities experienced by vulnerable populations.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART S--NURSE-MANAGED HEALTH CLINIC PROGRAM ``SEC.
GRANTS TO NURSE-MANAGED HEALTH CLINICS.
Definition; Establishment of Criteria.--In this section: ``(1) Comprehensive primary health care services.--The term `comprehensive primary health care services' means health care related to adult, family, and pediatric health consisting of adult health, pediatrics, obstetrics, or gynecology services that are furnished by nurse practitioners, physician assistants, physicians, nurse midwives, and other qualified health care professionals.
In addition to primary care services, specific services may include-- ``(A) preventive health services; ``(B) prenatal and perinatal services; ``(C) appropriate cancer screening; ``(D) well-child services; ``(E) immunizations against vaccine-preventable diseases; ``(F) screenings for elevated blood lead levels; ``(G) screening for communicable diseases; ``(H) cholesterol screenings; ``(I) pediatric eye and ear screenings to determine the need for vision and hearing correction; ``(J) emergency medical services; ``(K) diagnostic laboratory and radiologic services; ``(L) care navigation services; ``(M) pharmaceutical services as may be appropriate for each clinic; and ``(N) voluntary family planning.
Health promotion and disease prevention services.-- The term `health promotion and disease prevention services' means the full continuum of educational services as well as physical and mental assessment services designed to enable patients to take control over and improve their health through the prevention of disease as well as the reduction of existing symptoms.
Medically underserved populations.--The term `medically underserved population' has the meaning given such term in section 330(b)(3).
Nurse-managed health clinic.--The term `nurse-managed health clinic' means a nurse-practice arrangement, managed by advanced practice nurses, that provides primary care for underserved or vulnerable populations and is associated with a school, college, or department of nursing, federally qualified health center, or an independent nonprofit health or social services agency.
Vulnerable population.--The term `vulnerable population' means a population that lacks access to adequate primary care or suffers from increased health disparities due to factors such as health, age, race, ethnicity, sex, insurance status, income level, or ability to communicate effectively.
Authority To Award Grants.--The Secretary shall award grants for the cost of the operation of nurse-managed health clinics that meet the requirements of this section.
Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, an entity shall-- ``(1) be a nurse-managed health clinic (as defined in subsection (a)(4)); and ``(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing an assurance that-- ``(A) the nurse-managed health clinic will continue providing comprehensive primary care services (as defined in subsection (a)(1)) for the duration of the grant period; and ``(B) the nurse-managed health clinic will establish, within 90 days of receiving a grant under this section, a community advisory committee composed of individuals, a majority of whom are being served by the clinic, the purpose of which is to provide input into the nurse-managed health clinic decisionmaking process.
Waiver of Requirements.--The Secretary may, upon a showing of good cause, waive the requirement that the nurse-managed health clinic provide all required comprehensive primary health services for a period of not to exceed 2 years.
Use of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--Funds awarded under a grant under this section may be used for the provision of primary care services and additional health services, for the management of nurse- managed health clinic programs, for the payment of salaries for nurse-managed health clinic personnel, and for providing training for the provision of required health services.
Funds may also be used for acquiring, and the leasing of, buildings and equipment (including the cost of amortizing the principle of, and paying interest on, loans for such buildings and equipment).
Amount.--The amount of any grant made in any fiscal year to a nurse-managed health clinic shall be determined by the Secretary, taking into account-- ``(A) the financial need of the nurse-managed health clinic; ``(B) State, local, and other operational funding provided to the nurse-managed health clinic; and ``(C) other factors as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall establish a program through which the Secretary shall provide (either through the Department of Health and Human Services or by grant or contract) technical and other assistance to nurse-managed health clinics to assist such clinics in meeting the requirements of this section.
Services provided under this section may include necessary technical and nonfinancial assistance, including fiscal and program management assistance, training in fiscal and program management, operational and administrative support, and the provision of information to nurse- managed health clinics regarding the various resources available under this section and how those resources can best be used to meet the health needs of the communities served by nurse-managed health clinics.
Evaluation.--The Secretary shall develop and implement a plan for evaluating nurse-managed health clinics funded under this section.
Such evaluations shall monitor and track the performance of the grantee as well as the quality of the services that are provided under the grant.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for the fiscal year 2008, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2009 through 2012.