This Act may be cited as the ``Repetitive Flood Loss Reduction Act of 1999''.
REPETITIVE FLOOD LOSS REDUCTION.
Chapter III of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 is amended-- (1) by amending section 1370(a)(2) (42 United States Code 4121(a)(2)) to read as follows: ``(2) the terms `United States' (when used in a geographic sense) and `State' mean the several States and the District of Columbia;''; and (2) by adding after section 1367 (42 United States Code 4104d) the following new section: ``SEC.
REPETITIVE FLOOD LOSS REDUCTION.
Program.--The Director shall carry out a program to mitigate repetitive flood losses to structures-- ``(1) by purchasing structures in accordance with subsection (f); and ``(2) by making grants to States, communities, and local flood management agencies for eligible mitigation activities described in subsection (c) that the Director determines-- ``(A) have been proposed by the State, community, or local flood management agency applying for the grant to reduce repetitive flood losses pursuant to an evaluation and analysis (by the State, community, or local flood management agency) of flood risk and multiple flood claim structures; ``(B) are likely to provide protection against flood losses or substantially reduce damage to structures covered by contracts for flood insurance available under this title; ``(C) are cost-effective to the National Flood Insurance Fund; ``(D) are technically feasible and cost-effective; and ``(E) are consistent with other criteria that are established by the Director to carry out the purposes of this section.
Limitation on Grant Amounts.--The Director shall purchase structures and make grants under this section to the extent amounts are available pursuant to appropriation Acts, subject only to the absence of approvable applications for such grants or of willing sellers of appropriate structures.
Eligible Mitigation Activities.--A grant made under this section may be used only for eligible mitigation activities that are proposed in the application for the grant and that are described as follows: ``(1) Elevation, relocation, demolition, or floodproofing of structures (including public structures) located in areas having special flood hazards or other areas of flood risk.
Minor physical mitigation efforts that do not duplicate the flood prevention activities of other Federal agencies, States, communities, or local flood management agencies and that lessen the frequency or severity of flooding and decrease predicted flood damages, which shall not include major flood control projects such as dikes, levees, seawalls, groins, and jetties unless the Director specifically determines in approving a mitigation project that such projects are the most cost-effective mitigation activities for protecting the National Flood Insurance Fund.
Other mitigation activities that the Director considers appropriate and specifies in regulations.
Application for Grant.-- ``(1) In general.--To be eligible for a grant under this section, a State, community, or local flood management agency shall submit an application for such grant which contains-- ``(A) a description of the mitigation activities for which the grant is requested; ``(B) a description of the structures that the mitigation activities will protect; ``(C) a statement of the aggregate amount of payments made under the flood insurance program under this title pursuant to insurance claims for structures described pursuant to subparagraph (C); ``(D) information sufficient to demonstrate that the mitigation activities are eligible under subsection (c); and ``(E) any other information the Director may reasonably require.
Time for approval or rejection.--The Director shall approve or reject an application for a grant under this subsection not later than 30 days after receiving such application.
Matching Requirement.--The Director shall not provide a grant under this section in an amount exceeding 75 percent of the total cost of the mitigation activities to be financed using such grant.
The Director shall may not provide grants under this section for any mitigation activities unless the State, community, or local flood management agency that receives the grant certifies, as the Director shall require, that at least 25 percent of the total cost of such mitigation activities will be provided from non-Federal sources.
Purchase of Repetitive Substantial Flood Loss Structures.-- ``(1) Offer to purchase.--Upon determining that an insured structure is a repetitive substantial flood loss structure, the Director shall offer to purchase the structure at a price not greater than 125 percent of the fair market value of the structure at the time of the offer.
Any such offer shall explicitly state that the offer is contingent upon the availability of amounts under subsections (j) and (k) for such purchase.
Any such offer shall be held open, and shall not be revocable, during the period that the structure is covered by flood insurance under this title.
Acceptance of offer.--If an owner of a repetitive substantial flood loss structure accepts an offer to purchase the structure made under paragraph (1), the Director shall purchase the structure, if amounts are available pursuant to subsections (j) and (k).
The Director may request that the State or the a local flood management agency that has jurisdiction with respect to the area in which the structure is located coordinate and carry out the purchase for the Director under the terms of the offer.
Increased premiums for refusal of offer.-- Notwithstanding section 1308, if the owner of a repetitive substantial flood loss structure does not accept an offer made by the Director pursuant to paragraph (1) during the period after the offer is made having such duration as the Director shall establish, thereafter the chargeable premium rate with respect to the structure shall be an amount equal to 150 percent of the chargeable rate for the structure at the time that the offer was made (as adjusted by any other premium adjustments otherwise applicable to the structure), except as provided in paragraph (5), and the deductible in connection with insurance provided under this title shall increase by $5,000 more than the deductible on such insurance at the time that such offer was made.
Notice of continued offer.--Upon each renewal or modification of any flood insurance coverage under this title for a repetitive substantial flood loss structure, the Director shall notify the owner that the offer made pursuant to paragraph (1) is still open.
Increased premiums upon subsequent flood damage.-- Notwithstanding section 1308, if the owner of a repetitive substantial flood loss structure does not accept an offer made by the Director pursuant to paragraph (1) and subsequently a flood event causes substantial damage to the structure after such event, the chargeable premium rate with respect to the structure shall be an amount equal to 150 percent of the chargeable rate for the structure at the time of the event, as adjusted by any other premium adjustments otherwise applicable to the structure and any subsequent increases pursuant to this paragraph, and the deductible in connection with insurance provided under this title shall increase by $5,000 more than the deductible on such insurance at the time of the event.
List of structures.--The Director, in consultation with regional flood plain administrators, shall develop and periodically update a list of repetitive substantial flood loss structures.
Deposit of revenues.--All amounts collected from payment of deductible and premium increases pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited into the Repetitive Flood Loss Reduction Fund created by subsection (j).
Disposition of Acquired Structures.-- ``(1) In general.--As soon as practicable after acquisition of a structure under this section, the Director shall offer to transfer the structure to the local flood management agency that has jurisdiction with respect to the area in which the structure is located.
If such a local flood management agency does not exists or refuses such offer, the Director shall offer to transfer the structure to the State within whose boundaries such structure is located.
Terms and conditions.--If an offer to transfer a structure made pursuant to paragraph (1) is accepted, the Director shall make such transfer without compensation and upon such other terms and conditions as the Director considers necessary to protect the interests of the United States.
Oversight of Mitigation Activities.--The Director shall conduct oversight of recipients of grants under this section to ensure that the grant is used in compliance with approved mitigation activities and that matching funds certified under subsection (e) are used in accordance with such certification.
Recapture.--If the Director determines that a State, community, or local flood management agency that has received a grant under this section has not carried out the mitigation activities as set forth in the mitigation activity, the Director shall recapture such amounts and deposit the amounts in the Repetitive Flood Loss Reduction Fund created by subsection (j).
Repetitive Flood Loss Reduction Fund.--There is hereby created within the Treasury a fund which shall be known as the `Repetitive Flood Loss Reduction Fund'.
Amounts deposited into the Repetitive Flood Loss Reduction Fund shall be available to the Director to carry out this section to the extent provided by appropriation Acts.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Director $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 to carry out this section, and such amounts shall remain available until expended.
Division of funds.--Of the amounts appropriated to carry out this section, 90 percent shall be used for acquisitions under subsection (a)(1) and 10 percent shall be used for grants under subsection (a)(2).
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: ``(1) Community.--The term `community' has the meaning given that term in section 1366(k).
Repetitive substantial flood loss structure.--The term `repetitive substantial flood loss structure' means a structure covered by a contract for flood insurance under this title that has incurred flood-related damage on 3 or more occasions in which the cumulative cost of repairs is equal to or greater than 125 percent of the fair market value of the structure.