This Act may be cited as the ``High Quality Teaching Act of 2009''.
GRANTS TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES TO PROVIDE TARGETED ASSISTANCE TO HIGH NEED SCHOOLS TO RECRUIT, SUPPORT, AND RETAIN HIGHLY QUALIFIED AND EFFECTIVE TEACHERS.
In General.--Part A of title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart: ``Subpart 6--Targeted High Need Initiative ``SEC.
GRANTS TARGETING SCHOOLS HAVING HIGHEST NEED FOR HIGHLY QUALIFIED AND EFFECTIVE TEACHERS.
In General.--The Secretary shall make competitive grants to selected local educational agencies to recruit, support, and retain highly qualified and effective teachers through participation in the Targeted High Need Initiative program of the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Limitation on Number of Assisted Agencies.--Not more than 250 local educational agencies shall be selected by the Secretary to receive grants under this section.
Priorities.--In making such grants, the Secretary shall give priority to local educational agencies-- ``(1) having the highest number of students from a traditionally disadvantaged background, including students who receive free or reduced priced meals, students belonging to a minority subgroup, students with limited English proficiency, or migratory children; ``(2) having the highest number of schools identified for school improvement, corrective action, or restructuring under section 1116(b); and ``(3) having the lowest number of teachers who are certified by the National Board of Professional Teaching Standards.
Selection Process.-- ``(1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the State educational agency at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Review by state educational agency.--Applications received by a State educational agency under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the Secretary (at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require) together with recommendations by the State educational agency as to-- ``(A) which local educational agencies have the highest need; and ``(B) which should be given preference based on criteria specified by the State educational agency.
Such criteria may include the distribution of such grants between urban and rural areas, the number of limited English proficient children, and the number of schools needing assistance.
Contents of application.--The application under paragraph (1) shall describe the following: ``(A) The partnership that such agency will form with an institution of higher education or other appropriate entity to carry out the activities described in subsection (e).
How such agency will use funds received under this section to participate in the Targeted High Need Initiative program of the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Identify the initial 25 classroom teachers, and at least 1 superintendent, principal, or vice principal, who have agreed to be mentors under such program.
Use of Funds.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this section shall use the funds made available through the grant for the following: ``(1) Establish the partnership referred to subsection (d)(3)(A).
Support teachers through the Targeted High Need Initiative program of the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards through training, professional development, mentoring and technological resources.
Fully fund the assessment fee for all eligible teachers who apply to be certified by such Board and who agree to remain at the participating school for at least 3 years after completing the certification.
Provide a $1,000 award to each teacher who is certified by such Board after completing participation in such a Targeted High Need Initiative program.
Provide sponsoring schools with a $500 award for each teacher described in paragraph (4).
Conduct an independent evaluation of the impact of participation in such Targeted High Need Initiative program on teaching quality and student learning and achievement.
Such evaluation may include incorporating multiple sources of data over time to assess immediate and long-term impacts of such participation.
Duration of Grant.--The Secretary shall make grants under this section for period of 5 years.
Equitable Distribution.--To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall ensure an equitable geographic distribution of grants under this section among the regions of the United States.''.
Funding.-- (1) Section 2103 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6603) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Targeted High Need Initiative.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out subpart 6 $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2010 and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.''.
Subsection (a) of section 2103 of such Act is amended by striking ``subpart 5'' and inserting ``subparts 5 and 6''.