This Act may be cited as the ``Coral Reef Conservation Act of 1997''.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To preserve, sustain, and restore the health of coral reef ecosystems.
To assist in the conservation and protection of coral reefs by supporting conservation programs.
To provide financial resources for those programs.
To establish a formal mechanism for collecting and allocating monetary donations from the private sector to be used for coral reef conservation projects.
In this Act: (1) Coral.--The term ``coral'' means species of the phylum Cnidaria, including-- (A) all species of the orders Antipatharia (black corals), Scleractinia (stony corals), Gorgonacea (horny corals), Stolonifera (organpipe corals and others), and Coenothecalia (blue coral), of the class Anthozoa; and (B) all species of the order Hydrocorallina (fire corals and hydrocorals), of the class Hydrozoa.
Coral reef.--The term ``coral reef'' means any reef or shoal composed primarily of the skeletal material of species of the order Scleractinia (class Anthozoa).
Coral reef ecosystem.--The term ``coral reef ecosystem'' means the complex of species associated with coral reefs and their environment that-- (A) functions as an ecological unit in nature; and (B) is necessary for that function to continue.
Corals and coral products.--The term ``corals and coral products'' means any living or dead specimens, parts, or derivatives, or any product containing specimens, parts, or derivatives, of any species referred to in paragraph (1).
Conservation.--The term ``conservation'' means the use of methods and procedures necessary to preserve or sustain corals and species associated with coral reefs as diverse, viable, and self-perpetuating coral reef ecosystems, including all activities associated with resource management, such as conservation, protection, restoration, and management of habitat; habitat monitoring; assistance in the development of management strategies for marine protected areas and marine resources consistent with the National Marine Sanctuaries Act (16 United States Code 1431 et sequentes) and the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1801 et sequentes); law enforcement through community participation; conflict resolution initiatives; and community outreach and education.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Coral Reef Conservation Fund established under section 5(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
CORAL REEF CONSERVATION ASSISTANCE.
In General.--The Secretary, subject to the availability of funds, shall use amounts in the Fund to provide grants of financial assistance for projects for the conservation of coral reefs for which final project proposals are approved by the Secretary in accordance with this section.
Project Proposal.--Any relevant natural resource management authority of a State or territory of the United States or other government jurisdiction with coral reefs whose activities directly or indirectly affect coral reefs, or any nongovernmental organization or individual with demonstrated expertise in the conservation of coral reefs, may submit to the Secretary a project proposal under this section.
Each proposal shall include the following: (1) The name of the individual responsible for conducting the project.
A succinct statement of the purposes of the project.
A description of the qualifications of the individuals who will conduct the project.
An estimate of the funds and time required to complete the project.
Evidence of support of the project by appropriate representatives of States or territories of the United States or other government jurisdictions in which the project will be conducted, if the Secretary determines that the support is required for the success of the project.
Information regarding the source and amount of matching funding available to the applicant.
Any other information the Secretary considers to be necessary for evaluating the eligibility of the project for funding under this Act.
Project Review and Approval.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall review each final project proposal to determine if it meets the criteria set forth in subsection (d).
Consultation; approval or disapproval.--Not later than 6 months after receiving a final project proposal, and subject to the availability of funds, the Secretary shall-- (A) request written comments on the proposal from each State or territory of the United States or other government jurisdiction, including the relevant regional fishery management councils established under the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1801 et sequentes), within which the project is to be conducted; (B) provide for the merit-based peer review of the proposal and require standardized documentation of that peer review; (C) after reviewing any written comments and recommendations based on merit review, approve or disapprove the proposal; and (D) provide written notification of that approval or disapproval to the person who submitted the proposal, and each of those States, territories, and other government jurisdictions.
Criteria for Approval.--The Secretary may approve a final project proposal under this section if the project will enhance programs for conservation of coral reefs by assisting efforts to-- (1) implement conservation programs; (2) address the conflicts arising from the use of environments near coral reefs or from the use of corals, species associated with coral reefs, and coral products; (3) enhance compliance with laws that prohibit or regulate the taking of corals, species associated with coral reefs, and coral products or regulate the use and management of coral reef ecosystems; (4) develop sound scientific information on the condition of coral reef ecosystems or the threats to such ecosystems; or (5) promote cooperative projects on coral reef conservation that involve foreign governments, affected local communities, nongovernmental organizations, or others in the private sector.
Project Sustainability.--In determining whether to approve project proposals under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to projects which promote sustainable development and ensure effective, long-term conservation of coral reefs.
Project Reporting.--Each grantee under this section shall provide periodic reports, as the Secretary considers necessary, to the Secretary.
Each report shall include all information required by the Secretary for evaluating the progress and success of the project.
Matching Funds.--The Secretary may not approve a project proposal under this section unless the Secretary determines that there are non-Federal matching funds available to pay at least 50 percent of the total cost of the project.
CORAL REEF CONSERVATION FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the general fund of the Treasury a separate account, to be known as the ``Coral Reef Conservation Fund'', which shall consist of amounts deposited into the Fund by the Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (b).
Deposits Into the Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit into the Fund-- (1) all amounts received by the Secretary in the form of monetary donations under subsection (d); and (2) other amounts appropriated to the Fund.
Use.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may use amounts in the Fund without further appropriation to provide assistance under section 4.
Administration.--Of amounts in the Fund available for each fiscal year, the Secretary may use not more than 3 percent to administer the Fund.
Acceptance and Use of Monetary Donations.--The Secretary may accept and use monetary donations to provide assistance under section 4.
Amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations shall be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into the Fund.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002 to carry out this Act, which may remain available until expended.
Passed the House of Representatives November 13, 1997.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.