This Act may be cited as the ``Protecting Our Children from Sexual Predators Act of 2005''.
ISSUANCE OF DRIVER'S LICENSES OR IDENTIFICATION CARDS TO SEX OFFENDERS.
A State or tribal actor that issues driver's licenses or identification cards must have in effect throughout the jurisdiction of the actor laws and policies that ensure the following: (1) The actor does not issue a driver's license, commercial driver's license, or identification card to a sex offender or renew the driver's license, commercial driver's license or identification card of a sex offender until the actor has satisfactory evidence indicating that the sex offender is in compliance with all applicable sex offender registration requirements.
A driver's license, commercial driver's license, or identification card issued to a sex offender expires on the first anniversary date of the offender's birthday, measured from the birthday nearest the date of issuance.
IMPLEMENTATION BY STATES AND INDIAN TRIBES.
In General.--Each State actor or tribal actor shall have not more than 2 years from the date of the enactment of this Act in which to fully implement this Act.
Implementation by Tribes and in Indian Country.--The Attorney General shall coordinate with the Secretary of the Interior to assist tribal actors in fully implementing this Act throughout the jurisdiction of each tribal actor.
Ineligibility for Funds.-- (1) In general.--For any fiscal year after the expiration of the period specified in subsection (a), a State actor or tribal actor that fails to fully implement this Act shall not receive 10 percent of the funds that would otherwise be allocated for that fiscal year to the actor under any of the following programs: (A) Byrne.--Subpart 1 of Part E of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3750 et sequentes), whether characterized as the Edward Byrne Memorial State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance Programs, the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant Program, or otherwise.
LLEBG.--The Local Government Law Enforcement Block Grants program.
Other law enforcement grants.--Any other program under which the Attorney General provides grants or other financial assistance.
Reallocation.--Amounts not allocated under a program referred to in paragraph (1) to an actor for failure to fully implement this Act shall be reallocated under that program to State actors and tribal actors that have not failed to fully implement this Act.
In this Act: (1) State actor.--The term ``State actor'' means any of the following: (A) A State.
The District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, or any other territory or possession of the United States.
Tribal actor.--The term ``tribal actor'' means a federally recognized Indian tribe.
Sex offender.--The term ``sex offender'' means an individual who, either before or after the enactment of this Act, was convicted of, or adjudicated a juvenile delinquent for, an offense (other than an offense involving sexual conduct where the victim was at least 13 years old and the offender was not more than 4 years older than the victim and the sexual conduct was consensual, or an offense consisting of consensual sexual conduct with an adult) whether Federal, State, local, tribal, foreign (other than an offense based on conduct that would not be a crime if the conduct took place in the United States), military, juvenile or other, that is-- (A) a specified offense against a minor; (B) a serious sex offense; or (C) a misdemeanor sex offense against a minor.
Specified offense against a minor.--The term ``specified offense against a minor'' means an offense against a minor that involves any of the following: (A) Kidnapping (unless committed by a parent).
False imprisonment (unless committed by a parent).
Solicitation to engage in sexual conduct.
Use in a sexual performance.
Solicitation to practice prostitution.
Possession, production, or distribution of child pornography.
Criminal sexual conduct towards a minor.
Any conduct that by its nature is a sexual offense against a minor.
Any other offense designated by the Attorney General for inclusion in this definition.
Any attempt or conspiracy to commit an offense described in this paragraph.
Serious sex offense.--The term ``serious sex offense'' means-- (A) a sex offense punishable under the law of a jurisdiction by imprisonment for more than one year; (B) any Federal offense under chapter 109A, 110, 117, or section 1591 of title 18, United States Code; (C) an offense in a category specified by the Secretary of Defense under section 115(a)(8)(C) of title I of Public Law 105-119 (10 United States Code 951 note); (D) any other offense designated by the Attorney General for inclusion in this definition.
Misdemeanor sex offense against a minor.--The term ``misdemeanor sex offense against a minor'' means a sex offense against a minor punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year.
Minor.--The term ``minor'' means an individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.