This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Contractor Health Insurance Equity Act''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Contract.--The term ``contract'' means any contract for items or services or any lease of Government property (including any subcontract of such contract or any sublease of such lease)-- (A) the consideration with respect to which is greater than $75,000 per year, ``(B) with respect to a contract for services, requires at least 1000 hours of services, and (B) entered into between any entity or instrumentality of the legislative branch of the Federal Government and any individual or entity employing at least 15 full-time employees.
Employee.--The term ``employee'' has the meaning given such term under section 3(6) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002(6)).
Entity of the legislative branch.--The term ``entity of the legislative branch'' includes the following: (A) The House of Representatives.
The Capitol Guide Service.
The Congressional Budget Office.
The Office of the Architect of the Capitol.
The Office of the Attending Physician.
The Office of Compliance.
Group health plan.--The term ``group health plan'' means any plan or arrangement which provides, or pays the cost of, health benefits that are actuarially equivalent to the benefits provided under the standard option service benefit plan offered under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code.
Instrumentality of the legislative branch.--The term ``instrumentality of the legislative branch'' means the following: (A) The General Accounting Office.
The Government Printing Office.
The Library of Congress.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING CONTRACTS COVERED UNDER THIS ACT.
In General.--Any contract made or entered into by any entity or instrumentality of the legislative branch of the Federal Government shall contain provisions that require that-- (1) all persons employed by the contractor in the performance of the contract or at the location of the leasehold be offered health insurance coverage under a group health plan; and (2) with respect to the premiums for such plan with respect to each employee-- (A) the contractor pay a percentage equal to the average Government contribution required under section 8906 of title 5, United States Code, for health insurance coverage provided under chapter 89 of such title; and (B) the employee pay the remainder of such premiums.
Option To Purchase.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 8914 of title 5, United States Code, a contractor to which subsection (a) applies that does not offer health insurance coverage under a group health plan to its employees on the date on which the contract is to take effect, may obtain any health benefits plan offered under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, for all persons employed by the contractor in the performance of the contract or at the location of the leasehold.
Any contractor that exercises the option to purchase such coverage shall make any Government contributions required for such coverage under section 8906 of title 5, United States Code, with the employee paying the contribution required for such coverage for Federal employees.
Calculation of amount of premiums.--Subject to paragraph (3)(B), the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall calculate the amount of premiums for health benefits plans made available to contractor employees under paragraph (1) separately from Federal employees and annuitants enrolled in such plans.
Review by office of personnel management.-- (A) Annual review.--The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall review at the end of each calendar year whether the nonapplication of paragraph (2) would result in higher adverse selection, risk segmentation in, or a substantial increase in premiums for such health benefits plans.
Such review shall include a study by the Director of the health care utilization and risks of contractor employees.
The Director shall submit a report to the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate which shall contain the results of such review.
Nonapplication of paragraph (2).--Beginning in the calendar year following a certification by the Director of the Office of Personnel Management under subparagraph (A) that the nonapplication of paragraph (2) will not result in higher adverse selection, risk segmentation in, or a substantial increase in premiums for such health benefits plans, paragraph (2) shall not apply.
Requirement of opm.--The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as are appropriate to enable a contractor described in paragraph (1) to obtain the health insurance described in such paragraph.
Administrative Functions.-- (1) In general.--The office within the entity or instrumentality of the legislative branch of the Federal Government which administers the health benefits plans for Federal employees of such entity or instrumentality shall perform such tasks with respect to plan coverage purchased under subsection (b) by contractors with contracts with such entity or instrumentality.
Waiver authority.--Waiver of the requirements of this Act may be made by such office upon application.
In General.--This Act shall apply with respect to contracts executed, modified, or renewed on or after January 1, 1998.
Termination.-- (1) In general.--This Act shall not apply on and after October 1, 2002.
Transition rule.--In the case of any contract under which, pursuant to this Act, health insurance coverage is provided for calendar year 2002, the contractor and the employees shall, notwithstanding section 3(a)(2), pay 1\1/3\ of the otherwise required monthly premium for such coverage in monthly installments during the period beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending before October 1, 2002.