This Act may be cited as the ``White-Collar Crime Penalty Enhancement Act of 2002''.
CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT OFFENSE OR TO DEFRAUD THE UNITED STATES.
Section 371 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``If two or more'' and all that follows through ``If, however,'' and inserting the following: ``(a) In General.--If 2 or more persons-- ``(1) conspire to commit any offense against the United States, in any manner or for any purpose, and 1 or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each person shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, as set forth in the specific substantive offense which was the object of the conspiracy; or ``(2) conspire to defraud the United States, or any agency thereof in any manner or for any purpose, and 1 or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each person shall be fined under this title, or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR MAIL AND WIRE FRAUD.
Mail Fraud.--Section 1341 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``five years'' and inserting ``10 years''.
Wire Fraud.--Section 1343 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``five years'' and inserting ``10 years''.
CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 1974.
Section 501 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1131) is amended-- (1) by striking ``$5,000'' and inserting ``$100,000''; (2) by striking ``one year'' and inserting ``10 years''; and (3) by striking ``$100,000'' and inserting ``$500,000''.
AMENDMENT TO SENTENCING GUIDELINES RELATING TO CERTAIN WHITE- COLLAR OFFENSES.
Directive to the United States Sentencing Commission.--Pursuant to its authority under section 994(p) of title 18, United States Code, and in accordance with this section, the United States Sentencing Commission shall review and, as appropriate, amend the Federal Sentencing Guidelines and related policy statements to implement the provisions of this Act.
Requirements.--In carrying out this section, the Sentencing Commission shall-- (1) ensure that the sentencing guidelines and policy statements reflect the serious nature of the offenses and the penalties set forth in this Act, the growing incidence of serious fraud offenses which are identified above, and the need to modify the sentencing guidelines and policy statements to deter, prevent, and punish such offenses; (2) consider the extent to which the guidelines and policy statements adequately address-- (A) whether the guideline offense levels and enhancements for violations of the sections amended by this Act are sufficient to deter and punish such offenses, and specifically, are adequate in view of the statutory increases in penalties contained in this Act; and (B) whether a specific offense characteristic should be added in United States Sentencing Guideline section 2B1.1 in order to provide for stronger penalties for fraud when the crime is committed by a corporate officer or director; (3) assure reasonable consistency with other relevant directives and sentencing guidelines; (4) account for any additional aggravating or mitigating circumstances that might justify exceptions to the generally applicable sentencing ranges; (5) make any necessary conforming changes to the sentencing guidelines; and (6) assure that the guidelines adequately meet the purposes of sentencing as set forth in section 3553(a)(2) of title 18, United States Code.
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL REPORTS.
In General.--Chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Failure of corporate officers to certify financial reports ``(a) Certification of Periodic Financial Reports.--Each periodic report containing financial statements filed by an issuer with the Securities Exchange Commission pursuant to section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78m(a) or 78o(d)) shall be accompanied by a written statement by the chairman of the board, chief executive officer, and chief financial officer (or equivalent thereof) of the issuer.
Content.--The statement required under subsection (a) shall certify the appropriateness of the financial statements and disclosures contained in the periodic report or financial report, and that those financial statements and disclosures fairly present, in all material respects, the operations and financial condition of the issuer.
Criminal Penalties.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- ``(1) any person who recklessly and knowingly violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction be fined not more than $500,000, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both; or ``(2) any person who willfully violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction be fined not more than $1,000,000, or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The section analysis for chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``1348.
Failure of corporate officers to certify financial reports.