This Act may be cited as the ``Bodegas as Catalysts for Healthy Living Act''.
GRANTS FOR SMALL BUSINESSES AND CONSUMER EDUCATION AND OUTREACH.
Program Required.--The Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall carry out a program under which the Administrator makes grants to any of the following: (1) A locally-based organization that represents small business concerns.
A local redevelopment agency that is chartered, established, or otherwise sanctioned by a State or local government.
Use of Grant Amounts.--The recipient of a grant under this section shall use the grant amounts for one or more of the following activities: (1) To provide, to independently owned and operated small business concerns, such as bodegas and corner stores, assistance (such as assistance in purchasing appropriate equipment, or assistance in hiring and training personnel) in expanding their inventory to include one or more of the following products: (A) Fresh fruits and vegetables.
Healthy alternatives (as defined by the Department of Agriculture) such as whole milk alternatives, pure fruit juices, and products with 0 grams of transfat).
To provide, to community-based organizations, such as community health centers, assistance in carrying out consumer education and outreach activities to encourage the purchase of such products, such as by informing communities about the health risks associated with high-calorie, low-exercise lifestyles and the benefits of healthy living.
Collaboration Required.--A small business concern may receive assistance in expanding inventory under subsection (b)(1) only if the small business concern works in collaboration with one or more community-based organizations in expanding that inventory.
A community- based organization may receive assistance in carrying out activities under subsection (b)(2) only if the community-based organization works in collaboration with one or more small business concerns in carrying out those activities.
Maximum Grant.--A grant under this section may not exceed $100,000.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2007.
COVERAGE OF ADDITIONAL PRIMARY CARE AND PREVENTIVE SERVICES UNDER THE MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAMS.
Medicare Program.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x) is amended-- (A) in subsection (s)(2), by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(BB) additional primary and preventive services described in subsection (ccc);''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Additional Primary and Preventive Services ``(ccc) The term `additional primary and preventive services' means such primary and preventive services that are not otherwise covered under this title as the Secretary shall specify when provided by qualified providers, as specified by the Secretary.
Such term includes the following: ``(1) Services for the prevention and treatment of obesity and obesity-related disease.
Exercise stress testing for the purpose of exercise prescriptions.
Culinary arts education for the purpose of promoting proper nutrition.''.
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1862(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395y(a)(1)) is amended-- (i) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (M); (ii) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (N); and (iii) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(O) in the case of additional primary care and preventive services, which are performed more frequently than the Secretary may specify;''.
Section 1833(b)(5) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395l(b)(5)) is amended by inserting ``or additional primary care or preventive services (as defined in section 1861(ccc))'' after ``(jj))''.
Medicaid Program.--Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (27); (2) by redesignating paragraph (28) as paragraph (29); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (27) the following new paragraph: ``(28) additional primary care and preventive services (as defined in section 1861(ccc)) which are not otherwise covered under this subsection; and''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, with regard to whether regulations to implement such amendments are in effect as of such date.