This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Mental Health and Back-to- Work Act of 2003''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The statutory advisory committee of the Department of Veterans Affairs known as the Committee on Care of Veterans with Serious Mental Illness has underscored the need to integrate psychosocial recovery in the treatment of mental illness.
In its report to the President dated July 22, 2003, the President's New Freedom Commision on Mental Health (established by Executive order No.
13263 of April 29, 2002), identified the hope of recovery as the single most important goal of mental health service delivery.
The Surgeon General, in a report on mental health issued in 1999, stated that ``state of the art care for severe mental illness is recovery oriented care which requires an array of services that include intensive case management, access to substance abuse treatment, peer support and psychosocial rehabilitation such as pharmacologic treatment, housing, employment services, independent living and social skills training.''.
During fiscal year 2002, the Department of Veterans Affairs treated 757,767 patients in specialty mental health settings, of whom 293,246 were seriously mentally ill. (5) Approximately 21 percent of all patients seen by the Department of Veterans Affairs are seen for mental health treatment.
When veterans with mental illness do not receive comprehensive rehabilitative care, they are more likely to become homeless and, according to the National Coalition for Homeless Veterans, 45 percent of homeless veterans suffer from at least one mental illness and need help finding a job.
A study of the program operations of the Department of Veterans Affairs during fiscal year 2000 found that fewer than one percent of the 82,000 veterans under the age of 55 who have schizophrenia participated in compensated work therapy programs.
The National Mental Health Information Center of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration of the Department of Health and Human Services found a shocking 90 percent unemployment rate among adults with serious mental illness, the worst level of unemployment of any group of people with disabilities.
A study by the National Mental Health Information Center found that serious mental illness need not lead to unemployment when seriously mentally ill individuals are given proper training and employment support services.
ENHANCEMENT OF REHABILITATIVE SERVICES FOR VETERANS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS AND OTHER VETERANS.
Rehabilitative Services Through Medical Care Authority.-- Section 1701(8) is amended by striking ``(other than those types of vocational rehabilitation services provided under chapter 31 of this title)''.
Expansion of Authorized Rehabilitative Services.--Section 1718 is amended-- (1) in subsection (c)(1)-- (A) by striking ``subsection (b) of this section'' and inserting ``subsection (b) or (d)''; and (B) by striking ``paragraph (2) of such subsection'' and inserting ``subsection (b)(2)''; (2) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as subsections (e), (f), and (g), respectively; and (3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection (d): ``(d) In providing to a veteran rehabilitative services under this chapter, the Secretary may furnish the veteran with the following: ``(1) Work skills training and development services.
Job development and placement services.''.
COMMITTEE ON CARE OF VETERANS WITH SERIOUS MENTAL ILLNESS.
Name of Committee.--The committee of the Department of Veterans Affairs established under section 7321 of title 38, United States Code, shall be known and designated as the ``Committee on Care of Veterans with Serious Mental Illness''.
Matters to Be Included in Annual Report.--Section 7321 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) The committee shall include in its annual report to the Secretary its assessment of how the programs of the Department under section 1718 of this title are serving veterans with mental illness.
The committee shall include such recommendations for improving services to veterans with mental illness under such programs as the committee considers appropriate.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Subsection (a) of such section is amended by striking ``Committee on Care of Severely Chronically Mentally Ill Veterans'' and inserting ``Committee on Care of Veterans with Serious Mental Illness''.
The heading of such section is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Committee on Care of Veterans with Serious Mental Illness''.
The item relating to such section in the table of sections at the beginning of chapter 73 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``7321.
Committee on Care of Veterans with Serious Mental Illness.