This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Election Standards Act of 2001''.
TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMISSION ON FEDERAL ELECTION STANDARDS.
ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION; MEMBERSHIP.
Establishment of Commission.--There is established a commission to be known as the National Advisory Commission on Federal Election Standards (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 24 voting and 2 nonvoting members, who shall serve for the life of the Commission and shall be appointed as follows: (1) 3 members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
3 members appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
3 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
3 members appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
3 members appointed by the National Association of Secretaries of State, of whom no more than 2 shall represent States with large populations, no more than 2 shall represent States with small populations, and no more than 2 shall be from the same political party or geographic region.
3 members appointed by the National Association of State Election Directors, of whom no more than 2 shall represent States with large populations, no more than 2 shall represent States with small populations, and no more than 2 shall be from the same political party or geographic region.
6 members who shall be local election officials and who shall be appointed as follows: (A) 2 shall be appointed by the Election Center.
2 shall be appointed by the International Association of Clerks, Recorders, Election Officials and Treasurers.
2 shall be appointed by the National Association of County Recorders, Election Officials and Clerks.
The Attorney General and the Chair of the Federal Election Commission (or their respective designees), who shall be nonvoting members of the Commission.
Appointments; Initial Meeting.--Appointments to the Commission shall be made not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Commission shall hold its initial meeting not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, and at such meeting shall select a chair from among the members of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Rules of the Commission.-- (1) Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Meetings.--Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair upon at least 14 days written notice.
All meetings shall be open to the public.
Voting.--All actions of the Commission shall be by majority vote of those present and voting.
Testimony.--The Commission shall provide opportunities for representatives of the general public, civic groups, consumer groups, and State and local government officials to testify.
Additional rules.--The Commission may adopt additional rules as needed.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) examine and report to the President, the Congress, and the chief election official of each State regarding the accuracy, integrity, and efficiency of Federal election procedures in the States; (2) develop standards for the conduct of Federal elections and make recommendations with respect to the periodic review and updating of such standards; and (3) make additional recommendations to Congress with respect to procedural and administrative aspects of Federal elections over which Congress may exercise legislative authority under the Constitution of the United States.
Specific Consideration of Certain Issues in Development of Standards.--In developing standards under subsection (a)(2) for the conduct of Federal elections, the Commission shall give specific consideration to the following: (1) Procedures for voter registration and maintenance of lists of registered voters.
Ballot design, voting equipment, the methods employed in counting and recounting votes, and the procedures for challenging the results.
Factors which affect access to and the efficient and orderly operation of polling places, including hours of voting (which may include standards for a uniform national poll closing time for presidential elections), number and accessibility of polling stations, training of poll workers, methods of reducing delay, and steps to ensure that all voters who report to the polls have an opportunity to cast votes.
Procedures for mail-in and absentee voting (including deadlines for receipt of mail-in and absentee ballots).
Specific Consideration of Certain Issues in Additional Recommendations.--In preparing additional recommendations for Congress under subsection (a)(3), the Commission shall make recommendations as to whether Federal law should be amended to authorize Federal elections to be conducted-- (1) on dates other than those prescribed by current Federal law so as to permit weekend elections, voting on multiple days, or expanded early voting options; and (2) by means of the Internet.
Report on Current Procedures and Recommended Standards.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the initial meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Congress, the chair of the Federal Election Commission, and the chief election official of each State a report which includes-- (1) the findings and conclusions of the Commission on the accuracy, integrity, and efficiency of Federal election procedures in the States made under section 102(a)(1), together with other findings and conclusions of the Commission; and (2) the recommended standards for the conduct of Federal elections developed under section 102(a)(2).
Report on Additional Recommendations.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the initial meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to Congress the additional recommendations prepared under section 102(a)(3).
Separate Views.--Any member of the Commission may submit additional findings and recommendations to be made a part of the reports submitted under this section.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such places and times, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act, except that in holding hearings the Commission shall select locations for the hearings in a manner which reflects a balance among various geographic regions of the United States.
Access to Federal Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the chair of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Use of Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Compensation of Members.--Members of the Commission shall serve without pay, but shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes and places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Personnel.--The chair of the Commission may appoint staff of the Commission, request the detail of Federal employees, and accept temporary and intermittent services in accordance with section 3161 of title 5, United States Code, except that the rate of pay of any staff may not exceed the annual rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
The Commission shall terminate not later than the date that is 30 days after the date the Commission submits the reports required under section 103.
There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 to the Commission to carry out this title.
TITLE II--FEDERAL ELECTION STANDARDS IMPLEMENTATION GRANTS SEC.
In General.-- (1) Establishment of program.--Not later than 60 days after the National Advisory Commission on Federal Election Standards submits the report containing its recommended standards for the conduct of Federal elections under section 103(a), the Federal Election Commission shall establish a program to make grants to qualifying States to improve the accuracy, integrity, and efficiency of Federal election procedures by carrying out programs, projects, and other activities to bring the conduct of Federal elections into conformity with such standards.
Solicitation of applications.--Not later than 30 days after establishing the program under this section, the Federal Election Commission shall begin soliciting applications from States for grants under the program.
Qualifying State Defined.--In this section, a ``qualifying State'' is a State which has submitted an application for a grant under the program under this section (at such time and in such form and manner as the Federal Election Commission may require) containing such information and assurances as the Federal Election Commission may require.
Permitted Uses.--Grants made under the program under this section may be used by States, either directly or through units of local government, Indian tribal governments, other public and private entities, and multi-jurisdictional or regional consortia, for activities which may include the following: (1) The hiring of employees or consultants to design and implement systems and procedures which meet the standards referred to in subsection (a).
The procurement of equipment, technology, and administrative and managerial support systems which meet such standards.
The provision of training or retraining to election officials, employees, and volunteers in the proper use and maintenance of new systems and procedures which meet such standards.
Activities to enhance public confidence and participation in the electoral process by increasing knowledge and awareness of new systems and procedures which meet such standards.
The evaluation of the effectiveness of new systems and procedures put in place using funds provided under this title.
Matching Funds.--The portion of the costs of a program, project, or activity provided by a grant under the program under this section may not exceed 75 percent of the total costs of the program, project, or activity, except that the Federal Election Commission may waive this requirement in whole or in part under such terms and conditions as the Federal Election Commission considers appropriate.
Minimum Amount.--Unless all applications submitted by all qualifying States for grants under the program under this section have been funded, the amount received under this section for any fiscal year by each qualifying State, together with grantees within the State, may not be less than 0.5 percent of the total amount appropriated for such grants for the fiscal year.
In General.--The Federal Election Commission may provide technical assistance to States, units of local government, Indian tribal governments, and other public and private entities, in furtherance of the purposes of this title.
Training Centers and Facilities.--The technical assistance provided by the Federal Election Commission under this section may include the establishment and operation of training centers or facilities, either directly or by contracting or cooperative arrangements.
The functions of such centers or facilities may include instruction and seminars for election officials, employees, trainers, and such others as the Federal Election Commission considers appropriate to meet the objectives of this title.
Not later than 60 days after each fiscal year for which grants are made under this title, the Federal Election Commission shall submit a report to Congress on the programs carried out under this title during the year, and may include in the report any recommendations of the Federal Election Commission for amendments to this title and related provisions of law.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $250,000,000 for each of the first 3 fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal year.
TITLE III--STATE DEFINED SEC.
In this Act, the term ``State'' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, and American Samoa.