Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``joint resolution'' means-- (1) in the case of a joint resolution introduced within 5 session days of Congress of receipt by Congress of a report described in section 2(b), only a joint resolution the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress approves the recommendation of the President to not apply the country sanction described in the report submitted on ____ pursuant to section 2(b) of the Sanctions Implementation Procedures Act of 1998 with respect to the sanctionable activity described in the report.
'', with the blank filled in with the appropriate date; and (2) in the case of a joint resolution introduced within 5 session days of Congress of receipt by Congress of a report described in section 2(d), only a joint resolution the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress approves the recommendation of the President to remove the country sanction described in the report submitted on ____ pursuant to section 2(d) of the Sanctions Implementation Procedures Act of 1998 with respect to the sanctionable activity described in the report.
'', with the blank filled in with the appropriate date.
Referral of Resolutions.--A resolution described in subsection (a) that is introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
A resolution described in subsection (a) that is introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives.
Discharge of Committees.--If the committee to which is referred a resolution described in subsection (a) has not reported such resolution (or an identical resolution) at the end of 5 session days of Congress after its introduction, the committee shall be deemed to be discharged from further consideration of the resolution and the resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Motions To Proceed to the Consideration of the Resolutions.-- Whenever the committee to which a resolution is referred has reported, or has been deemed to be discharged from further consideration of, a resolution described in subsection (a), it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the resolution, and all points of order against the resolution (and against consideration of the resolution) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution is agreed to, the resolution shall remain unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Time for Debate.--Debate on the resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 8 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
An amendment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Vote on Final Passage.--Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on a resolution described in subsection (a), and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the resolution shall occur.
Appeals.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a resolution described in subsection (a) shall be decided without debate.
Treatment of Other House's Resolution.--If, before the passage by one House of a resolution of that House described in subsection (a), that House receives from the other House a resolution described in subsection (a), then the following procedures shall apply: (1) The resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee.
With respect to a resolution described in subsection (a) of the House receiving the resolution-- (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no resolution had been received from the other House; but (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the resolution of the other House.
Presidential Vetoes.-- (1) In general.--Upon receipt of a message from the President returning the joint resolution unsigned to the House of origin and setting further his objections to the joint resolution, the House receiving the message shall immediately enter the objections at large on the journal of that House and the House shall proceed to the immediate reconsideration of the joint resolution the objections of the President to the contrary notwithstanding or of a motion to proceed to the immediate reconsideration of the joint resolution, or the joint resolution and objections shall lie on the table.
Upon receipt of a message of a House transmitting the joint resolution and the objections of the President, the House receiving the message shall proceed to the immediate reconsideration of the joint resolution the objections of the President to the contrary notwithstanding or of a motion to proceed to the immediate reconsideration of the joint resolution, or the joint resolution and objections shall lie on the table.
A motion to refer the joint resolution to a committee shall not be in order in either House.
Motion to proceed.--After the receipt of a message by a House as described in paragraph (1), it is at any time in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the reconsideration of the joint resolution the objections of the President to the contrary notwithstanding.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is a question of highest privilege in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the reconsideration of the resolution is agreed to, the resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Limit on debate.--Debate on reconsideration of the joint resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 8 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the joint resolution.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
An amendment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the joint resolution is agreed to notwithstanding the objections of the President or disagreed to is not in order.
Vote to override veto.--Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on reconsideration of the resolution, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on the question of passage, the objections of the President to the contrary notwithstanding, shall occur.
Rules of the Senate and the House.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such as it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a resolution described in subsection (a), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
In this Act: (1) Country sanction.--The term ``country sanction'' means any prohibition or restriction that is expressly directed to or is applied to, a specific foreign country or government-- (A) on the use of Federal funds with respect to the foreign country or government; or (B) on transactions involving property in which the foreign country or government has any interest.
Mandated by statute.--The term ``mandated by statute''-- (A) means any direction or requirement expressed in statute; and (B) excludes any provision of law conferring discretion or authority upon an officer or employee of the United States, including any authority to exercise a waiver or delay in the implementation of a statutory provision, except that this exclusion does not apply to any provision of law containing a waiver that may only be exercised on grounds more restrictive than a determination that it is in the national interests of the United States to do so.
Initial imposition.--The term ``initial imposition'' means, with respect to a sanction or sanctions, the first imposition of any sanction with respect to a specific determination made under the statute mandating the sanction.
Sanctionable activity.--The term ``sanctionable activity'' means the conduct of the foreign country or government that is the basis for the imposition of a country sanction mandated by statute.
Session day of congress.--The term ``session day of Congress'' means any day on which the respective House of Congress is in session.