This Act may be cited as the ``National Health Service Corps Reinvestment Act of 2001''.
TITLE I--REVISION AND EXTENSION OF PROGRAM FOR NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS SEC.
Additional Authorizations of Appropriations.--Section 338(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254k(a)(1)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, $62,284,500 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006''.
Designation of Health Professional Shortage Areas.--Section 332 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254e) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(i)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subpart, the Secretary shall consider facilities described in paragraph (2) to be health professional shortage areas within the meaning of subsection (a)(1)(C).
The facilities referred to in paragraph (1) are public or nonprofit private facilities that are any of the following: ``(A) A health center receiving a grant under section 330.
A Federally-qualified health center as defined in section 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act.
A rural health clinic under section 1861(aa)(2) of the Social Security Act.''.
Striking of Provisions Regarding Cost Sharing.--Subpart II of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254d et seq.)
is amended by striking section 334.
SCHOLARSHIP AND LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS.
Additional Authorizations of Appropriations.--Section 338H(b)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254q(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' after ``1991,''; and (2) by inserting before the period the following: ``, $131,886,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006''.
Demonstration Program Regarding Part-Time Performance of Obligated Service.--Section 338C (42 United States Code 254m) of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(f)(1) In carrying out this subpart, the Secretary may in accordance with this subsection carry out demonstration projects in which individuals who have entered into contracts under section 338A or 338B receive a waiver under which the individuals are authorized, notwithstanding subsection (a), to satisfy the requirement of obligated service through providing clinical service that is not full-time (referred to in this subsection as `part-time service').
A waiver under paragraph (1) may be provided by the Secretary only if the following conditions are met: ``(A) An entity approved under section 333 for the assignment of a Corps member has requested in writing that the Corps member assigned to the entity provide part-time service.
The Secretary has determined that part-time service by a Corp member is appropriate for the health professional shortage area in which the entity is located.
A Corps member who is required to perform obligated service has agreed in writing to be assigned, for part-time service, to an entity described in subparagraph (A).
The entity and the Corps member agree in writing that the part-time service provided by the Corps member will be not less than 20 hours per week.
The Corps member agrees in writing that the period of time over which the Corps member would otherwise have performed obligated service pursuant to section 338A or 338B (as applicable) will be extended so that the aggregate amount of part-time service provided by the Corps member will equal the period of obligated service that otherwise would have applied pursuant to such section.
The Corps member agrees in writing that, if the Corps member begins providing part-time service but fails to complete the period of obligated service, the method of determining the amount of damages described in subsection (b) or (c) of section 338E, as applicable, will be applied by using the full-time equivalent of the part-time service provided by the Corp member.''.
TITLE II--EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME FOR CERTAIN SCHOLARSHIPS AND LOAN PAYMENTS UNDER NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS PROGRAM SEC.
EXCLUSION OF AMOUNTS RECEIVED UNDER THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 117(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the exclusion from gross income amounts received as a qualified scholarship) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Subsections (a)'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), subsections (a)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount received by an individual under the National Health Service Corps Scholarship Program under section 338A(g)(1)(A) of the Public Health Service Act.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to amounts received in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
EXCLUSION FOR LOAN PAYMENTS UNDER NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 117 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Loan Payments Under National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program.--Gross income shall not include any amount received under section 338B(g) of the Public Health Service Act.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to amounts received by an individual in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS SEC.
CONFORMING AMENDMENT REGARDING REIMBURSEMENT OF TAX LIABILITY FOR LOAN PAYMENTS.
Section 338B(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254l- 1(g)) is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (3); and (2) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3).
Except as provided otherwise in this Act, this Act and the amendments made by this Act take effect October 1, 2001, or upon the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever occurs later.