This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Market Access Act of 1994''.
REPORTS ON ACCESS TO JAPANESE MARKETS.
Initial Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report assessing the access to the Japanese market of goods and services produced or originating in the United States in each sector specifically identified in the Framework Agreement.
Contents of report.--The Secretary shall include in the report under paragraph (1) the following: (A) An assessment of the market access opportunities that would be available in the Japanese market for goods and services in each sector referred to in paragraph (1) in the absence of barriers to achieving access to such market in both the public and private sectors in Japan.
In making such assessment, the Secretary shall consider the competitive position of such goods and services in similarly developed markets in other countries.
Such assessment shall specify the time periods within which such market access opportunities should reasonably be expected to be obtained.
Objective criteria for measuring the extent to which those market access opportunities described in subparagraph (A) have been obtained.
The development of such objective criteria may include the use of interim objective criteria to measure results on a periodic basis, as appropriate.
Subsequent Annual Reports.-- (1) In general.--Not later than the date which is 1 year after the last day of the 90-day period referred to in subsection (a)(1), and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report containing the following: (A) An assessment of the market access opportunities that would be available in the Japanese market, for goods and services produced or originating in the United States in those sectors selected by the Secretary, in the absence of the barriers to achieving access to such market in both the public and private sectors in Japan.
In making such assessment, the Secretary shall consider the competitive position of such goods and services in similarly developed markets in other countries.
Such assessment shall specify the time periods within which such market access opportunities should reasonably be expected to be obtained.
Objective criteria for measuring the extent to which those market access opportunities described in subparagraph (A) have been obtained.
The development of such objective criteria may include the use of interim criteria described in subsection (a)(2)(B).
An assessment of whether, and to what extent, Japan has materially complied with-- (i) agreements and understandings reached between the United States and Japan pursuant to section 3, and (ii) existing trade agreements between the United States and Japan.
Such assessment shall include specific information on the extent to which United States suppliers have achieved additional access to the Japanese market and the extent to which Japan has complied with other commitments under such agreements and understandings.
An assessment of the effect of the agreements and understandings described in subparagraph (C) on the access to the Japanese markets of goods and services produced or originating in the United States.
Selection of sectors.--In selecting sectors that are to be the subject of a report under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give priority to those sectors-- (A) in which access to the Japanese market is likely to have significant potential to increase exports of United States goods and services; (B) in which access to the Japanese market will result in significant employment benefits for producers of United States goods and services; or (C) which represent critical technologies, including those identified by the National Critical Technologies Panel under section 603 of the National Science and Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976 (42 United States Code 6683).
The Secretary shall include an assessment under paragraph (1) of any sector for which the Trade Representative requests such assessment be made.
In preparing any such request, the Trade Representative shall give priority to those barriers identified in the reports required by section 181(b) of the Trade Act of 1974.
Information on access by foreign suppliers.--The Secretary shall consult with the governments of foreign countries concerning access to the Japanese market of goods and services produced or originating in those countries.
At the request of the government of any such country, the Secretary may include in the reports required by paragraph (1) information, with respect to that country, on such access.
NEGOTIATIONS TO ACHIEVE MARKET ACCESS.
Negotiating Authority.--The President is authorized to enter into agreements or other understandings with the Government of Japan for the purpose of obtaining the market access opportunities described in the reports of the Secretary under section 2.
Determination of Priority of Negotiations.--Upon the submission by the Secretary of each report under section 2, the Trade Representative shall determine-- (1) for which sectors identified in the report the Trade Representative will pursue negotiations, during the 6-month period following submission of the report, for the purpose of concluding agreements or other understandings described in subsection (a), and the time frame for pursuing negotiations on any other sector identified in the report; and (2) for which sectors identified in any previous report of the Secretary under section 2 the Trade Representative will pursue negotiations, during the 6-month period described in paragraph (1), in cases in which-- (A) negotiations were not previously pursued by the Trade Representative, or (B) negotiations that were pursued by the Trade Representative did not result in the conclusion of an agreement or understanding described in subsection (a) during the preceding 6-month period, but are expected to result in such an agreement or understanding during the 6-month period described in paragraph (1).
For purposes of this Act, negotiations by the Trade Representative with respect to a particular sector shall be for a period of not more than 12 months.
Semiannual Reports.--At the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date on which the Secretary's first report is submitted under subsection (a)(1), and every 6 months thereafter, the Trade Representative shall submit to the Congress a report containing the following: (1) With respect to each sector on which negotiations described in subsection (b) were pursued during that 6-month period-- (A) a determination of whether such negotiations have resulted in the conclusion of an agreement or understanding intended to obtain the market access opportunities described in the most recent applicable report of the Secretary, and if not-- (i) whether such negotiations are continuing because they are expected to result in such an agreement or understanding during the succeeding 6-month period; or (ii) whether such negotiations have terminated; and (B) in the case of a positive determination made under subparagraph (A)(i) in the preceding report submitted under this subsection, a determination of whether the continuing negotiations have resulted in the conclusion of an agreement or understanding described in subparagraph (A) during that 6-month period.
With respect to each sector on which negotiations described in subsection (b) were not pursued during that 6- month period, a determination of when such negotiations will be pursued.
MONITORING OF AGREEMENTS AND UNDERSTANDINGS.
In General.--For the purpose of making the assessments required by section 2(b)(1)(C), the Secretary shall monitor the compliance with each agreement or understanding reached between the United States and Japan pursuant to section 3, and with each existing trade agreement between the United States and Japan.
In making each such assessment, the Secretary shall describe-- (1) the extent to which market access for the sector covered by the agreement or understanding has been achieved; and (2) the bilateral trade relationship with Japan in that sector.
In the case of agreements or understandings reached pursuant to section 3, the description under paragraph (1) shall be done on the basis of the objective criteria set forth in the applicable report under section 2(a)(2)(B) or 2(b)(1)(B).
Treatment of Agreements and Understandings.--Any agreement or understanding reached pursuant to negotiations conducted under this Act, and each existing trade agreement between the United States and Japan, shall be considered to be a trade agreement for purposes of section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974.
TRIGGERING OF SECTION 301 ACTIONS.
Determinations by Trade Representative.-- (1) Failure to conclude agreements.--In any case in which the Trade Representative determines under section 3(c)(1)(A)(ii) or (B) that negotiations have not resulted in the conclusion of an agreement or understanding described in section 3(a), each barrier to access to the Japanese market that was the subject of such negotiations shall, for purposes of title III of the Trade Act of 1974, be considered to be an act, policy, or practice determined under section 304 of that Act to be an act, policy or practice that is unreasonable and discriminatory and burdens or restricts United States commerce.
The Trade Representative shall determine what action to take under section 301(b) of that Act in response to such act, policy, or practice.
Noncompliance with agreements or understandings.--In any case in which the Secretary determines, in a report submitted under section 2(b)(1), that Japan is not in material compliance with-- (A) any agreement or understanding concluded pursuant to negotiations conducted under section 3, or (B) any existing trade agreement between the United States and Japan, the Trade Representative shall determine what action to take under section 301(a) of the Trade Act of 1974.
For purposes of section 301 of that Act, a determination of noncompliance described in the preceding sentence shall be treated as a determination made under section 304 of that Act.
As used in this Act: (1) Existing trade agreement between the united states and japan.--The term ``existing trade agreement between the United States and Japan'' means any trade agreement that was entered into between the United States and Japan before the date of the enactment of this Act and is in effect on such date.
Such term includes-- (A) the Arrangement Between the Government of Japan and the Government of the United States of America Concerning Trade in Semiconductor Products, signed in 1986; (B) the Arrangement Between the Government of Japan and the Government of the United States of America Concerning Trade in Semiconductor Products, signed in 1991; (C) the United States-Japan Wood Products Agreement, signed on June 5, 1990; (D) Measures Related to Japanese Public Sector Procurements of Computer Products and Services, signed on January 10, 1992; (E) the Tokyo Declaration on the United States Reports-Japan Global Partnership, signed on January 9, 1992; and (F) the Cellular Telephone and Third-Party Radio Agreement, signed in 1989.
Framework agreement.--The term ``Framework Agreement'' means the Japan-United States Framework for a New Economic Partnership, signed on July 10, 1993.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
Trade representative.--The term ``Trade Representative'' means the United States Trade Representative.