This Act may be cited as the ``Colonia Assistance Authorization Act of 1993''.
The purpose of this Act is to protect the economy, public health, environment, and water quality of the United States-Mexico border area that is endangered and is being polluted by raw or partially treated sewage, effluent, and other pollutants.
As used in this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Border state.--The term ``border State'' means each of the following States: (A) Arizona.
Construction.--The term ``construction'' has the meaning provided the term under section 212(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1292(1)).
Eligible community.--The term ``eligible community'' means a low-income community commonly referred to as a colonia that is located in the United States-Mexico border area (generally in an unincorporated area) and that lacks basic sanitation facilities such as safe drinking water, household plumbing, and a proper sewage disposal system.
Treatment works.--The term ``treatment works'' has the meaning provided the term under section 212(2) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1292(2)).
TRANSFERS AND GRANTS TO ALLEVIATE HEALTH RISK.
In General.-- (1) Assistance.--The Administrator is authorized to transfer funds to another Federal agency or award grants to any other appropriate entity or border State, designated by the President, to provide assistance to eligible communities for-- (A) the conservation, development, use, and control of water (including the extension or improvement of a water supply system); and (B) the construction or improvement of sewers, wastewater treatment works, and essential community facilities (including necessary related equipment).
Use of funds.--Each transfer of funds, and each grant awarded, pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be used to provide assistance to 1 (or more) eligible community with respect to which the residents are subject to a significant health risk (as determined by the Administrator) because a significant proportion of the residents of the eligible community do not have access to, or service by, an adequate and affordable-- (A) water supply system; or (B) treatment works for wastewater treatment.
Operation and Maintenance.--To carry out the purpose referred to in section 2, the Administrator and the head of each other Federal agency, entity, or border State, designated by the President pursuant to subsection (a)(1), are each authorized to operate and maintain a treatment works or other project that is constructed with funds made available pursuant to subsection (a).
Approval of Plans.-- (1) Plans and specifications.--Each treatment works or other project that is funded by a transfer or a grant made pursuant to subsection (a)(1) shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications developed by the Administrator or the head of another Federal agency or the appropriate official of an entity or border State designated by the President under subsection (a), in consultation with the appropriate official of the affected border State.
Approval by the administrator.--As a condition of carrying out the construction of a treatment works or other project referred in paragraph (1), the head of the Federal agency or appropriate official of an entity or border State shall submit the plans and specifications referred to in paragraph (1) to the Administrator for approval.
Standards for construction.--The Administrator may approve a plan referred to in paragraph (2) if the Administrator determines that the treatment works or other project that is the subject of the plan meets the standards that would apply to the treatment works or other project if the treatment works or other project were constructed under appropriate standards under the laws of the United States and Mexico under applicable treaties and international agreements.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Environmental Protection Agency to carry out this Act such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1994, and for each fiscal year thereafter.