This Act may be cited as the ``Hanford Reach National Salmon Preserve and Recreational Area Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The 51-mile stretch of the Columbia River, known as the ``Hanford Reach'', provides 80 percent of the fall Chinook salmon in the river system, critical habitat for wildlife, a high-quality waterfowl sanctuary, as well as numerous scenic, historic, and recreational opportunities for the public.
In 1996 Congress, through Public Law 104-333, prohibited damming, dredging, channeling, or other such activities along the Hanford Reach in order to help preserve and protect the unique environmental benefits of the region.
The lands surrounding the Hanford Reach area of the Columbia River, Washington, should be properly managed in order to protect plant, fish, wildlife, cultural, recreational, and scenic resources, while preserving access to these lands.
Recognizing the unique and pristine values of the area, local citizens in cooperation with Federal and State authorities have developed a comprehensive protection plan which has enhanced salmon habitat along the Hanford Reach.
This plan, known as the Vernita Bar Agreement, has preserved the free flowing, riparian character of the Hanford Reach, and serves as a blueprint for further successful management along the Columbia River.
Although dozens of local, State, and Federal environmental protection and management laws and regulations exist for the Hanford Reach, management efforts can be better integrated and can lead to more efficient use of public resources and improved habitat and recreation management.
Inasmuch as Federal financial resources are constrained, joint partnerships among Federal, State, and local entities can provide long-term habitat and wildlife management, maintain recreational opportunities, and develop a responsible and environmentally sound management plan for the Hanford Reach.
The people and the governments of Benton, Franklin, and Grant Counties desire to enter into such a partnership with the State of Washington and the United States to ensure the continued protection of plant, fish, wildlife, cultural, recreational, and scenic resources on the lands surrounding the Hanford Reach.
Such a cooperative partnership will provide a forum for public input from the entire region and ensure the long-term protection of the river as wild, scenic, and accessible.
Congress recommends the formation of a commission, with Federal, State and local members, to manage the Reach in accordance with the above goals.
The commission will be structured to ensure that each entity will have equal standing to make or reject management decisions.
The purpose of this Act is to protect and enhance the plant resources, fish and wildlife resources, cultural resources, recreational access and other uses of the Hanford Reach through a joint partnership with Federal, State and local governments.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Hanford Reach Protection and Management Commission.
Hanford reach.--The term ``Hanford Reach'' refers to the portion of the Columbia River from river mile 353 to river mile 392.
Hanford site.--The term ``Hanford Site'' means the property represented as ``Department of Energy'' under the Land Status Legend on the Bureau of Land Management topographic map of Priest Rapids, Washington, Edition-1991.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
GENERAL AUTHORITY; PROPERTY DESCRIPTIONS.
Authority.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary for no consideration shall convey to the governmental entities referred to in subsection (c) all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the properties described in subsection (c).
Environmental Safety.--The conveyance made under subsection (c) shall be made only after the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency certifies to the Secretary that-- (1) the properties described in section 5(c) are clean of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive materials or substances; (2) all corrective, remedial, or response actions have been completed; and (3) all obligations of the Secretary at the Hanford Site under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes) and other applicable laws have been fulfilled.
Conveyance to the State of Washington.--The Secretary shall convey to the State of Washington the property that consists of the portion of the Hanford Site that runs along both banks of the Columbia River and lies within the one quarter mile to the north of the mean high water mark on the north bank of the Columbia River, and that lies within the one quarter mile to the south of the mean high water mark on the south bank of the Columbia River.
Water Rights and Utility Easements.--The conveyances under subsection (c) shall be made subject to all existing water rights and all easements and rights of any public and private utility districts which operate and maintain transmission and generation facilities along the lands described under section 5.
DESIGNATION OF THE HANFORD REACH CORRIDOR.
Upon passage of this Act, the lands conveyed under section 5(c) and the Columbia River corridor adjacent to such lands shall be referred to the ``Hanford Reach National Salmon Preserve and Recreational Area.''
ESTABLISHMENT OF HANFORD REACH PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT COMMISSION.
Not later than 6 months after the conveyances under section 5(b)(1) are made, the Department of Energy and the State of Washington shall enter into a written joint agreement with the governments of Benton, Franklin, and Grant Counties to establish the Hanford Reach Protection and Management Commission as follows: (1) Membership appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members.
As soon as practicable, but not more than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the members shall be appointed as follows: (A) Local panel.-- (i) One member who shall be a resident of Benton County, appointed by the government of such county.
One member who shall be a resident of Franklin County, appointed by the government of such county.
One member who shall be a resident of Grant County, appointed by the government of such county.
State panel.--Three members who shall each be residents of the State of Washington, appointed by the Governor of the State of Washington.
Federal panel.-- (i) One Member who shall be a resident of the State of Washington, appointed by the Secretary of Energy.
One member who shall be a resident of the State of Washington, appointed by the Secretary of the Interior.
One member who shall be a resident of the State of Washington, appointed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Voting requirements.--Each issue before the Commission shall be deemed approved only if a majority of each panel has voiced approval.
Nonvoting members.--The Commission should seek the advice and technical expertise from state and Federal agencies, public utility districts, irrigators, academics, biologists, and others, on matters before the Commission.
Terms of office.--The length of the terms of office of the members appointed under paragraph (1) shall not exceed 4 years.
Terms shall be staggered within each panel.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy that may occur prior to the expiration of a member's term shall be filled for the balance of such term by appointment made by the entity which appointed the vacating member.
Establishment of commission authority.--As soon as practicable after the appointment of a majority of the members of the Commission, such members shall be authorized to convene meetings of the Commission and to adopt rules and provisions governing the administration, voting, meeting, terms of service, and finances of the Commission.
The first meeting shall be held no later than 1 year from the date of the establishment of the Commission.
Development of hanford reach protection and management plan.-- (A) The primary duty of the Commission shall be to develop and implement a plan to manage the lands conveyed pursuant to section 5(c) consistent with the purposes of this Act.
From the date the conveyances under section 5(c) are made until such time as a permanent protection and management plan is approved by the Commission, the lands conveyed pursuant to such section shall be managed under an interim management plan approved by the governments of Benton, Franklin, and Grant Counties, which shall be consistent with the purposes of this Act.
Use of federal resources authorized.--The Secretary of the Interior may enter into agreements with the State of Washington and the governments of Benton, Franklin, and Grant Counties to allow the utilization of personnel, and the provision of technical and financial assistance from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to assist the county governments in the administration and management of the lands transferred under this Act.