SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Good People, Good Government Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICERS Sec.
Chief Human Capital Officers.
Chief Human Capital Officers Council.
Report on human capital metrics for the Federal Government.
TITLE II--REFORMS RELATING TO FEDERAL EMPLOYEE CAREER DEVELOPMENT AND BENEFITS Sec.
Increase in Government contribution for Federal employee health insurance.
TITLE I--CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICERS SEC.
CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICERS.
In General.--Part II of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 13 the following: ``CHAPTER 14--CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICERS ``Sec.
Establishment of Chief Human Capital Officers.
Authority and functions of Chief Human Capital Officers.
Establishment of Chief Human Capital Officers ``The head of each Executive agency shall appoint or designate a Chief Human Capital Officer, who shall advise and assist the head of the agency and other agency officials in carrying out the agency's responsibilities with respect to-- ``(1) selecting, developing, and managing a high-quality, productive workforce in accordance with merit system principles; and ``(2) implementing the rules and regulations of the President and the Office of Personnel Management and the laws governing the civil service within the agency.
Authority and functions of Chief Human Capital Officers ``(a) The functions of each Chief Human Capital Officer shall include-- ``(1) setting the workforce development strategy of the agency; ``(2) assessing workforce characteristics and future needs based on the agency's mission; ``(3) reviewing agency training and other human resources policies and programs to assess their effectiveness in promoting the achievement of the agency's mission and goals; ``(4) developing and advocating a culture of continuous learning to attract and retain employees with superior abilities; ``(5) identifying best practices and benchmarking studies; and ``(6) applying methods for measuring intellectual capital and identifying links of that capital to organizational performance and growth.
(1) In order to carry out this chapter, each Chief Human Capital Officer-- ``(A) shall have access to all records, reports, audits, reviews, documents, papers, recommendations, or other material that-- ``(i) are in the possession or under the control of the agency; and ``(ii) relate to programs or operations with respect to which that Chief Human Capital Officer has any duties or responsibilities under this chapter; ``(B) may request such information or assistance, from any Federal, State, or local governmental entity, as the Chief Human Capital Officer considers necessary; and ``(C) may, to the extent and in such amounts as may be provided in advance by appropriations Acts, enter into contracts and other arrangements for studies, analyses, and other services with public agencies and with private persons, and make such payments as may be necessary.
(A) Upon request of a Chief Human Capital Officer for information or assistance under paragraph (1)(B), the head of any Federal entity involved shall, insofar as is practicable and not in contravention of any existing statutory restriction or regulation of the Federal entity from which the information is requested, furnish to such Chief Human Capital Officer, or to an authorized designee, such information or assistance.
Whenever information or assistance requested under paragraph (1)(A) or (1)(B) is, in the judgment of a Chief Human Capital Officer, unreasonably refused or not provided, the Chief Human Capital Officer shall report the circumstances to the head of the establishment involved without delay.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part II of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 13 the following: ``14.
Chief Human Capital Officers.......................... 1401''.
CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICERS COUNCIL.
Establishment.--There is established a Chief Human Capital Officers Council, consisting of-- (1) the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, who shall serve as chairperson of the Council; (2) the Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget; and (3) the Chief Human Capital Officers of Executive departments (as defined by section 101 of title 5, United States Code) and any other members who are designated by the Director of the Office of Personnel Management.
Functions.--The Chief Human Capital Officers Council shall meet periodically to advise and coordinate the activities of the agencies of its members on such matters as modernization of human resources systems, improved quality of human resources information, and legislation affecting human resources operations and organizations.
REPORT ON HUMAN CAPITAL METRICS FOR THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
In General.--The General Accounting Office shall conduct a study and prepare a report on the feasibility and desirability of developing human capital metrics for use by the Federal Government.
Contents.--The report under subsection (a) shall examine the feasibility and desirability of developing a proposed set of metrics that-- (1) may be applied to the Federal Government human capital process; (2) provides for the basic quantitative analysis and measurement for human capital that are necessary for reform efforts; (3) provides for standardized measurements of-- (A) the efficiency of the human capital process of a Federal agency; and (B) the success of a Federal agency in achieving human capital objectives; (4) provides for an accurate comparison among agencies to encourage management focus on human capital issues; and (5) may be used as the basis for regular reports prepared by Chief Human Capital Officers.
Submission of Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the General Accounting Office shall submit the report prepared under this section to-- (1) the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate; and (2) the Committee on Government Reform of the House of Representatives.
In General.--Except as provided under subsection (b), this title shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Report.--Section 103 shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--REFORMS RELATING TO FEDERAL EMPLOYEE CAREER DEVELOPMENT AND BENEFITS SEC.
Training To Accomplish Performance Plans and Strategic Goals.-- Section 4103 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) The head of each agency shall-- ``(1) evaluate each program and plan established, operated, or maintained under subsection (a) with respect to accomplishing specific agency goals and objectives; and ``(2) modify such program or plan to accomplish such goals and objectives.''.
Agency Training Officers.--Section 4103 of title 5, United States Code, is further amended by adding after subsection (c) (as added by subsection (a)) the following: ``(d) The head of each agency shall appoint or designate a training officer, who shall advise and assist the head of the agency in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of that agency head under this chapter.''.
Records Maintenance; Specific Training Programs.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 41 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 4112 the following: ``Sec.
Specific training programs ``In consultation with the Office of Personnel Management, the head of each agency shall establish-- ``(1) a comprehensive program to provide training to employees to develop managers for the agency; and ``(2) a program to provide training to managers on actions, options, and strategies a manager may use relating to employees with unacceptable performance.
Records maintenance ``Each agency shall maintain detailed records of all activities relating to training of employees of such agency.''.
Technical and conforming amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 41 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 4112 the following: ``4113.
Academic Degree Training.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 4107 of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1) The regulations prescribed under section 4118 shall include provisions under which the head of an agency may provide training, or payment or reimbursement for the costs of any training, not otherwise allowable under subsection (a), if such training-- ``(A) contributes significantly to-- ``(i) meeting an identified agency training need; ``(ii) resolving an identified agency staffing problem; or ``(iii) accomplishing goals in the agency's strategic plan (developed under section 306); ``(B) is part of a planned, systematic, and coordinated agency employee development program linked to accomplishing the goals referred to in subparagraph (A)(iii); and ``(C) is administered or conducted by a college or university, or other comparable educational institution, recognized under standards implemented by a national or regional accrediting body, except in a case in which such standards do not exist or the use of such standards would not be appropriate.
In exercising any authority under this subsection, an agency shall, consistent with the merit system principles set forth in paragraphs (2) and (7) of section 2301(b), take into consideration the need to-- ``(A) maintain a balanced workforce in which women, members of racial and ethnic minority groups, and persons with disabilities are appropriately represented in Government service; and ``(B) provide employees effective education and training to improve organizational and individual performance.
No authority under this subsection may be exercised on behalf of any employee occupying or seeking to qualify for appointment to-- ``(A) a position in the Senior Executive Service as a noncareer appointee (as defined by section 3132(a)(7)); or ``(B) a position which is excepted from the competitive service because of its confidential policy-determining, policy- making, or policy-advocating character.''.
Technical and conforming amendments.--Section 4107 of such title 5, as amended by paragraph (1), is further amended-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsections (b) and (c) of this section,'' and inserting ``subsection (b),''; and (B) by striking subsection (c).
Agency Training as Separate Statement in Accountability Reports.--Section 902(a)(6) of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following: ``(E) expenditures on agency training; and''.
In General.--Subpart B of part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting before chapter 31 the following: ``CHAPTER 30--RECRUITMENT AUTHORITY ``Sec.
Appointment of recruitment officers.
Definition ``For the purpose of this chapter, the term `agency' means an Executive agency.
Appointment of recruitment officers ``The head of each agency shall appoint or designate a recruitment officer, who shall advise and assist the head of the agency in carrying out such functions as the agency head may specify relating to the recruitment of qualified candidates for positions within that agency.
Records maintenance ``Each agency shall maintain detailed records of all recruitment activities of that agency.''.
Agency Recruiting as Separate Statement in Accountability Reports.--Section 902(a)(6) of title 31, United States Code (as amended by section 201(e)), is further amended-- (1) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following: ``(F) expenditures on agency recruiting; and''.
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The analysis for part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the item relating to chapter 31 the following: ``30.
(A) The heading for subpart B of part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Subpart B--Recruitment, Employment, and Retention''.
The analysis for part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to subpart B and inserting the following: ``Subpart B--Recruitment, Employment, and Retention''.
INCREASE IN GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEE HEALTH INSURANCE.
Increase in the Maximum Contribution Payable by the Government (Expressed as a Percentage of Governmentwide Weighted Averages).-- Section 8906(b)(1) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``72'' and inserting ``76''.
Increase in the Maximum Percentage of an Enrollee's Actual Subscription Charges Payable by the Government.--Section 8906(b)(2) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``75'' and inserting ``79''.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the first day of the first contract year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.