This Act may be cited as the ``Idaho Land Exchange Act of 1993''.
TARGHEE NATIONAL FOREST BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT.
In General.--The boundaries of the Targhee National Forest are adjusted as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Targhee National Forest Proposed Boundary Changes'' and dated March 1, 1991.
Map and Legal Description.-- (1) Public access.--The map described in subsection (a) and a legal description of the lands depicted on the map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Regional Office of the Intermountain Region of the Forest Service.
Technical corrections.--The map and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary of Agriculture (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') may correct clerical and typographical errors.
Rule of Construction.--For the purpose of section 7 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-9), the boundaries of the Targhee National Forest, as adjusted by this Act, shall be considered to be the boundaries of the Forest as of January 1, 1965.
CLARK FORK LAND EXCHANGE.
Findings.--Congress finds that, over the past 10 years-- (1) the University of Idaho has utilized the Clark Fork Ranger Station within the Kaniksu National Forest as the Clark Fork Field Campus, under a Granger-Thye permit; and (2) the University of Idaho has made substantial improvements in order to maintain and utilize the buildings as a campus facility.
Land Exchange.-- (1) Conveyance by the secretary.-- (A) In general.--In exchange for the conveyance described in paragraph (2) and subject to easements that are considered necessary by the Secretary for public and administrative access and to valid existing rights, the Secretary shall convey to the State of Idaho, acting through the Regents of the University of Idaho, all right, title, and interest of the United States to Parcel A.
Parcel a.--As used in this section, the term ``Parcel A'' means the approximately 35.27 acres comprising the Clark Fork Ranger Station within the Kaniksu National Forest, as depicted on the map entitled ``Clark Fork Land Exchange--Parcel A'' and dated July 1, 1991.
Conveyance by the state of idaho.-- (A) In general.--In exchange for the conveyance described in paragraph (1) and subject to valid existing rights of record acceptable to the Secretary, the State of Idaho shall convey to the Secretary, by general warranty deed in accordance with Department of Justice title standards, all right, title, and interest to Parcel B.
Parcel b.--As used in this section, the term ``Parcel B'' means the approximately 40 acres depicted on the map entitled ``Clark Fork Land Exchange--Parcel B'' and dated July 1, 1991.
Maps and legal descriptions.-- (A) Public access.--The maps described in paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(B) and the legal descriptions of the lands depicted on the maps shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Regional Office of the Northern Region of the Forest Service.
Technical corrections.--The maps and legal descriptions shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors.
Land Valuation.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), if the lands exchanged between the United States and the State of Idaho, as authorized by subsection (b), are not of equal value, the values shall be equalized in accordance with section 206(b) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716(b)).
Exception.--The value of the improvements made by the University of Idaho on Parcel A under the Granger-Thye permit shall be excluded from consideration in a valuation conducted pursuant to paragraph (1).
National Forest Boundary Adjustment.-- (1) In general.--Upon acquisition of Parcel B by the United States, the boundaries of the Kaniksu National Forest shall be adjusted to include Parcel B.
Rule of construction.--For the purpose of section 7 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-9), the boundaries of the Kaniksu National Forest, as adjusted by this Act, shall be considered to be the boundaries of the Forest as of January 1, 1965.