This Act may be cited as the ``Civilian Facilities Closure and Realignment Act of 1993''.
The purpose of this Act is to reduce unnecessary spending in the Federal Government by closing or realigning duplicative, wasteful, or otherwise unnecessary civilian facilities, including facilities that-- (1) have a cost to the Federal Government that is out of proportion to the benefits provided through the facility; or (2) fail to further any legitimate goal or mission of the administering agency.
THE CIVILIAN FACILITIES CLOSURE AND REALIGNMENT COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established an independent commission to be known as the ``Civilian Facilities Closure and Realignment Commission''.
Duties.--The Commission shall carry out the duties specified for it in this Act.
Appointment.--(1)(A) The Commission shall be composed of seven members appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
No later than January 1, 1994, the President shall submit to the Senate the nominations for appointment to the Commission.
In selecting individuals for nominations for appointments to the Commission, the President should consult with-- (A) the Speaker of the House of Representatives concerning the appointment of one member; (B) the majority leader of the Senate concerning the appointment of one member; (C) the minority leader of the House of Representatives concerning the appointment of one member; and (D) the minority leader of the Senate concerning the appointment of one member.
At the time the President nominates individuals for appointment to the Commission, the President shall designate one such individual who shall serve as Chairman of the Commission.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall serve until December 31, 1995, and may only be removed by the President for cause.
Meetings.--(1) Each meeting of the Commission, other than meetings in which classified information is to be discussed, shall be open to the public.
All the proceedings, information, and deliberations of the Commission shall be open, upon request, to any Member or committee of the Congress.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, but the individual appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve only for the unexpired portion of the term for which the individual's predecessor was appointed.
Pay and Travel Expenses.--(1)(A) Each member, other than the Chairman, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
The Chairman shall be paid for each day referred to in subparagraph (A) at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Director of Staff.--(1) The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint a Director who has not served as a Federal employee during the one-year period preceding the date of such appointment.
The Director shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Director, with the approval of the Commission, may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel.
The Director may make such appointments without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for a position above GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Upon request of the Director, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall provide assistance, including the detailing of employees, to the Commission in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Commission.
Consultants and Property.--(1) The Commission may procure by contract, to the extent funds are available, the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
The Commission may lease space and acquire personal property to the extent funds are available.
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such funds as are necessary to carry out its duties under this Act.
Such funds shall remain available until expended.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on December 31, 1995.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND REPORT FOR CIVILIAN FACILITY CLOSURES AND REALIGNMENTS.
Agency Recommendations.--(1) No later than June 1, 1994, each head of an executive agency as defined under section 105 of title 5, United States Code (except for the Secretary of Defense with regard to the Department of Defense) shall submit to the Commission recommendations for closing or realigning civilian facilities administered by such agency.
The recommendations shall include a statement providing rationale for the recommended closure or realignment.
The Office of Management and Budget shall submit to the Commission with each recommendation submitted under paragraph (1), an estimate of the administrative costs and savings that would result from the implementation of such recommendation for the 5 fiscal years following such implementation.
Review and Recommendations by the Commission.--(1) After receiving the recommendations from the heads of executive agencies under subsection (a), the Commission shall conduct public hearings on the recommendations.
Such hearings shall be conducted in Washington, D.C. and in affected regions throughout the United States.
(A) No later than June 1, 1995, the Commission shall submit to the President a report containing-- (i) the Commission's findings and conclusions based on a review and analysis of the recommendations made by the heads of executive agencies and from public hearings; (ii) the Commission's recommendations for closures and realignments of Federal facilities; and (iii) proposed legislation (containing specific language proposed to be enacted) to implement the Commission's recommendations.
Subject to subparagraph (C), in making its recommendations, the Commission may make changes in any of the recommendations made by the heads of executive agencies.
In the case of a change described in subparagraph (D) in the recommendations made by the heads of executive agencies, the Commission may make the change only if the Commission-- (i) publishes a notice of the proposed change in the Federal Register not less than 30 days before submitting its recommendations to the President under subparagraph (A); and (ii) conduct a public hearing on the proposed change.
Subparagraph (C) shall apply to a change by the Commission in the heads of executive agencies' recommendations that would-- (i) add a facility to the list of facilities recommended by the applicable head of an executive agency for closure; (ii) add a facility to the list of facilities recommended by the applicable head of an executive agency for realignment; or (iii) increase the extent of a realignment of a particular facility recommended by the applicable head of an executive agency.
The Commission shall explain and justify in its report submitted to the President under paragraph (2) any recommendation made by the Commission that is different from the recommendations made by the heads of the executive agencies under subsection (a).
The Commission shall submit a copy of such report to the Congress on the same date on which it submits its recommendations to the President under paragraph (2).
After the Commission submits recommendations to the President under this subsection, the Commission shall promptly provide, upon request, to any Member or committee of Congress information used by the Commission in making its recommendations.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall-- (A) assist the Commission, to the extent requested, in the Commission's review and analysis of the recommendations made by the heads of the executive agencies under subsection (c); and (B) submit to the Congress and to the Commission a report containing a detailed analysis of the heads of executive agencies' recommendations and selection process, including an assessment of whether such recommendations comply with the purposes of this Act.
Review by the President.--(1) No later than September 1, 1995, the President shall approve or disapprove the report submitted under subsection (b)(2)(A).
If the report is approved the President shall submit the report to the Congress for legislative action under section 5.
If the President disapproves the report, the President shall report specific issues and objections, including the reasons for any changes recommended in the report, to the Commission and the Congress.
The Commission shall consider any issues or objections raised by the President and may modify the report based on such issues and objections.
No later than 30 days after receipt of the President's disapproval under paragraph (3), the Commission shall submit the final report (as modified if modified) to the Congress for legislative action under section 5.
CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF COMMISSION REPORT.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``implementation bill'' means only a bill which is introduced as provided under subsection (b), and contains the proposed legislation contained in the final report submitted to the Congress under section 4(c) (2) or (4) without modification; and (2) the term ``session day'' means a day that both the Senate and the House of Representatives are in session.
Introduction and Referral.--(1) On the first session day on or immediately following the date on which a final report is submitted to the Congress under section 4(c) (2) or (4), an implementation bill shall be introduced-- (A) in the Senate by the Majority Leader of the Senate, for himself, the Minority Leader of the Senate, or by Members of the Senate designated by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate; and (B) in the House of Representatives by the Majority Leader of the House of Representatives, for himself and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, or by Members of the House of Representatives designated by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
The implementation bill introduced in the Senate shall be referred concurrently to the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and other committees with jurisdiction.
The implementation bill introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred concurrently to the Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives, and other committees with jurisdiction.
Discharge.--If the committee to which an implementation bill is referred has not reported such bill by the end of the 15 session day period beginning on the date of introduction of such bill, such committee shall be, at the end of such period, discharged from further consideration of such bill, and such bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Consideration.--(1) On or after the fifth session day after the date on which the committee to which such a bill is referred has reported, or has been discharged (under subsection (c)) from further consideration of, such a bill, it is in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the implementation bill (but only on the day after the calendar day on which such Member announces to the House concerned the Member's intention to do so).
All points of order against the implementation bill (and against consideration of the implementation bill) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the implementation bill is agreed to, the respective House shall immediately proceed to consideration of the implementation bill without intervening motion, order, or other business, and the implementation bill shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate on the implementation bill, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader or their designees.
An amendment to the implementation bill is not in order.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
A motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the implementation bill is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the implementation bill is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on an implementation bill and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the implementation bill shall occur.
Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to an implementation bill shall be decided without debate.
Consideration by Other House.--(1) If, before the passage by one House of an implementation bill of that House described in subsection (a), that House receives from the other House an implementation bill described in subsection (a), then the following procedures shall apply: (A) The implementation bill of the other House shall not be referred to a committee and may not be considered in the House receiving it except in the case of final passage as provided in subparagraph (B)(ii).
With respect to an implementation bill described in subsection (a) of the House receiving such bill-- (i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no implementation bill had been received from the other House; but (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the implementation bill of the other House, except that if the implementation bill is a bill for the raising of revenue, the vote of final passage shall be upon the implementation bill which originates in the House of Representatives.
Upon disposition of the implementation bill received from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider the implementation bill that originated in the receiving House.
Rules of the Senate and House.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of an implementation bill described in subsection (a), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Any proceeds from the sale of assets of any department or agency resulting from the enactment of an Act under section 5 shall be-- (1) applied to reduce the Federal deficit; and (2) deposited in the Treasury and treated as general receipts.
ADDITIONAL APPROPRIATIONS BASED ON AGENCY SAVINGS.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) in the fiscal year immediately following a recommendation submitted under section 4(a)(1) there should be appropriated to each agency an amount no less than 25 percent of the amount of the estimate of administrative savings determined under section 4(a)(2) applicable to such agency in the 3 fiscal years following the submission of the recommendation; and (2) the appropriated amount described under paragraph (1) should be-- (A) appropriated funds in addition to funds which would otherwise be appropriated to such agency if not for the provisions of this Act; and (B) made available for expenditure at the discretion of the head of such agency to improve such agency's management, efficiency, or productivity.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.