This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Defense-Department of Veterans Affairs Health Resources Access Improvement Act of 2001''.
FINDINGS AND SENSE OF CONGRESS CONCERNING STATUS OF HEALTH RESOURCES SHARING BETWEEN THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS AND THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Federal health resources provided by the people of the United States through tax receipts are by their nature scarce and thus should be effectively and efficiently used.
In 1982, Congress authorized health resources sharing between Department of Defense medical treatment facilities and Department of Veterans Affairs health care facilities in order to allow more effective and efficient use of their health resources.
Health care beneficiaries of the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs, whether active servicemembers, veterans, retirees, or family members of active or retired servicemembers, should have full access to the health care and services that Congress has authorized for them.
The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and the appropriate officials of each of those departments with responsibilities related to health care, have not taken full advantage of the opportunities provided by law to make their respective health resources available to health care beneficiaries of the other department in order to provide improved health care for the whole number of beneficiaries.
After the many years of support and encouragement from Congress, the departments have made little progress in health resource sharing and the intended results of the sharing authority have not been achieved.
Sense of Congress.--Congress urges the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to commit their respective departments to exploring new ways for significantly improving health resources sharing and to building organizational cultures supportive of health resources sharing.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to authorize a demonstration program to advance the principles of health resources sharing consistent with the expressed intent of Congress; and (2) to establish a basis for joint strategic planning of Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs health systems to ensure that available funds are used more effectively and efficiently in order to enhance access to high quality health care for their beneficiaries.
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES INTEGRATION DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall conduct a demonstration project to identify advantages of providing for integrated management of military treatment facilities and VA health care facilities that are located in the same geographic area.
Site Identification.--(1) The Secretaries shall jointly identify five qualifying sites at which to conduct the demonstration project under this section.
For purposes of this section, a qualifying site is an area in the United States in which-- (A) one or more military treatment facilities and one or more VA health care facilities are situated in relative proximity to each other; (B) for which there could be in effect within one year after the date of the enactment of this Act an integrated budget and personnel system for those facilities; and (C) as determined by the Secretaries, both the candidate VA facilities and the candidate military medical treatment facilities have in place information systems to demonstrate the validity of the activities of those facilities so that the Secretaries are confident that they will be able to effectively measure differences in activities at those facilities (including cost, access, quality, patient satisfaction, and other important performance indicators) before the demonstration project, during the period of the demonstration project, and after the end of the demonstration project.
Conduct of Demonstration Project.--At each site at which the demonstration project is conducted, the Secretaries shall provide for a unified management system for the military treatment facilities and VA health care facilities at that site.
To the extent feasible, that unified management system shall include-- (1) a unified budget and financial management system for those facilities; (2) a unified staffing and assignment system for the personnel employed at or assigned to those facilities; and (3) medical information and information technology systems for those facilities that-- (A) are unified across those facilities; (B) maintain interoperability with medical information and information technology systems of the respective departments of those facilities; and (C) incorporate standards of information quality that are at least equivalent to those adopted for the departments at large.
Authority To Waive Certain Administrative Regulations and Policies.--(1) In order to carry out subsection (c), the Secretary of Defense may, in the Secretary's discretion, waive any regulation or administrative policy otherwise applicable to the Department of Defense, and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs may, in the Secretary's discretion, waive any regulation or administrative policy otherwise applicable to the Department of Veterans Affairs, as each Secretary determines necessary for the purposes of the demonstration project.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall jointly submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs and the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the use of the authority provided by paragraph (1).
The report shall include a statement of the numbers and types of requests for waivers of regulations and administrative policies that have been made to that date and the disposition of each.
Use of Title 38 Personnel Authorities.--(1) In order to carry out subsection (c), the Secretary of Defense may apply to civilian personnel of the Department of Defense assigned to or employed at a military treatment facility participating in the demonstration project any of the provisions of subchapters I, III, and IV of chapter 74 of title 38, United States Code, determined appropriate by the Secretary.
For such purposes, any reference in such chapter-- (A) to the ``Secretary'' or the ``Under Secretary for Health'' shall be treated as referring to the Secretary of Defense; and (B) to the ``Veterans Health Administration'' shall be treated as referring to the Department of Defense.
Facilities To Be Deemed Facilities of the Other Department.--A VA health care facility participating in the demonstration project shall be considered to be a military treatment facility for purposes of eligibility for care for beneficiaries of the Department of Defense, and a military treatment facility participating in the demonstration project shall be considered to be a VA health care facility for purposes of eligibility for care for beneficiaries of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Benefits, Copayments, Etc., To Be Equalized.--In the case of facilities of the participating departments selected to participate in the demonstration project, the medical care for which a beneficiary of the Department of Defense or beneficiary of the Department of Veterans Affairs is eligible, and any required copayments or deductibles for such care applicable to the beneficiaries of either participating department, shall to the extent practicable be the same.
Regulations to govern such benefits, copayments, and deductibles shall be prescribed by the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
However, in no case may the benefits for which any beneficiary is eligible be reduced or any copayment or deductible applicable to any beneficiary be increased.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to each of the participating departments to carry out the demonstration project-- (1) $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; and (2) $25,000,000 for each succeeding year during which the demonstration project is in effect.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``military treatment facility'' means a medical facility under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of a military department.
The term ``VA health care facility'' means a facility under the jurisdiction of the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The term ``participating departments'' means the Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Defense.
Termination.--The demonstration project, and the authority provided by this section, shall terminate on September 30, 2006.
JOINT PROSPECTUS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF NEW MEDICAL FACILITY.
Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a prospectus for construction of a new joint medical facility for their respective departments.
The location for the new joint facility shall be selected jointly by the two Secretaries and shall be-- (1) at a location where both a current Department of Veterans Affairs medical center and a current Department of Defense military treatment facility are in need of replacement and the new facility can be a replacement for both; or (B) situated so as to provide improved access to eligible veterans and eligible military beneficiaries in a location where there is only one Department of Veterans Affairs medical center or military medical treatment facility serving one of those beneficiary populations.
Findings.--Congress finds that integration or consolidation of graduate medical education programs of the Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs would-- (1) lead to increased efficiencies by eliminating duplicative administrative processes and streamlining and consolidating joint training programs; (2) allow increased clinical training sites in Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs accredited programs; and (3) make Department of Veterans Affairs facilities available to military reserve health care professionals education programs.
Comprehensive Review.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall enter into a joint contract for the conduct by an organization outside the Government of an independent, comprehensive review to identify opportunities for joint funding for an integrated graduate medical education program at facilities of their respective departments where such an integrated program is feasible.
Funding.--Funds for the contract under subsection (b) shall be provided in equal shares by the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Common Affiliation Agreement.--Based on the results of the review under subsection (b), the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall develop and implement a common affiliation agreement or contract for graduate medical education purposes at locations where the demonstration project under section 3 is carried out.
REQUIRED SHARING OF HEALTH CARE RESOURCES.
Required Sharing.--Section 8111(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``may enter into'' and inserting ``shall enter into''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1104 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall''.
Repeal of VA Bed Limits.--(1) Section 8110(a)(1) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``at not more than 125,000 and not less than 100,000''; (B) in the third sentence, by striking ``shall operate and maintain a total of not less than 90,000 hospital beds and nursing home beds and''; and (C) in the fourth sentence, by striking ``to enable the Department to operate and maintain a total of not less than 90,000 hospital and nursing home beds in accordance with this paragraph and''.
Section 8111(a) of such title is amended by striking ``, except that'' and all that follows through ``of the Government'' before the period at the end.
Interim Report.--Not later than February 1, 2003, the Secretary of Defense and Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs and the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a joint interim report on the conduct of programs under this Act through the end of the preceding fiscal year.
The Secretaries shall include in the report a description of the measures taken, or planned to be taken, to implement the demonstration project under section 3 and the other provisions of this Act and any cost savings anticipated at facilities participating in the demonstration project.
Final Report.--Not later than February 1, 2006, the Secretary of Defense and Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the committees of Congress specified in subsection (a) a joint report on the conduct of programs under this Act through the end of the preceding fiscal year.
The Secretaries shall include in the report the following: (1) A description of activities under this Act.
Identification of cost savings, access improvements, and other efficiencies realized under the demonstration project carried out under section 3.
Analysis of measurable changes achieved by the demonstration project, including the use of data sources and performance indicators described in section 3(b)(2)(C).
Transmittal of the report resulting from the review required by section 5(b), accompanied by appropriate recommendations by the Under Secretary of Veterans Affairs for Health and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs.
Any recommendations of the two Secretaries for expansion of the demonstration project to additional facilities or for modification to any of the authorities for the demonstration project provided in section 3.