EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN STATE AND LOCAL POLITICAL COMMITTEES FROM NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
Exemption From Notification Requirements.--Paragraph (5) of section 527(i) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to organizations must notify Secretary that they are section 527 organizations) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(C) which is a political committee of a State or local candidate or which is a State or local committee of a political party.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the amendments made by Public Law 106- 230.
EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN STATE AND LOCAL POLITICAL COMMITTEES FROM REPORTING AND ANNUAL RETURN REQUIREMENTS.
In General.--Section 527(j)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to coordination with other requirements) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by redesignating subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E) as subparagraphs (D), (E), and (F), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph: ``(C) to any organization which is an exempt State or local political organization,''.
Exempt State or Local Political Organization.--Subsection (e) of section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to other definitions) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Exempt state or local political organization.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `exempt State or local political organization' means a political organization which-- ``(i) does not engage in any exempt function other than solely for the purposes of influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any State or local public office or office in a State or local political organization, ``(ii) is subject to State requirements to report (and it so reports)-- ``(I) information regarding each separate expenditure from and contribution to, such organization, and ``(II) information regarding the person who makes such contribution or receives such expenditure, which would otherwise be required to be reported under this section, and ``(iii) with respect to which the reports referred to in clause (ii) are made public by the agency with which such reports are filed and are publicly available for inspection in a manner similar to that required by section 6104(d)(1).
Certain failures disregarded.--An organization shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of subparagraph (A)(ii) solely by reason of 1 or more of the following: ``(i) The minimum amount of any expenditure or contribution required to be reported under State law is not more than $300 greater than the minimum amount required to be reported under subsection (j).
The State law does not require the organization to identify 1 or more of the following: ``(I) The employer of any person who makes contributions to the organization.
The occupation of any person who makes contributions to the organization.
The employer of any person who receives expenditures from the organization.
The occupation of any person who receives expenditures from the organization.
The purpose of any expenditure of the organization.
The organization makes de minimis errors in complying with State law requirements as long as the organization corrects the errors within a reasonable period after being notified of such errors.
Participation of federal candidate or office holder.--The term `exempt State or local political organization' shall not include any organization otherwise described in subparagraph (A) if a candidate for nomination or election to Federal public office or an individual who holds such office-- ``(i) controls or materially participates in the direction of the organization, ``(ii) solicits contributions to the organization, or ``(iii) directs, in whole or in part, disbursements by the organization.''.
Annual Return Requirements.-- (1) Income tax returns required only for political organization taxable income.--Paragraph (6) of section 6012(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to persons required to make returns of income) is amended by striking ``or which has'' and all that follows through ``section)''.
Information returns.--Subsection (g) of section 6033 of such Code (relating to returns required by political organizations) is amended-- (A) by striking ``political organization required to file a return under section 6012(a)(6)'' and inserting ``political organization (with the meaning of section 527, other than a political committee of a State or local candidate) which has gross receipts of $25,000 or more for the taxable year'', and (B) by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``In the case of an exempt State or local political organization (as defined in section 527(e)(5)), the preceding sentence shall be applied by substituting `$100,000' for `$25,000'.''.
Authorization to modify information returns.--The Secretary shall review for possible modification the annual return required under section 6033(g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect as if included in the amendments made by Public Law 106-230.
NOTIFICATION OF INTERACTION OF REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Federal Election Commission, shall publicize-- (1) the effect of the amendments made by this Act, and (2) the interaction of requirements to file a notification or report under section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and reports under the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
Information.--Information provided under subsection (a) shall be included in any appropriate form, instruction, notice, or other guidance issued to the public by the Secretary of the Treasury or the Federal Election Commission regarding reporting requirements of political organizations (as defined in section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) or reporting requirements under the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
Waiver of Filing Penalties.--Section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k) Authority To Waive.--The Secretary may waive all or any portion of the-- ``(1) tax assessed on an organization by reason of the failure of the organization to give notice under subsection (i), or ``(2) penalty imposed under subsection (j) for a failure to file a report, on a showing that such failure was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to any tax assessed or penalty imposed after June 30, 2000.
TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS TO SECTION 527 ORGANIZATION DISCLOSURE PROVISIONS.
Unsegregated Funds Not To Avoid Tax.--Paragraph (4) of section 527(i) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to failure to notify) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `exempt function income' means any amount described in a subparagraph of subsection (c)(3), whether or not segregated for use for an exempt function.''.
Procedures for Assessment and Collection of Penalty.--Paragraph (1) of section 527(j) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to required disclosure of expenditures and contributions) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For purposes of subtitle F, the penalty imposed by this paragraph shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as penalties imposed by section 6652(c).''.
Duplicate Written Filings Not Required.-- (1) Subparagraph (A) of section 527(i)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``, electronically and in writing,'' and inserting ``electronically''.
Subsection (i) of section 527 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Electronic filing.--The Secretary shall develop procedures for submission in electronic form of notices required to be filed under this subsection and reports required to be filed under subsection (j).''.
Application of Fraud Penalty.--Section 7207 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to fraudulent returns, statements, and other documents) is amended by striking ``pursuant to subsection (b) of section 6047 or pursuant to subsection (d) of section 6104'' and inserting ``pursuant to section 6047(b), section 6104(d), or subsection (i) or (j) of section 527''.
Contents of Report.--Section 527(j)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to contents of report) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``, date, and purpose'' after ``The amount'' in subparagraph (A), and (2) by inserting ``and date'' after ``the amount'' in subparagraph (B).
Contents of Notice.--Section 527(i)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to contents of notice) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F), and by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) whether the organization intends to claim an exemption from the requirements of subsection (j) or section 6033, and''.
Timing of Notices.--Section 527(i)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to time to give notice) is amended by inserting ``or, in the case of any material change in the information required under paragraph (3), not later than 30 days after such material change'' after ``established''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Subsections (a) and (b).--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply to failures occurring on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Subsection (c).--The amendments made by subsection (c) shall take effect as if included in the amendments made by Public Law 106-230.
Subsections (d), (e), and (f).--The amendments made by subsections (d), (e), and (f) shall apply to reports or notices filed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Subsection (g).--The amendments made by subsection (g) shall apply to material changes on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.