This Act may be cited as the ``International Malaria Control Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The World Health Organization estimates that there are 300,000,000 to 500,000,000 cases of malaria each year.
According to the World Health Organization, more than 1,000,000 persons are estimated to die due to malaria each year.
According to the National Institutes of Health, about 40 percent of the world's population is at risk of becoming infected.
About half of those who die each year from malaria are children under 9 years of age.
Malaria kills one child each 30 seconds.
Although malaria is a public health problem in more than 90 countries, more than 90 percent of all malaria cases are in sub-Saharan Africa.
In addition to Africa, large areas of Central and South America, Haiti and the Dominican Republic, the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East are high risk malaria areas.
These high risk areas represent many of the world's poorest nations.
Malaria is particularly dangerous during pregnancy.
The disease causes severe anemia and is a major factor contributing to maternal deaths in malaria endemic regions.
Pregnant mothers who are HIV-positive and have malaria are more likely to pass on HIV to their children.
``Airport malaria'', the importing of malaria by international aircraft and other conveyances, is becoming more common as is the spread of malaria by international travelers; the United Kingdom reported 2,364 cases of malaria in 1997, all of them imported by travelers.
In the United States, of the 1,400 cases of malaria reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 1998, the vast majority were imported.
Between 1970 and 1997, the malaria infection rate in the United States increased by about 40 percent.
Malaria is caused by a single-cell parasite that is spread to humans by mosquitoes.
No vaccine is available and treatment is hampered by development of drug-resistant parasites and insecticide- resistant mosquitoes.
ASSISTANCE FOR MALARIA PREVENTION, TREATMENT, CONTROL, AND ELIMINATION.
Findings.--Congress recognizes the growing international problem of malaria and the impact of this epidemic on many nations, particularly in the nations of sub-Saharan Africa.
Congress further recognizes the negative interaction among the epidemics of malaria, HIV and tuberculosis in many nations, particularly in the nations of sub- Saharan Africa.
Congress directs the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development to undertake activities designed to control malaria in recipient countries by-- (1) coordinating with appropriate Federal officials and appropriate organizations to develop and implement, in partnership with recipient nations, a comprehensive malaria prevention and control program; and (2) coordinating, consistent with clause (i), malaria prevention and control activities with efforts by recipient nations to prevent and control HIV and tuberculosis.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 and 2002 to carry out this section.
In General.--In providing the assistance and carrying out the activities provided for under this Act, the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development should work in coordination with appropriate Federal officials.
Purpose.--The purpose of such interagency coordination and consultation is to help ensure that the financial assistance provided by the United States is utilized in a manner that advances, to the greatest extent possible, the public health of recipient countries.
Provision of Information to Recipient Countries.--The Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development shall take appropriate steps to provide recipient countries with information concerning the development of vaccines and therapeutic agents for, HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis.
Information Specified.--The Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development should provide to appropriate officials in recipient countries information concerning participation in, and the results of, clinical trials conducted for vaccines and therapeutic agents for HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis.
Consideration of Interaction Among Epidemics.--The Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development should consider the interaction among the epidemics of HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis as the United States provides financial and technical assistance to recipient countries under this Act.