This Act may be cited as the ``Guam and the Northern Marianas Commemorative Coin Act''.
Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 1,500,000 one dollar coins which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of the coins authorized under subsection (a) shall be emblematic of the heroism of the American forces that liberated Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands in World War II.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the years ``1944-1994'', and inscriptions of the words ``Mariana Islands'', ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--The coins issued under this Act shall be considered numismatic items for purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this title from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act.
The design for each coin authorized under this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Delegate from Guam to Congress and the Resident Representative of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the face value, plus the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing and shipping), and the surcharge provided for in subsection (d).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales at a reasonable account.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins issued under this Act prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharge Required.--All sales of coins issued under this Act shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
The surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of the coins issued under this Act shall be made available or paid to the Secretary of the Interior for the following purposes: (1) Amounts to be made available for the construction of a visitors center and museum on guam.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall make available to the Secretary of the Interior all funds from such surcharges as may be necessary to construct a visitors center and museum at the War in the Pacific National Historical Park on Guam.
Amounts to be made available for the construction of a visitors center and museum on saipan.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall make available to the Secretary of the Interior all funds from such surcharges as may be necessary to construct a visitors center and museum at the American Memorial Park on Saipan.
ISSUANCE OF THE COINS.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary shall make every effort to issue the coins under this Act by July 21, 1994.
The coins shall be made available for issue during the 1-year period beginning on the date the coins are first issued.
Proof and Uncirculated Coins.--The coins authorized under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services required to carry out this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of the coins referred to in section 2 shall not result in any net cost to the Federal Government.
Payment for Coins.--No coin shall be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for such coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Government.