In this Act: (1) Agreement.--The term ``Agreement'' means the agreement entitled ``Agreement to Affirm Boundary Between Pueblo of Santa Clara and Pueblo of San Ildefonso Aboriginal Lands Within Garcia Canyon Tract'', entered into by the Governors on December 20, 2000.
Boundary line.--The term ``boundary line'' means the boundary line established under section 4(a).
Governors.--The term ``Governors'' means-- (A) the Governor of the Pueblo of Santa Clara, New Mexico; and (B) the Governor of the Pueblo of San Ildefonso, New Mexico.
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b).
Pueblos.--The term ``Pueblos'' means-- (A) the Pueblo of Santa Clara, New Mexico; and (B) the Pueblo of San Ildefonso, New Mexico.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Trust land.--The term ``trust land'' means the land held by the United States in trust under section 2(a) or 3(a).
TRUST FOR THE PUEBLO OF SANTA CLARA, NEW MEXICO.
In General.--All right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the land described in subsection (b), including improvements on, appurtenances to, and mineral rights (including rights to oil and gas) to the land, shall be held by the United States in trust for the Pueblo of Santa Clara, New Mexico.
Description of Land.--The land referred to in subsection (a) consists of approximately 2,484 acres of Bureau of Land Management land located in Rio Arriba County, New Mexico, and more particularly described as-- (1) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
22, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is located north of the boundary line; (2) the southern half of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
23, New Mexico Principal Meridian; (3) the southern half of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
24, New Mexico Principal Meridian; (4) T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
25, excluding the 5-acre tract in the southeast quarter owned by the Pueblo of San Ildefonso; (5) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
26, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is located north and east of the boundary line; (6) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
27, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is located north of the boundary line; (7) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 8 E., Sec.
19, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is not included in the Santa Clara Pueblo Grant or the Santa Clara Indian Reservation; and (8) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 8 E., Sec.
30, that is not included in the Santa Clara Pueblo Grant or the San Ildefonso Grant.
TRUST FOR THE PUEBLO OF SAN ILDEFONSO, NEW MEXICO.
In General.--All right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the land described in subsection (b), including improvements on, appurtenances to, and mineral rights (including rights to oil and gas) to the land, shall be held by the United States in trust for the Pueblo of San Ildefonso, New Mexico.
Description of Land.--The land referred to in subsection (a) consists of approximately 2,000 acres of Bureau of Land Management land located in Rio Arriba County and Santa Fe County in the State of New Mexico, and more particularly described as-- (1) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
22, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is located south of the boundary line; (2) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
26, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is located south and west of the boundary line; (3) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
27, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is located south of the boundary line; (4) T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
34, New Mexico Principal Meridian; and (5) the portion of T. 20 N., R. 7 E., Sec.
35, New Mexico Principal Meridian, that is not included in the San Ildefonso Pueblo Grant.
SURVEY AND LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS.
Survey.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Office of Cadastral Survey of the Bureau of Land Management shall, in accordance with the Agreement, complete a survey of the boundary line established under the Agreement for the purpose of establishing, in accordance with sections 2(b) and 3(b), the boundaries of the trust land.
Legal Descriptions.-- (1) Publication.--On approval by the Governors of the survey completed under subsection (a), the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register-- (A) a legal description of the boundary line; and (B) legal descriptions of the trust land.
Technical corrections.--Before the date on which the legal descriptions are published under paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary may correct any technical errors in the descriptions of the trust land provided in sections 2(b) and 3(b) to ensure that the descriptions are consistent with the terms of the Agreement.
Effect.--Beginning on the date on which the legal descriptions are published under paragraph (1)(B), the legal descriptions shall be the official legal descriptions of the trust land.
ADMINISTRATION OF TRUST LAND.
In General.--Beginning on the date of enactment of this Act-- (1) the land held in trust under section 2(a) shall be declared to be a part of the Santa Clara Indian Reservation; and (2) the land held in trust under section 3(a) shall be declared to be a part of the San Ildefonso Indian Reservation.
Applicable Law.-- (1) In general.--The trust land shall be administered in accordance with any law (including regulations) or court order generally applicable to property held in trust by the United States for Indian tribes.
Pueblo lands act.--The following shall be subject to section 17 of the Act of June 7, 1924 (commonly known as the ``Pueblo Lands Act'') (25 United States Code 331 note): (A) The trust land.
Any land owned as of the date of enactment of this Act or acquired after the date of enactment of this Act by the Pueblo of Santa Clara in the Santa Clara Pueblo Grant.
Any land owned as of the date of enactment of this Act or acquired after the date of enactment of this Act by the Pueblo of San Ildefonso in the San Ildefonso Pueblo Grant.
Use of Trust Land.-- (1) In general.--Subject to the criteria developed under paragraph (2), the trust land may be used only for-- (A) traditional and customary uses; or (B) stewardship conservation for the benefit of the Pueblo for which the trust land is held in trust.
Criteria.--The Secretary shall work with the Pueblos to develop appropriate criteria for using the trust land in a manner that preserves the trust land for traditional and customary uses or stewardship conservation.
Limitation.--Beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the trust land shall not be used for any new commercial developments.
Nothing in this Act-- (1) affects any valid right-of-way, lease, permit, mining claim, grazing permit, water right, or other right or interest of a person or entity (other than the United States) that is-- (A) in or to the trust land; and (B) in existence before the date of enactment of this Act; (2) enlarges, impairs, or otherwise affects a right or claim of the Pueblos to any land or interest in land that is-- (A) based on Aboriginal or Indian title; and (B) in existence before the date of enactment of this Act; (3) constitutes an express or implied reservation of water or water right with respect to the trust land; or (4) affects any water right of the Pueblos in existence before the date of enactment of this Act.