This Act may be cited as the ``Rescue and Emergency Services Prepared for Our Nation's Defense Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Many nations currently possess weapons of mass destruction and related materials and technologies, and such weapons are increasingly available to a variety of sources through legitimate and illegitimate means.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is growing, and will likely continue despite the best efforts of the international community to limit their flow.
The increased availability, relative affordability, and ease of use of weapons of mass destruction may make the use of such weapons an increasingly attractive option to potential adversaries who are not otherwise capable of countering United States military superiority.
On November 12, 1997, President Clinton issued an Executive Order stating that ``the proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons (``weapons of mass destruction'') and the means of delivering such weapons constitutes an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States'' and declaring a national emergency to deal with that threat.
The Quadrennial Defense Review concluded that the threat or use of weapons of mass destruction is a likely condition of future warfare and poses a potential threat to the United States.
The United States lacks adequate preparedness at the Federal, State, and local levels to respond to a potential attack on the United States involving weapons of mass destruction.
The United States has initiated an effort to enhance the capability of Federal, State, and local governments as well as local emergency response personnel to prevent and respond to a domestic terrorist incident involving weapons of mass destruction.
More than 40 Federal departments, agencies, and bureaus are involved in combating terrorism, and many, including the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice, the Department of Energy, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency, are executing programs to provide civilian personnel at the Federal, State, and local levels with training and assistance to prevent and respond to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction.
The Secretary of Defense has called for the establishment of 10 Rapid Assessment and Initial Detection elements, composed of 22 National Guard personnel, to provide timely regional assistance to local emergency responders during an incident involving chemical or biological weapons of mass destruction.
The Department of Energy has established a Nuclear Emergency Response Team which is available to respond to incidents involving nuclear or radiological emergencies.
The Department of Defense has begun to implement a program to train local emergency responders in major cities throughout the United States to prevent and respond to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction.
The Department of Justice has initiated a program to direct and coordinate training and exercises to enhance local emergency response to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction, and may be establishing a National Center for Domestic Preparedness.
Federal agency initiatives to enhance domestic preparedness to respond to an incident involving weapons of mass destruction are hampered by incomplete interagency coordination and overlapping jurisdiction of agency missions.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency, originally designated to lead the coordinated Federal effort to enhance preparedness to respond to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction, has withdrawn from that role, and a successor lead agency has not yet been determined.
In order to ensure effective local response capabilities to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction, the Federal Government, in addition to providing training, must concurrently address the need for-- (A) compatible communications capabilities for all Federal, State, and local emergency responders, which often use different radio systems and operate on different radio frequencies; (B) adequate equipment necessary for response to an incident involving weapons of mass destruction, and a means to ensure that financially lacking localities have access to such equipment; (C) local and regional preplanning efforts to ensure the effective execution of emergency response in the event of an incident involving a weapon of mass destruction; and (D) increased planning and training to prepare for emergency response capabilities in port areas and littoral waters.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a commission to be known as the ``Commission to Assess Weapons of Mass Destruction Domestic Response Capabilities''.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members, appointed as follows: (1) 4 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (2) 4 members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; (3) 2 members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; (4) 2 members appointed by the minority leader of the Senate; (5) 3 members appointed by the President.
Qualifications.--Members shall be appointed from among individuals with knowledge and expertise in emergency response matters.
Deadline for Appointments.--Appointments shall be made not later than the date that is 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Initial Meeting.--The Commission shall conduct its first meeting not later than the date that is 30 days after the date that appointments to the Commission have been made.
Chairman.--A Chairman of the Commission shall be elected by a majority of the members.
The Commission shall-- (1) assess Federal agency efforts to enhance domestic preparedness for incidents involving weapons of mass destruction; (2) assess the progress of Federal training programs for local emergency responses to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction; (3) assess deficiencies in training programs for responses to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction, including a review of unfunded communications, equipment, and preplanning and maritime region needs; (4) recommend strategies for ensuring effective coordination with respect to Federal agency weapons of mass destruction response efforts, and for ensuring fully effective local response capabilities for weapons of mass destruction incidents; and (5) assess the appropriate role of State and local governments in funding effective local response capabilities.
Not later than the date that is 6 months after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit a report to Congress on its findings under section 4 and recommendations for improving Federal, State, and local domestic emergency preparedness to respond to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction.
Hearings.--The Commission or, at its direction, any panel or member of the Commission, may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold such hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, receive evidence, and administer oaths to the extent that the Commission or any panel member considers advisable.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information that the Commission considers necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of a majority of the members.
Quorum.--Eight members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum other than for the purpose of holding hearings.
Commission.--The Commission may establish panels composed of less than full membership of the Commission for the purpose of carrying out the Commission's duties.
The actions of each such panel shall be subject to the review and control of the Commission.
Any findings and determinations made by such panel shall not be considered the findings and determinations of the Commission unless approved by the Commission.
Authority of Individuals To Act for Commission.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this Act.
Pay of Members.--Members of the Commission shall serve without pay by reason of their work on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.--(1) The Commission may, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, appoint a staff director and such additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The Commission may fix the pay of the staff director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay fixed under this paragraph for the staff director may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title and the rate of pay for other personnel may not exceed the maximum rate payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Detail of Government Employees.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a nonreimbursable basis, any personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Postal and Printing Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails and obtain printing and binding services in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Miscellaneous Administrative and Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
The Commission shall terminate not later than 60 days after the date that the Commission submits its report under section 5.