This Act may be cited as the ``Early Learning and Opportunity State Grants Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The first 3 years of life are a critical period of brain development, intellectual growth, and emotional, social, affective, and moral development, that help determine the health and productivity of a child in later life.
Scientific research shows that how individuals function from preschool through adolescence and adulthood hinges to a significant extent on the experiences children have in their first 3 years of life.
One in 3 victims of physical abuse is a baby less than 1 year of age.
In 1993 the National Educational Goals Panel reported that nearly half of infants in the United States do not have what they need to grow and thrive.
High-quality care from a parent or other adult is necessary to facilitate growth and development.
More than 50 percent of mothers with children less than 1 year of age are working outside the home.
Five million children under age 3 are in the care of other adults while their parents work outside the home.
Parents of very young children have few child care service options.
Many cannot afford to stay home with their children, or to pay for safe, high-quality developmental child care services.
Statewide and multistate studies have found that less than 20 percent of child care services for very young children is of good quality; nearly 50 percent is of such substandard quality that it adversely affects such children's development and may put their health and safety at risk.
In 1998 the average child care worker earned $14,820, making it difficult to recruit and retain qualified caregivers for infants and toddlers.
Families with children less than 3 years of age are the single largest group living in poverty.
Twenty-five percent of such children, 3,000,000 children, are living below the poverty line, are at greater risk for malnutrition, poor health, and maltreatment, and are less likely to receive the care they need from parents or other child care service providers to grow and develop normally.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to improve the quality, and to increase the availability, of child care services for children less than 3 years of age, (2) to improve the affordability of child care services available to such children, (3) to improve the quality, and to increase the availability, of services to assist families to nurture such children, and (4) to improve the coordination and effectiveness of existing programs that provide such services to such children and their families.
Authority To Make Grants.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may make grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible States to improve the quality, and to increase the availability, of child care services for very young children and of support services for the families of such children.
Priority.--For the purpose of making grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to eligible States to the extent that such State, as demonstrated in the application for a grant under such subsection-- (1) will minimize the administrative costs to be incurred to carry out the plan contained in such application, (2) has coordinated the activities described in the plan contained in such application, with providers of child care services for children between 3 and 6 years of age, and with providers of family support services for families of such children, located in the State, (3) has taken substantial legislative or executive action to reduce the duplication of, and barriers to providing, such services, and (4) during the fiscal year for which such grant is received, will reimburse such providers for such services at rates that reflect-- (A) the higher costs incurred by such providers who are accredited by national association that provides accreditation for providers of the respective types of such services and that is recognized by the Secretary, and (B) the higher costs incurred by such providers to provide child care services to children who are very young children.
To be eligible to receive a grant under section 4, a State shall submit to the Secretary an application that satisfies the following requirements: (1) Such application is prepared by the State after consultation with providers of child care services for very young children, and with providers of family support services for families of such children, located in the State.
Such application contains a plan that describes how the State will expend such grant to do 1 or more of the following: (A) To improve quality of child care services.
To improve licensing standards applicable to providers of child care services for very young children in the State by specifying matters that apply to providing child care services, such as child-to- staff ratios, group size, staff preparation and qualifications, ongoing staff training, health and safety, and linkages to parents and community services.
To improve enforcement of licensing standards applicable to providers of child care services for care for very young children in the State.
To improve compensation for caregivers of such child care services.
To support ongoing and more advanced training for such caregivers (including training to provide child care services for children with special needs) and to create incentives for individuals to obtain, and child care centers to employ individuals who have obtained, more advanced training in providing child care services.
To improve accessibility to and quality of child care services for very young children, including improving the quality of, and expanding the availability of, resource and referral services and transportation services for families with very young children.
To expand the supply and quality of infant care, including creating and supporting family child care networks, recruiting family child care providers, and expanding slots for infants and toddlers in other child care settings.
To support child care networks that can provide on-going support for child care providers of infants and toddlers.
To provide resource and referral services to enable child care providers to hire infant and toddler specialists.
To improve affordability of child care services for very young children.
To improve and expand support services to families with very young children.
To improve coordination of existing Federal and State programs that provide support services for families with very young children.
Such application shall contain assurances that-- (i) not more than 70 percent of the cost of carrying out the plan contained in such application will be paid with such grant together with any other available Federal funds, (ii) such grant will be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal funds otherwise available to provide child care services for very young children and support services for the families of such children, (iii) the State will expend in cash or in kind, from State resources (including private contributions and excluding resources available to local governmental entities) an amount not less than 30 percent of the amount of such grant, and (iv) such grant will be administered by the lead agency that is designated by the State under section 658D of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858b).
Such application shall contain such other information and assurances as the Secretary may require by rule.
MODEL TRAINING PROGRAM FOR EMPLOYEES OF CHILD CARE PROVIDERS.
The Secretary shall-- (1) by adapting the requirements in effect under section 1792(a) of title 10, United States Code, develop a voluntary model training program applicable to individuals who are employed as caregivers for infants and toddlers by providers of child care services, (2) make available to providers of child care services and Head Start agencies the model training code developed under paragraph (1), and (3) provide to such agencies and such providers technical assistance to implement such program.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Caregiver.--The term ``caregiver'' means an individual who provides a service directly to a child on a person-to- person basis.
Family support services.--The term ``family support services'' means community-based activities designed to promote parental competencies and behaviors that will increase the ability of families to successfully nurture their children.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Very young children.--The term ``very young children'' means children who are less than 3 years of age.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, $750,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $1,000,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2003, 2004, and 2005.