This Act may be cited as the ``Prevention of Truancy Act of 1997''.
Congress finds that-- (1) in 1994, courts in the United States formally processed 36,400 truancy cases, representing a 35 percent increase since 1990, and a 67 percent increase since 1985, in the formal processing of truancy cases; (2) in 1993, among individuals aged 16 through 24, approximately 3,400,000,000 (11 percent of all individuals in this age group) had not completed high school and were not enrolled in school; (3) the economic and social costs of providing for the increasing population of youth who are at risk of leaving or who have left the educational mainstream are an enormous drain on the resources of Federal, State, and local governments and the private sector; (4) truancy is the first indicator that a young person is giving up and losing his or her way; (5) students who become truant and eventually drop out of school put themselves at a long-term disadvantage in becoming productive citizens; (6) high school drop-outs are two and one-half times more likely to be on welfare than high school graduates; (7) high school drop-outs are almost twice as likely to be unemployed as high school graduates; (8) in 1993, 17 percent of youth under age 18 who entered adult prisons had not completed grade school, one-fourth of such youth had completed 10th grade, and 2 percent of such youth had a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent; (9) truancy contributes to increased use of the foster care and court systems; (10) truancy is a gateway to crime, and high rates of truancy are linked to high daytime burglary rates and high vandalism rates; (11) communities that have instituted truancy prevention programs have seen daytime burglary rates decline by as much as 75 percent; and (12) truancy prevention and reduction programs result in significant increases in school attendance.
The goals of this Act are to prevent and reduce truancy.
In this Act: (1) Elementary school; secondary school.--The terms ``elementary school'' and ``secondary school'' have the meanings given the terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Parent.--The term ``parent'' means the biological parent, adoptive parent, or legal guardian, of a child.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUANCY PREVENTION AND CRIME CONTROL DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.
Demonstrations Authorized.--The Secretary shall make grants to partnerships consisting of an elementary school or secondary school, a local law enforcement agency, and a social service and youth serving organization, for the purpose of developing, implementing, or operating projects for the prevention or reduction of truancy.
Use of Funds.--Grant funds under this section may be used for programs that prevent or reduce truancy, such as programs that use police officers or patrol officers to pick up truant students, return the students to school, or take the students to centers for assessment.
Application and Selection.--Each partnership desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Each such application shall-- (1) contain a description of the proposed truancy prevention or reduction project to be established or improved with funds provided under this Act; (2) specify the methods to be used to involve parents in truancy prevention or reduction activities; (3) specify the types of sanctions that students will face for engaging in truant behavior; (4) specify the incentives that will be used for parental responsibility; (5) specify the types of initiatives, if any, that schools will develop to combat the underlying causes of truancy; and (6) specify the linkages that will be made with local law enforcement agencies.
Selection Criteria.--The Secretary shall give priority in awarding grants under this Act to partnerships-- (1) serving areas with concentrations of poverty, including urban and rural areas; and (2) that meet any other criteria that the Secretary determines will contribute to the achievement of the goals of this Act.
Project Evaluations.-- (1) In general.--Each partnership receiving a grant under this section shall-- (A) provide for the evaluation of the project assisted under this Act, which evaluation shall meet such conditions and standards as the Secretary may require; and (B) submit to the Secretary reports, at such times, in such formats, and containing such information, as the Secretary may require.
Required information.--A report submitted under subparagraph (1)(B) shall include information on and analysis of the effect of the project with respect to-- (A) prevention of or reduction in truancy; (B) increased school attendance; and (C) reduction in juvenile crime.
Reports to Congress.--The Secretary, on the basis of the reports received under subsection (a), shall submit interim reports, and, not later than March 1, 2002, submit a final report, to Congress.
Each report submitted under this subsection shall contain an assessment of the effectiveness of the projects assisted under this Act, and any recommendations for legislative action that the Secretary considers appropriate.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act-- (1) $80,000,000 for fiscal year 1998; and (2) such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1999, 2000, and 2001.
Availability.--Funds appropriated under subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.