This Act may be cited as the ``Guaranteeing a United and Resolute Defense Act of 2003'' or the ``GUARD Act of 2003''.
FUNDING ASSISTANCE FOR HOMELAND SECURITY ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL GUARD.
In General.--Chapter 1 of title 32, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 112 the following new section: ``Sec.
Homeland security activities ``(a) Funding Assistance.--(1) The Secretary of Defense may provide funds to the Governor of a State who submits to the Secretary a homeland security activities plan satisfying the requirements of subsection (b).
To be eligible for assistance under this subsection, a State shall have a homeland security activities plan in effect.
Any funds provided to a State under this subsection shall be used for the following: ``(A) Pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence, gratuities, travel, and related expenses, as authorized by State law, of personnel of the National Guard of the State for service performed for the purpose of homeland security while not in Federal service.
Operation and maintenance of the equipment and facilities of the National Guard of the State that are used for the purpose of homeland security.
Procurement of services and the purchase or leasing of equipment for the National Guard of the State for use for the purpose of homeland security.
Homeland Security Activities Plan Requirements.--The homeland security activities plan of a State-- ``(1) shall specify how personnel and equipment of the National Guard of the State are to be used in homeland security activities and include a detailed explanation of the reasons why the National Guard should be used for the specified activities; ``(2) shall describe in detail how any available National Guard training facilities, including any distance learning programs and projects, are to be used; ``(3) shall include the Governor's certification that the activities under the plan are to be conducted at a time when the personnel involved are not in Federal service; ``(4) shall include the Governor's certification that participation by National Guard personnel in the activities under the plan is service in addition to training required under section 502 of this title; ``(5) shall include a certification by the Attorney General of the State (or, in the case of a State with no position of Attorney General, a civilian official of the State equivalent to a State attorney general) that the use of the National Guard of the State for the activities proposed under the plan is authorized by, and is consistent with, State law; ``(6) shall include the Governor's certification that the Governor or a civilian law enforcement official of the State designated by the Governor has determined that any activities to be carried out in conjunction with Federal law enforcement agencies under the plan serve a State law enforcement purpose; and ``(7) may provide for the use of personnel and equipment of the National Guard of that State to assist the Directorate of Immigration Affairs of the Department of Homeland Security in the transportation of aliens who have violated a Federal or State law prohibiting terrorist acts.
Examination and Approval of Plan.--The Secretary of Defense shall examine the adequacy of each homeland security activities plan of a State and, if the plan is determined adequate, approve the plan.
Annual Report.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress each year a report on the assistance provided under this section during the preceding fiscal year, including the activities carried out with such assistance.
The annual report under this subsection shall include the following: ``(A) A description of the homeland security activities conducted under the homeland security activities plans with funds provided under this section.
An accounting of the funds provided to each State under this section.
An analysis of the effects on military training and readiness of using units and personnel of the National Guard to perform activities under the homeland security activities plans.
Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the authority of any unit of the National Guard of a State, when such unit is not in Federal service, to perform law enforcement functions authorized to be performed by the National Guard by the laws of the State concerned.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `Governor', in the case of the District of Columbia, means the commanding general of the National Guard of the District of Columbia.
The term `homeland security activities', with respect to the National Guard of a State, means the use of National Guard personnel, when authorized by the law of the State and requested by the Governor of the State, to prevent, deter, defend against, and respond to an attack or threat of attack on the people and territory of the United States.
The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Virgin Islands.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 1 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 112 the following new item: ``112a.