SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Deficit Reduction for Infrastructure, Value, and Efficiency Now Act of 2014'' or the ``DRIVE Now Act of 2014''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--HIGHWAY TRUST FUND Sec.
Funding of Highway Trust Fund.
TITLE II--COST REDUCTION MEASURES Subtitle A--Data Center Consolidation Sec.
Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative.
Performance requirements related to data center consolidation.
Cost savings related to data center optimization.
Reporting requirements to Congress and the Federal Chief Information Officer.
Reduction and consolidation of data centers.
Subtitle B--Repeal of Duplicative Catfish Inspection Program Sec.
Repeal of duplicative catfish inspection program.
Subtitle C--Closing Empty Bank Accounts Sec.
Documenting and closing long-empty Federal bank accounts.
TITLE I--HIGHWAY TRUST FUND SEC.
FUNDING OF HIGHWAY TRUST FUND.
Section 9503(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following: ``(5) Additional sums.--Out of money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, there is hereby appropriated $5,000,000,000 to the Highway Account (as defined in subsection (e)(5)(B)) in the Highway Trust Fund.''.
TITLE II--COST REDUCTION MEASURES Subtitle A--Data Center Consolidation SEC.
The purpose of this subtitle is to optimize Federal data center usage and efficiency.
In this subtitle: (1) Federal data center optimization initiative.--The term ``Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative'' or the ``Initiative'' means the initiative developed and implemented by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, through the Federal Chief Information Officer, as required under section 203.
Covered agency.--The term ``covered agency'' means any agency included in the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative.
Federal chief information officer.--The term ``Federal Chief Information Officer'' means the Administrator of the Office of Electronic Government established under section 3602 of title 44, United States Code.
Data center.--The term ``data center'' means a closet, room, floor, or building for the storage, management, and dissemination of data and information, as defined by the Federal Chief Information Officer under guidance issued pursuant to this section.
Federal data center.--The term ``Federal data center'' means any data center of a covered agency used or operated by a covered agency, by a contractor of a covered agency, or by another organization on behalf of a covered agency.
Server utilization.--The term ``server utilization'' refers to the activity level of a server relative to its maximum activity level, expressed as a percentage.
Power usage effectiveness.--The term ``power usage effectiveness'' means the ratio obtained by dividing the total amount of electricity and other power consumed in running a data center by the power consumed by the information and communications technology in the data center.
FEDERAL DATA CENTER OPTIMIZATION INITIATIVE.
Requirement for Initiative.--The Federal Chief Information Officer, in consultation with the chief information officers of covered agencies, shall develop and implement an initiative, to be known as the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative, to optimize the usage and efficiency of Federal data centers by meeting the requirements of this Act and taking additional measures, as appropriate.
Requirement for Plan.--Within 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Federal Chief Information Officer, in consultation with the chief information officers of covered agencies, shall develop and submit to Congress a plan for implementation of the Initiative required by subsection (a) by each covered agency.
In developing the plan, the Federal Chief Information Officer shall take into account the findings and recommendations of the Comptroller General review required by section 205(e).
Matters Covered.--The plan shall include-- (1) descriptions of how covered agencies will use reductions in floor space, energy use, infrastructure, equipment, applications, personnel, increases in multiorganizational use, and other appropriate methods to meet the requirements of the initiative; and (2) appropriate consideration of shifting federally owned data centers to commercially owned data centers.
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO DATA CENTER CONSOLIDATION.
Server Utilization.--Each covered agency may use the following methods to achieve the maximum server utilization possible as determined by the Federal Chief Information Officer: (1) The closing of existing data centers that lack adequate server utilization, as determined by the Federal Chief Information Officer.
If the agency fails to close such data centers, the agency shall provide a detailed explanation as to why this data center should remain in use as part of the submitted plan.
The Federal Chief Information Officer shall include an assessment of the agency explanation in the annual report to Congress.
The consolidation of services within existing data centers to increase server utilization rates.
Any other method that the Federal Chief Information Officer, in consultation with the chief information officers of covered agencies, determines necessary to optimize server utilization.
Power Usage Effectiveness.--Each covered agency may use the following methods to achieve the maximum energy efficiency possible as determined by the Federal Chief Information Officer: (1) The use of the measurement of power usage effectiveness to calculate data center energy efficiency.
The use of power meters in data centers to frequently measure power consumption over time.
The establishment of power usage effectiveness goals for each data center.
The adoption of best practices for managing-- (A) temperature and airflow in data centers; and (B) power supply efficiency.
The implementation of any other method that the Federal Chief Information Officer, in consultation with the Chief Information Officers of covered agencies, determines necessary to optimize data center energy efficiency.
COST SAVINGS RELATED TO DATA CENTER OPTIMIZATION.
Requirement To Track Costs.-- (1) In general.--Each covered agency shall track costs resulting from implementation of the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative within the agency and submit a report on those costs annually to the Federal Chief Information Officer.
Covered agencies shall determine the net costs from data consolidation on an annual basis.
Factors.--In calculating net costs each year under paragraph (1), a covered agency shall use the following factors: (A) Energy costs.
Operating system, database, and other software license expense costs.
Other appropriate costs, as determined by the agency in consultation with the Federal Chief Information Officer.
Requirement To Track Savings.-- (1) In general.--Each covered agency shall track savings resulting from implementation of the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative within the agency and submit a report on those savings annually to the Federal Chief Information Officer.
Covered agencies shall determine the net savings from data consolidation on an annual basis.
Factors.--In calculating net savings each year under paragraph (1), a covered agency shall use the following factors: (A) Energy savings.
Operating system, database, and other software license expense savings.
Other appropriate savings, as determined by the agency in consultation with the Federal Chief Information Officer.
Requirement To Use Cost-Effective Measures.--Covered agencies shall use the most cost-effective measures to implement the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative.
Use of Savings.--Any savings resulting from implementation of the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative within a covered agency shall be used for the following purposes: (1) To offset the costs of implementing the Initiative within the agency.
To further enhance information technology capabilities and services within the agency.
Government Accountability Office Review.--Not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall examine methods for calculating savings from the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative and using them for the purposes identified in subsection (d), including establishment and use of a special revolving fund that supports data centers and server optimization, and shall submit to the Federal Chief Information Officer and Congress a report on the Comptroller General's findings and recommendations.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS TO CONGRESS AND THE FEDERAL CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER.
Agency Requirement To Report to CIO.--Each year, each covered agency shall submit to the Federal Chief Information Officer a report on the implementation of the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative, including savings resulting from such implementation.
The report shall include an update of the agency's plan for implementing the Initiative.
Federal Chief Information Officer Requirement To Report to Congress.--Each year, the Federal Chief Information Officer shall submit to the relevant congressional committees a report that assesses agency progress in carrying out the Federal Data Center Optimization Initiative and updates the plan under section 113.
The report may be included as part of the annual report required under section 3606 of title 44, United States Code.
REDUCTION AND CONSOLIDATION OF DATA CENTERS.
OMB Recommendation.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with the Administrator of General Services and the heads of other executive agencies, shall issue recommendations for reducing or consolidating the number of Federal data centers in existence as of the date of the enactment of this Act-- (1) by at least 40 percent not later than September 30, 2018; and (2) by at least 80 percent not later than September 30, 2023.
Reduction of Data Centers.--Not later than 6 months after the issuance of recommendations by the Director under subsection (a), the head of each executive agency shall implement the recommendations by reducing the number of Federal data centers in accordance with such recommendations.
Subtitle B--Repeal of Duplicative Catfish Inspection Program SECTION 211.
REPEAL OF DUPLICATIVE CATFISH INSPECTION PROGRAM.
In General.--Effective on the date of the enactment of the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (7 United States Code 8701 et sequentes), section 11016 of such Act (Public Law 110-246; 122 United States Statutes at Large 2130) and the amendments made by such section are repealed.
Application.--The Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946 (7 United States Code 1621 et sequentes) and the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601 et seq.)
shall be applied and administered as if section 11016 (Public Law 110-246; 122 United States Statutes at Large 2130) of the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (7 United States Code 8701 et sequentes) and the amendments made by such section had not been enacted.
Subtitle C--Closing Empty Bank Accounts SEC.
DOCUMENTING AND CLOSING LONG-EMPTY FEDERAL BANK ACCOUNTS.
Inspectors General Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency shall submit to Congress a report that-- (1) lists each bank account held by the United States Government that has a balance of zero dollars for 180 days or more; and (2) recommends which of these accounts should be immediately closed.
Closure of Accounts Required.--Not later than 7 days after the report is submitted under subsection (a), the head of each agency with a bank account recommended for closure in the report described in subsection (a) shall close each such account that is managed by the agency.
Agency Defined.--In this section, the term ``agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 551 of title 5, United States Code.