SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Home Health Refinement Act of 2000''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--EMERGENCY CASH-FLOW ASSISTANCE FOR HOME HEALTH AGENCIES Sec.
Home Health Transitional Loan Program.
Establishment of split-payment percentages under the PPS for home health services.
Prompt payment from medicare trust funds under the IPS and the PPS for home health services.
TITLE II--REIMBURSEMENT OF HOME HEALTH AGENCIES FOR UNFUNDED PPS RELATED COSTS Sec.
Adjustment to reflect administrative costs not included in the PPS for home health services.
TITLE III--REIMBURSEMENT OF HOME HEALTH AGENCIES FOR OASIS LABOR COSTS Sec.
Reimbursement for OASIS labor costs under the IPS and PPS for home health services.
TITLE IV--NONROUTINE MEDICAL SUPPLIES FURNISHED BY HOME HEALTH AGENCIES Sec.
Exclusion of nonroutine medical supplies under the PPS for home health services.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Home health care is a vital component of the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
Home health services provided under the medicare program enable medicare beneficiaries who are homebound and greatly risk costly institutionalized care to continue to live in their own homes and communities.
The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 reformed Medicare home health care spending by instructing the Health Care Financing Administration (in this section referred to as ``HCFA'') to implement a prospective payment system.
A number of HCFA's regulations to implement the prospective payment system are administratively burdensome and divert funds away from needed beneficiary care.
The vast majority of home health agencies are small businesses or nonprofit institutions that cannot operate with significant cash flow problems.
The prospective payment system should not penalize home health agencies that treat medicare beneficiaries with higher- than-average medical needs.
TITLE I--EMERGENCY CASH-FLOW ASSISTANCE FOR HOME HEALTH AGENCIES SEC.
HOME HEALTH TRANSITIONAL LOAN PROGRAM.
Establishment of Home Health Transitional Loan Program.--There is established a Home Health Transitional Loan Program under which the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall make loans from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund to any qualified home health agency (as defined in subsection (c)) in accordance with the terms and conditions described in subsection (b) before the termination of the authority of the Secretary to make such loans under subsection (d).
Terms and Conditions.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary shall make loans on such terms and conditions as the Secretary may specify.
Specific terms and conditions.--The terms and conditions of each loan shall include the following: (A) Application.--The Secretary shall approve each application for a loan under this section submitted by a qualified home health agency not later than 10 days after the Secretary receives such application.
Amount.--The total amount of a loan made to a qualified home health agency under this section may not exceed the average total costs incurred by such a home health agency during a 3-month period as reported on such home health agency's most recently settled medicare cost report.
Interest rate.--The interest rate of the loans made under this section shall be zero percent.
Duration.--The home health agency shall repay any loan made under this section not later than 12 months after the date on which such loan is made.
Qualified Home Health Agency Defined.--The term ``qualified home health agency'' means a home health agency (as defined in section 1861(o) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(o))) that the Secretary determines does not have sufficient cash reserves to transition from the interim payment system for home health services under section 1861(v)(1)(L) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)) (in this section referred to as the ``IPS'' to the prospective payment system for such services under section 1895 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) (in this section referred to as the ``PPS'') because of-- (1) the repayment by the home health agency of overpayments made under the IPS; (2) the discontinuation of the periodic interim payment for home health agencies by section 4603(b) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-133; 111 United States Statutes at Large 470); or (3) the payment amounts under the PPS being less than the payment amounts under the IPS.
Termination of Authority.--The Secretary may not make any loan under this section after the date that is 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the later of-- (1) the date of enactment of this Act; or (2) the date on which the Secretary implements the prospective payment system under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff).
ESTABLISHMENT OF SPLIT-PAYMENT PERCENTAGES UNDER THE PPS FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Establishment.--Section 1895(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Establishment of split-payment percentages.--In making payments under this section, the Secretary shall pay to the agency 80 percent of the prospective payment amount upon the transmittal of the notice of patient admission and 20 percent of such amount upon transmittal of the final episode claim.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
PROMPT PAYMENT FROM MEDICARE TRUST FUNDS UNDER THE IPS AND THE PPS FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Under the IPS.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(xi) To ensure that payment of claims of home health agencies are not delayed because the Secretary must determine from which trust fund to pay a claim under this subparagraph, the Secretary shall pay the full amount of each claim for an episode of care from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, and, in the case that any amount paid from such Trust Fund should have been paid from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, the Secretary shall transfer such amount from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund to the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund.''.
Under the PPS.--Section 1895(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) (as amended by section 102) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Prompt payments from trust funds.--To ensure that payment of claims of home health agencies are not delayed because the Secretary must determine from which trust fund to pay a claim under this section, the Secretary shall pay the full amount of each claim for an episode of care from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, and, in the case that any amount paid from such Trust Fund should have been paid from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, the Secretary shall transfer such amount from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund to the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--REIMBURSEMENT OF HOME HEALTH AGENCIES FOR UNFUNDED PPS RELATED COSTS SEC.
ADJUSTMENT TO REFLECT ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS NOT INCLUDED IN THE PPS FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Adjustment To Reflect Administrative Costs.--In the case of a home health agency that furnishes home health services to a medicare beneficiary, for each such beneficiary to whom the agency furnished such services during the agency's cost reporting period beginning in fiscal year 2000, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall pay the agency, in addition to any amount of payment made under section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)) for the beneficiary and only for such cost reporting period, an aggregate amount of $10 to defray costs incurred by the agency attributable to technology costs required for compliance with the prospective payment system for home health services under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff), including the acquisition of computer hardware and software necessary for classification of patients, and accounting, billing, and transmitting data in the manner required under such payment system.
Payment 30 Days After Settled Cost Report.--The Secretary shall pay the amounts payable to an agency under this section no later than 30 days after the later of-- (1) the date of enactment of this Act; or (2) the date on which the cost report submitted by the agency for the cost reporting period beginning in fiscal year 2000 is settled.
Payment From Medicare Trust Funds.--Payments under this section shall be made, in appropriate part as specified by the Secretary, from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Home health agency.--The term ``home health agency'' has the meaning given that term under section 1861(o) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(o)).
Home health services.--The term ``home health services'' has the meaning given that term under section 1861(m) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(m)).
Medicare beneficiary.--The term ``medicare beneficiary'' means a beneficiary described in section 1861(v)(1)(L)(vi)(II) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(vi)(II)).
TITLE III--REIMBURSEMENT OF HOME HEALTH AGENCIES FOR OASIS LABOR COSTS SEC.
REIMBURSEMENT FOR OASIS LABOR COSTS UNDER THE IPS AND PPS FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Adjustment To Reflect Administrative Costs.-- (1) Under the interim payment system.--Section 301(a) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Balanced Budget Refinement Act of 1999 (42 United States Code 1395fff note) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1)-- (i) by inserting ``and each subsequent fiscal year before the implementation of the prospective payment system under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff)'' after ``beginning in fiscal year 2000''; and (ii) by striking ``$10'' and inserting ``$30''; (B) in paragraph (2)-- (i) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; (ii) by inserting after the heading the following: ``(A) For fiscal year 2000.--''; and (iii) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(B) For subsequent fiscal years.--For each cost reporting period beginning after fiscal year 2000 and before the implementation of the prospective payment system under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff), the Secretary shall pay the amounts payable to an agency under this subsection no later than 30 days after the date on which the cost report submitted by the agency for the cost reporting period beginning in such fiscal year is settled.''.
Under the prospective payment system.--Section 1895(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) (as amended by section 103) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Adjustment to reflect oasis administrative costs.--In the case of a home health agency that furnishes home health services to a medicare beneficiary, for each such beneficiary to whom the agency furnished such services during the agency's cost reporting period for which payment is made to such agency under this section, the Secretary shall include in such payment an aggregate amount of $30 to defray costs incurred by the agency attributable to data collection and reporting requirements under the Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS) required by reason of section 4602(e) of BBA (42 United States Code 1395fff note).
Waiving Budget Neutrality.--Section 1895(b)(3) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) No adjustment for additional payments for oasis administrative costs.--The Secretary shall not reduce the standard prospective payment amount (or amounts) under this paragraph applicable to home health services furnished during a period to offset the increase in payments resulting from the application of paragraph (9).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Balanced Budget Refinement Act of 1999 (113 United States Statutes at Large 1501A-358), as enacted into law by section 1000(a)(6) of Public Law (106-113).
TITLE IV--NONROUTINE MEDICAL SUPPLIES FURNISHED BY HOME HEALTH AGENCIES SEC.
EXCLUSION OF NONROUTINE MEDICAL SUPPLIES UNDER THE PPS FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Exclusion of Nonroutine Medical Supplies.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, in the case of all nonroutine medical supplies (as defined by the Secretary) furnished by a home health agency during a year (beginning with 2001) for which payment is otherwise made on the basis of the prospective payment amount under this section, payment under this section shall instead be based on the lesser of-- ``(A) the actual charge for the nonroutine medical supply, or ``(B) the amount determined under the fee schedule established by the Secretary for purposes of making payment under this subsection for nonroutine medical supplies furnished during that year.
Budget neutrality adjustment.--The Secretary shall provide for an appropriate proportional reduction in payments under this section so that beginning with fiscal year 2001, the aggregate amount of such reductions is equal to the aggregate increase in payments attributable to the exclusion effected under paragraph (1).''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1895(b)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting ``Subject to subsection (e), the Secretary''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.