The Congress finds that-- (1) the Augusta Canal National Landmark in the State of Georgia, listed on the National Historic Register of Historic Places, and designated by the Governor of Georgia as one of four regionally important resources in the State, is one of the last unspoiled areas in the State of Georgia; (2) the Augusta Canal National Historic Landmark possesses excellent water quality, beautiful rural and historic cultural landscapes, architecturally significant mill structures and mill villages, and large acreages of parks and permanent open space; (3) three national historic districts, the Harrisburg, Laney Walker, and Greene Street districts, and 2 national historic landmarks, Stallings Island, located in the Savannah River, and Meadow Garden, are connected by the Augusta Canal Area; (4) the beautiful rural landscapes and historic cultural landscapes, scenic vistas and excellent water quality of the Augusta Canal contain significant undeveloped recreational opportunities for people throughout the United States; (5) the Augusta Canal and related mill sites, structures, and associated neighborhoods are representative of the development of the cotton textile industry and associated agriculture and trade in the South; (6) the transformation of the agrarian economy of the area into an early industrial economy was precipitated by the development and use of the Augusta Canal; (7) several significant sites associated with the American Revolution, the Civil War, Native Americans, Colonial Americans, African Americans, Chinese Americans, and Irish Americans are located within the Augusta Canal area; (8) despite the efforts by the State of Georgia, political subdivisions of the State, volunteer organizations, and private businesses, the cultural, historical, natural, and recreational resources of the area have not realized full potential and may be lost without assistance from the Federal Government; (9) the Secretary of the Interior considers this landmark threatened and has designated it a priority for protection; and (10) many local, regional, and State agencies, businesses, and private citizens have expressed an overwhelming desire to combine forces to work cooperatively to preserve and enhance the resources of the Augusta Canal National Historic Landmark and better plan for its future.
It is the purpose of this Act to provide a cooperative management framework to assist the State of Georgia, its units of local government, and area citizens in retaining, enhancing, and interpreting the significant features of the lands, water, and structures of the Augusta Canal, in a manner consistent with positive economic impact and development for the benefit and inspiration of present and future generations in the State of Georgia and the United States.
ESTABLISHMENT AND BOUNDARIES OF AUGUSTA CANAL NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is established in the State of Georgia the Augusta Canal National Heritage Area (referred to in this Act as the ``Heritage Area'').
Boundaries.-- (1) In general.--The Heritage Area shall include those lands in the States of Georgia and South Carolina commonly known as the Augusta Canal, as generally depicted in the ``Augusta Canal Master Plan'', dated December 31, 1993.
The Augusta Canal Master Plan shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Director of the National Park Service, Washington, D.C. (2) Map.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') shall publish in the Federal Register a detailed description and map of the boundaries established under this subsection.
Establishment.--There is established the Augusta Canal Commission.
Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall appoint the members of the Commission as follows: (1) Five members shall be appointed from among persons serving on the Augusta Canal Authority as established in the Augusta Canal Charter, by Georgia Public Law.
One member shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by the mayor of the city of Augusta, Georgia.
One member shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by a consensus of the Georgia congressional delegation, representing Augusta, Georgia.
One member shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by the Governor of the State of Georgia.
One member shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by the Governor of the State of South Carolina.
Chairperson.--The Commission shall elect a chairman from among its members.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Preparation of Plan.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Augusta Canal Commission shall prepare and submit to the Secretary for review and approval a plan for the management and administration of the Heritage Area.
Content.--The plan shall be based on Federal, State, and local plans in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, including the Augusta Canal Master Plan.
The Augusta Canal Commission shall coordinate and combine such plans and present an integrated and cooperative approach for the protection, enhancement, and interpretation of the cultural, natural, scenic, and recreational resources of the Heritage Area.
Assistance.--The Secretary is authorized to provide technical and financial assistance in the preparation of the management plan.
Approval.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after receipt of the plan submitted pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall approve or disapprove the plan.
Criteria.--In determining whether to approve a plan, the Secretary shall consider-- (A) whether the planning area has strong local support for the study from a diversity of landowners, business interests, nonprofit organizations, and governments within the proposed study area; (B) whether the proposal is consistent with and complements continued economic activity in the area; (C) whether the planning area has a high potential for effective partnership mechanisms; (D) whether the plan improperly infringes on private property rights; and (E) whether the plan will take appropriate action to ensure private property rights are observed.
Disapproval.-- (A) In general.--If the Secretary disapproves the management plan, the Secretary shall notify the Augusta Canal Commission of the disapproval in writing.
The notice shall include-- (i) the reasons for the disapproval; and (ii) recommendations for revision.
Revised plan.--The Augusta Canal Commission shall revise and resubmit the management plan to the Secretary for approval.
Not later than 180 days after receipt of the revised plan, the Secretary shall approve or disapprove the plan as provided in paragraph (2).
The Augusta Canal Commission shall revise and submit the management plan until the management plan is approved by the Secretary.
Implementation.-- (1) In general.--Upon approval of the management plan as provided in subsection (d), the Secretary, in conjunction with the Augusta Canal Commission, shall take appropriate steps to implement the management plan.
Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with the State of Georgia, political subdivisions of the State, the Augusta Canal Commission, or any organization or individual to implement the management plan.
Economic Development.--The Augusta Commission, the State of Georgia, the city of Augusta, or any political subdivision of the State shall encourage, by appropriate means, enhanced economic and industrial development in the area consistent with the goals of the Augusta Canal Master Plan.
Construction.--Nothing in this Act is intended to impose any occupational, safety, conservation, or environmental regulation on the Heritage Area that is more stringent than the regulations that would be applicable to such area but for the establishment of the Heritage Area pursuant to section 3.
Restrictions.--No Federal agency may promulgate an occupational, safety, conservation, or environmental regulation for the Heritage Area that is more stringent than the regulations applicable to the Heritage Area in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, solely as a result of the establishment of the Heritage Area pursuant to section 3.
DUTIES OF OTHER FEDERAL ENTITIES.
Any Federal entity conducting or supporting activities directly affecting the Heritage Area shall-- (1) consult with the Secretary and the Augusta Canal Commission with respect to such activities; (2) cooperate with the Secretary and the Augusta Canal Authority with respect to such activities; (3) coordinate such activities with the Secretary and the Augusta Canal Commission; and (4) conduct or support such activities in a manner that the Secretary and the Augusta Canal Commission determine will not have an adverse effect on the Heritage Area.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.