Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Connecticut Old State House Bicentennial Commemorative Coin Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the history of the Old State House in Hartford, Connecticut, is intrinsically linked to the history of the city of Hartford, the State of Connecticut, and the United States; (2) the site of the Old State House is where the Colony of Connecticut was founded and where General George Washington first met Comte de Rochambeau in America to begin plotting the Yorktown strategy to win the Revolutionary War; (3) the Old State House, designed by Charles Bulfinch, is a prime example of 18th century architecture and was designated a Registered National Landmark by the Secretary of the Interior; (4) since 1979, the Old State House Association has operated the Old State House as a museum, public meeting house, and focal point for downtown Hartford; (5) the Old State House Association initiated an extensive renovation in 1992 to revitalize the building and its surroundings and to expand its educational, recreational, and cultural services; (6) the new Old State House will feature a Museum of Connecticut History, a market on Main Street on the building's west side, and a Peace Park on its east side; and (7) the new Old State House will be rededicated on its 200th birthday in May 1996, when it will once again become a focal point and meeting place for Hartford, Connecticut, and the entire New England region.
One Dollar Silver Coins.--In commemoration of the bicentennial of the Old State House in Hartford, Connecticut, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 700,000 one dollar coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the Old State House and the role of the Old State House in the history of the city of Hartford, the State of Connecticut, and the United States.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the years ``1796-1996''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Old State House Association, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act only during the period beginning on January 1, 1996, and ending on December 31, 1996.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Old State House Association for use in-- (1) the construction, renovation, and preservation involving the Old State House, including the Museum of Connecticut History, the Main Street Market, and the Peace Park; (2) the education of the general public about the central role of the Old State House in the history of Connecticut and the United States through exhibits, programs, and other educational activities; and (3) the maintenance of the Old State House as a central hub for recreational, cultural, and commercial activities in the city of Hartford.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Old State House Association as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under subsection (a).
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.