MOTORBOATS IN BOUNDARY WATERS CANOE AREA WILDERNESS.
Basswood, Saganaga, and Birch Lakes.--Section 4(c) of Public Law 95-495 (92 United States Statutes at Large 1650) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``Basswood, except'' and all that follows through ``Washington Island;'' and inserting ``Basswood, Lake County;''; (B) by striking ``, except for that portion west of American Point''; and (C) by inserting ``Birch, Lake County;'' after ``Moose, Lake County;''; and (2) by striking paragraph (4).
Lac La Croix.--Section 4(d) of Public Law 95-495 (92 United States Statutes at Large 1651) is amended by striking ``that portion of the Lac La Croix, Saint Louis County, south of Snow Bay and east of Wilkins Bay'' and inserting ``and Lac la Croix, Saint Louis County''.
Seagull Lake.--Section 4(c) of Public Law 95-495 (92 United States Statutes at Large 1650) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``, that portion generally east of Threemile Island, Cook County''; and (2) in paragraph (3), by striking ``Sea Gull, Cook County, that portion generally west of Threemile Island, until January 1, 1999;''.
The second proviso of section 4(f) of Public Law 95-495 (92 United States Statutes at Large 1651) is amended-- (1) by striking ``homeowners and their guests and resort owners and their guests'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``homeowners and resort owners and the day and overnight guests of homeowners and resort owners who buy or rent goods and services''; and (2) by inserting ``or chain of lakes'' after ``shall have access to that particular lake''.
Section 4(g) of Public Law 95-495 (92 United States Statutes at Large 1651) is amended to read as follows: ``(g) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prevent the operation of motorized vehicles and associated equipment which is necessary to assist in the transport of boats across the portages from Moose Lake Chain to Basswood Lake, from Fall Lake to Basswood Lake, and from Lake Vermilion to Trout Lake.''.
BOUNDARY WATERS CANOE AREA WILDERNESS INTERGOVERNMENTAL COUNCIL.
Public Law 95-495 (92 United States Statutes at Large 1650) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
BOUNDARY WATERS CANOE AREA WILDERNESS INTERGOVERNMENTAL COUNCIL.
Establishment.-- ``(1) Membership.--There is hereby established the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness Intergovernmental Council (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Council'').
The Council shall be composed of 11 members, as follows: ``(A) The Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment, Department of Agriculture, ex officio, or his designee.
Three individuals, appointed by the Secretary after consideration of recommendations by the Governor, to represent the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board, and the Minnesota Office of Tourism.
One individual appointed by the Secretary to represent the Minnesota Historical Society.
The Chair of the St. Louis County Commissioners, or the designee of the Chair, ex officio.
The Chair of the Lake County Commissioners, or the designee of the Chair, ex officio.
The Chair of Cook County Commissioners, or the designee of the Chair, ex officio.
The State Senator, who represents the area in which the wilderness is located, or the designee of the State Senator, ex officio.
The State Representative, who represents the area in which the wilderness is located, or the designee of the State Representative, ex officio.
One member of the Native American community to represent the 1854 Treaty Authority.
Terms.--The term of the members appointed to the Council under paragraph (1), other than ex officio members, shall be two years.
Any member of the Council appointed for a definite term may serve after the expiration of his term until his successor is appointed.
Compensation.--Members of the Council who are not employed by the Federal Government shall serve without pay.
While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services of the Council, members of the Council shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Federal Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Provisions Relating to the Conduct of Council Business.-- ``(1) Quorum.--Eight members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
Chairperson.--The members of the Council shall elect a chairperson of the Council from among the members of the Council.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy in the Council shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.--The Council shall meet at the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members.
Staff.--The Secretary shall provide the Council with such staff and technical assistance as the Secretary, after consultation with the Council, considers appropriate to enable the Council to carry out its duties.
Upon request of the Secretary, any Federal agency may provide information, personnel, property, and services, on a reimbursable basis, to the Council to assist in carrying out its duties under this section.
The Secretary may accept the services of personnel detailed from the State of Minnesota or any political subdivision of the State and may reimburse the State or such political subdivision for such services.
Procedural matters.-- ``(A) FACA.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Council.
Guidelines for conduct of business.--The following guidelines apply with respect to the conduct of business at meetings of the Council: ``(i) Each regular meeting and each emergency meeting shall be open to the public.
Emergency meetings shall be held at the call of the chair or equivalent presiding officer.
Timely public notice of each regular meeting and each emergency meeting, including the time, place, and agenda of the meeting, shall be published in local newspapers and such notice may be given by such other means as will result in wide publicity.
Interested persons shall be permitted to present oral or written statements regarding the matters on the agenda at meetings.
Minutes of each meeting shall be kept and shall contain a record of the persons present, an accurate description of matters discussed and conclusions reached, and copies of all statements filed.
The administrative record, including minutes required under clause (v), of each meeting, and records or other documents which were made available to or prepared for or by the Council incident to the meeting, shall be available for public inspection and copying at a single location in the offices of the Council.
New information.--At any time when the Council determines it appropriate to consider new information from a State or Federal agency or from a Council advisory body, the Council shall give comparable consideration to new information offered at that time by interested members of the public.
Interested parties shall have a reasonable opportunity to respond to new data or information before the Council takes final action on management measures.
Functions.--The Council shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Act-- ``(1) prepare and submit to the Secretary draft amendments to the management plan and, from time to time, such additional amendments to the plan as are necessary, which provides for as broad a range of sustainable land and water uses and scenic and recreational activities as are compatible with the laws and regulations governing the wilderness and other local, State, or Federal public lands, as may be decided upon in the plan; ``(2) after considering public comment and comment from the Secretary, prepare and submit to the Secretary revisions of the management plan when appropriate for the purposes of making regularly scheduled management plan revisions under section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1604); ``(3) consult with and provide comments to the Secretary regarding the environmental impact of major Federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment which are proposed by the Secretary; ``(4) analyze the economic and environmental costs and benefits of implementing sustainable practices for the wilderness; ``(5) conduct public hearings, at appropriate times and in appropriate locations, so as to allow all interested persons an opportunity to be heard in the development of the amendments to and revisions of the management plan, in the development of major Federal actions referred to in paragraph (3), and with respect to the administration and implementation of the provisions of this Act; ``(6) establish an ongoing process of review and evaluation of local, State, and Federal actions, plans, ordinances, regulations, laws, and land use decisions for the purpose of assessing their effect on the long-term sustainability of the economic and environmental values and resources of the region; ``(7) submit to the Secretary such periodic reports as the Council deems appropriate, and any other relevant report which may be requested by the Secretary; and ``(8) conduct other activities which are required by, or provided for in, this Act or which are necessary and appropriate to the functions specified in paragraphs (1) through (7).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.''.
Public Law 95-495 (92 United States Statutes at Large 1650), as amended by section 4 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--The provisions of this section shall apply when the Secretary is amending and revising management plans for the wilderness or considering decisions that require public involvement and notification under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
Management Plan.-- ``(1) Received from council.--The Secretary shall receive the draft amendments to the revisions of the management plan prepared and submitted by the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness Intergovernmental Council under section 22(c), together with public comments on the draft amendments or revisions, and shall review and, if necessary, submit to the Council such recommendations as the Secretary determines appropriate for revising the draft amendments or revisions.
Revisions.--The Secretary shall accept a revised drafts prepared and submitted by the Council by reason of paragraph (1).
Final plan.-- ``(A) In general.--If the Secretary determines that the amendments to or revisions of the management plan are not inconsistent with other provisions of this Act or applicable laws, treaties, executive orders, and that the amended or revised management plan is in the public interest, the Secretary shall adopt the amended or revised management plan.
Management plan board.-- ``(i) If the Secretary decides not to adopt the revised amendments to the management plan, the amendments to the management plan shall be made by the Secretary in accordance with clause (iii) pursuant to recommendations made by a management plan board appointed under clause (ii).
The management plan board shall consist of three members, appointed as follows: ``(I) One member appointed by the Secretary, ``(II) One member appointed by the Secretary from a list of 5 or more individuals submitted by the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness Intergovernmental Council, by majority vote.
The Secretary may request additional lists.
One member appointed by the Secretary from a list of 5 or more individuals submitted by the two members appointed under subclauses (I) and (II).
The Secretary may request additional lists.
Members of a management plan board who are not employed by the Federal Government shall serve without pay.
While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services of the board, members of the board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Federal Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to a management plan board.
The management plan board shall review the revised amendments to the management plan submitted by the Council to the Secretary under section 22(c), and such comments on the revised amendments and recommendations for such amendments as the Secretary submits to the board.
Following such review, the board shall submit to the Secretary such amendments as the board finds to be appropriate under the provisions of this Act.
The Secretary shall revise the management plan in a manner based on the amendments submitted by the board.
Not accepted.--If the Secretary determines not to adopt the amendments to or revisions of the management plan under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall notify the Council in writing within 95 days of the determination and shall make recommendations for further action by the Council.
No amendment to the management plan shall be implemented by the Secretary until the Secretary complies with paragraphs (1), (2), and (3).
Failure of council to act.--If the Council declines to submit to the Secretary a revised management plan, or amendments to a revised plan, the Secretary may make such revisions as the Secretary considers necessary or appropriate and implement the plan.
Major Federal Actions.--The Secretary shall seek the comment of the Council when considering major Federal actions that require public involvement and notification under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
Status Quo.--The management plan of the wilderness may not be changed except in accordance with this section.