This Act may be cited as the ``New Diplomatic Offensive for Iraq Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Iraq's ability to establish stability and security within its borders and defeat terrorist organizations is significantly affected by the actions of neighboring nations and by regional conflicts and events, while other nations in the region have a vested interest in achieving a resolution to the conflict in Iraq.
On December 6, 2006, the first recommendation released by the bipartisan Iraq Study Group was that the United States, working with the Iraqi Government, should launch a comprehensive New Diplomatic Offensive to deal with the problems in Iraq and in the region before December 31, 2006.
The Iraq Study Group recommended the following specific goals for the New Diplomatic Offensive: (A) Support the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq.
Stop destabilizing interventions and actions by Iraq's neighbors.
Secure Iraq's borders, including the use of joint patrols with neighboring countries.
Prevent the expansion of the instability and conflict in Iraq beyond its borders.
Promote economic assistance, commerce, trade, political support, and, if possible, military assistance for the Iraqi Government from non- neighboring Muslim nations.
Energize countries to support national political reconciliation in Iraq.
Validate Iraq's legitimacy by resuming diplomatic relations, where appropriate, and reestablishing embassies in Baghdad.
Assist Iraq in establishing active working embassies in key capitals in the region (for example, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia).
Help Iraq reach a mutually-acceptable agreement on Kirkuk.
Assist the Iraqi Government in achieving certain security, political, and economic milestones, including better performance on issues such as national reconciliation, equitable distribution of oil revenues, and the dismantling of militias.
The Iraq Study Group recommended regional involvement in the diplomatic efforts of stabilizing Iraq and the Middle East, including involvement of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
On July 22, 2004, the bipartisan National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States (commonly known as the ``9/11 Commission'') recommended the United States should engage other nations in developing a comprehensive coalition strategy against Islamist terrorism in the Middle East.
President George W. Bush and his Administration have already undertaken critical elements of such a diplomatic effort, including diplomatic talks with key Iraqi neighbors in Sharm-al-Sheik, Egypt and in Baghdad, Iraq in May 2007, as well as proposing a comprehensive Middle East peace conference.
Despite these positive actions, significantly more robust diplomatic effort is needed to establish international consensus on achieving security and stability in Iraq, promoting national reconciliation efforts in Iraq, supporting the reconstruction of Iraq, and supporting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Iraqi nation.
MIDDLE EAST REGIONAL DIPLOMACY.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall seek to develop and implement a regional diplomatic plan, in conjunction with the United Nations Security Council, that will attempt to accomplish the following objectives: (1) Curtail the ongoing civil war in Iraq.
Prevent the spread of violence from Iraq into neighboring countries.
Prevent the establishment of safe havens for al-Qa'ida and other terrorist organizations.
Prevent genocide, ethnic cleansing, and other crimes against humanity.
Promote a national process of reconciliation within Iraq.
Statement of United States Policy.--In the implementation of the regional diplomatic plan required by subsection (a), it is the policy of the United States to-- (1) undertake a sustained diplomatic effort to engage the governments of nations in the region on the regional diplomatic plan required in subsection (a) and on issues and actions that impact the situation in Iraq; (2) continue and expand United States direct bilateral talks with nations neighboring Iraq on issues of mutual interest; (3) support the goals specified in the International Compact for Iraq; and (4) encourage the increased engagement of international organizations, including the United Nations, the Arab League, and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, in working toward solutions to achieve stability and security in Iraq.
Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and every 90 days thereafter, the President shall transmit to Congress a report on the status of efforts to implement the regional diplomatic plan required by subsection (a), including-- (1) progress being made to accomplish the objectives described in paragraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (a); (2) efforts of the United States to promote regional dialogue on Iraq's future, including the organization of regional peace conferences and the establishment of sustained regional structures such as working groups; (3) the progress of bilateral discussions with key nations neighboring Iraq; (4) the status of pledges of financial assistance for the relief and reconstruction of Iraq made by members of the international community at the Madrid International Conference on Reconstruction in Iraq and other international conferences for the relief and reconstruction of Iraq since March 2003, and the efforts of the United States to encourage nations and organizations to fulfill such pledges; and (5) the progress of efforts to address other critical regional issues and conflicts that significantly affect the situation in Iraq.
SPECIAL ENVOY FOR IRAQ REGIONAL SECURITY.
Special Envoy for Iraq Regional Security.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall appoint a Presidential Special Envoy for Iraq Regional Security.
Duties.--The Presidential Special Envoy appointed pursuant to subsection (a) shall have the following duties: (1) Carry out, in consultation with the United States Ambassador to Iraq, the Commander of the Multi-National Forces- Iraq, and leaders of foreign nations and international organizations, the policy set forth in section 3(b) of this Act.
Enter into discussions with the Government of Iraq and governments of neighboring countries to support Iraq's efforts to achieve peace and stability and to take necessary actions to prevent regional instability.
Such discussions shall include the establishment of security along Iraq's borders, the prevention of entry of weapons and foreign terrorists into Iraq, and cessation of destabilizing actions or interventions from outside Iraq's borders.
Organize an Iraq Support Group, consisting of representatives of the entities described in paragraph (2), to coordinate regional and international policy in support of Iraq's efforts to achieve peace and stability.
Work with officials of the Government of Iraq and other domestic stakeholders to organize a forum for negotiations on national reconciliation.
Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2008 and 2009.
COOPERATION WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS.
International Donors Conference.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of State shall undertake the organization of an international donors conference to solicit additional commitments of funding and support from the international community for ongoing reconstruction and economic development activities in Iraq.
Leadership of conference.--The international donors conference should be presided over by the Secretary-General of the United Nations or by the head of another international organization, as appropriate.
Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2008 and 2009.
United Nations.--The President shall direct the Permanent Representative of the United States to the United Nations to consult with the United Nations Security Council to institute the regional diplomatic plan described in section 3(a) of this Act and to seek a new resolution in the United Nations Security Council that-- (1) supports regional and international cooperation in promoting stability and development in Iraq in accordance with the International Compact with Iraq; (2) encourages increased support for and participation in efforts to rebuild and expand Iraq's economy and critical infrastructure; and (3) authorizes renewed United Nations assistance to promote security and political reconciliation in Iraq, including a commitment to an increased United Nations role following the beginning of a strategic redeployment of United States Armed Forces personnel from Iraq.