SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``New Direction for Iraq Act of 2007''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
Goals of United States policy toward Iraq.
TITLE I--REDEPLOYMENT OF UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES FROM IRAQ Sec.
Prohibition on escalation of United States military presence in Iraq.
Redeployment of United States Armed Forces from Iraq.
Restoration of Iraqi sovereignty.
TITLE II--ASSISTANCE FOR IRAQ Sec.
Assistance for reconstruction and economic development.
Assistance for democracy and civil society promotion.
Assistance for militia disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration.
Federal contracts for Iraq reconstruction.
TITLE III--DIPLOMATIC EFFORTS Sec.
Regional and international diplomacy.
GOALS OF UNITED STATES POLICY TOWARD IRAQ.
The goals of United States policy toward Iraq are-- (1) to support the people of Iraq in their desire for security, democratic self-determination, and an end to the United States occupation of Iraq; (2) to mitigate against a worsening of violence in Iraq and seek to prevent, to the extent possible, additional sectarian violence; (3) to reestablish United States international credibility, military readiness, and fiscal responsibility; and (4) to refocus on the threat posed by violent fundamentalists and other real threats to the national security of the United States.
TITLE I--REDEPLOYMENT OF UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES FROM IRAQ SEC.
PROHIBITION ON ESCALATION OF UNITED STATES MILITARY PRESENCE IN IRAQ.
Funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense under any provision of law may not be obligated or expended to increase the number of members of the Armed Forces serving in Iraq so that the total number of members serving in Iraq at any time exceeds the number of members serving in Iraq as of the date of the enactment of this Act unless the increase is specifically authorized by an Act of Congress.
REDEPLOYMENT OF UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES FROM IRAQ.
Commencement of Redeployment.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall begin the redeployment of United States Armed Forces from Iraq.
Timetable for Completion of Redeployment.--The redeployment required by subsection (a) shall be completed in the shortest appropriate time frame, based on the advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and detailed plan for the transfer of security responsibility on a sector-by-sector basis to be negotiated with the appropriate authorities of the Government of Iraq.
It is the sense of Congress that the phrase ``shortest appropriate time frame'' should be no longer than one year.
Redeployment Locations.--The majority of units of the Armed Forces redeployed pursuant to subsection (a) should be returned to the United States.
Other units should be redeployed as part of a rapid reaction force in the Middle East, with the capacity to respond to contingencies in Iraq and in Afghanistan for the purpose of expanding secured areas and preventing the reemergence of the Taliban.
Mission of Armed Forces in Iraq.--Until the redeployment required by subsection (a) is completed, the mission of the Armed Forces in Iraq should focus on supporting the Iraqi Army in holding and stabilizing population centers, rather than using the Armed Forces to engage in combat operations against insurgents.
RESTORATION OF IRAQI SOVEREIGNTY.
Prohibition on Permanent United States Military Installations in Iraq.--No permanent or long-term military installation, which is designed or intended to be occupied by a unit of the United States Armed Forces after the redeployment of the Armed Forces from Iraq pursuant to section 102, may be constructed in Iraq.
Prohibition on United States Actions to Control Oil Resources in Iraq.--No official or representative of the Government of the United States shall seek to exercise control over the petroleum infrastructure, petroleum resources, or the economic policies of Iraq.
TITLE II--ASSISTANCE FOR IRAQ SEC.
ASSISTANCE FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
Requirement to Provide Assistance Through Iraqi Businesses and Nationals.--Funds appropriated or otherwise made available for the reconstruction of Iraq or economic development in Iraq under any provision of law shall, to the maximum extent possible and appropriate, be expended through-- (1) Iraqi-owned businesses, with a preference for small businesses; and (2) private voluntary organizations or businesses of any nationality whose Iraq-based staff consists primarily of individuals who are nationals of Iraq.
Sense of Congress Regarding Iraq Community Action Program.--It is the sense of Congress that the Iraq Community Action Program of the United States Agency for International Development is an effective economic development program being carried out at the local level in Iraq and should be greatly expanded.
ASSISTANCE FOR DEMOCRACY AND CIVIL SOCIETY PROMOTION.
Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance for the promotion of democracy and civil society in Iraq.
Activities Supported.--Assistance provided under subsection (a) shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be used to strengthen participatory, nonpartisan, multi-ethnic institutions of civil society in Iraq, including labor and trade unions, chambers of commerce, environmental organizations, peacebuilding and reconciliation programs, and social and community organizations.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--To carry out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President $40,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2007 through 2010.
Additional requirements.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under paragraph (1)-- (A) are authorized to remain available until expended; and (B) are in addition to amounts otherwise available for such purposes.
ASSISTANCE FOR MILITIA DISARMAMENT, DEMOBILIZATION, AND REINTEGRATION.
Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance for the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration of militias in Iraq.
Activities Supported.--Assistance provided under subsection (a) shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be used to support-- (1) the presence of neutral international experts as advisors to the Government of Iraq on the processes of disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration of militias; and (2) the establishment of a single office in the Government of Iraq to coordinate assistance for disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration of militias.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that members and units of the United States Armed Forces should not carry out or otherwise participate in activities supported under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--To carry out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2007 through 2010.
Additional requirements.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under paragraph (1)-- (A) are authorized to remain available until expended; and (B) are in addition to amounts otherwise available for such purposes.
FEDERAL CONTRACTS FOR IRAQ RECONSTRUCTION.
Termination of All Contracts of Contractor Not Fulfilling Terms of One Contract.--In the case of a contractor with more than one contract awarded by the Federal Government to perform Iraq reconstruction, the President may terminate all such contracts of the contractor if the contractor is not fulfilling the terms of one of its contracts for Iraq reconstruction.
Any funds recovered from the termination of such contracts shall be considered to be funds available for the reconstruction of Iraq or economic development in Iraq and shall, to the maximum extent possible and appropriate, be expended in accordance with section 201(a).
Recovery of Funds.--It is the sense of Congress that the President should make aggressive use of the authority to recover funds from any contracts for Iraq reconstruction that are terminated, whether terminated pursuant to the authority in subsection (a) or as otherwise provided by law.
War Profiteering.--It is the sense of Congress that the Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretaries of Defense and State, should aggressively seek to prosecute any perpetrators of criminal fraud in the awarding and carrying out of Federal contracts for Iraq reconstruction.
Congressional Oversight.--It is the sense of Congress that the appropriate committees of jurisdiction in the House of Representatives and the Senate should use their full authority to investigate the awarding and carrying out of contracts by the Government to conduct activities in Iraq regarding the following matters: (1) The award of such contracts, including the solicitation and evaluation of bids or proposals.
Standards for the auditing of such contracts.
Procedures for oversight of the performance of such contracts.
Forms of payment and safeguards against money laundering.
Accountability of contractors and Government officials involved in the award and carrying out of such contracts.
Penalties for violations of law and abuses in the awarding and carrying out of such contracts.
The use of subcontracts under large, comprehensive contracts.
The inclusion and use of small businesses in such contracts, through subcontracts or otherwise.
TITLE III--DIPLOMATIC EFFORTS SEC.
REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY.
In General.--The President, acting through the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, shall undertake a regional diplomatic effort to establish a regional security dialogue to provide support and cooperation in promoting stability in Iraq.
Such an effort shall include direct bilateral negotiations with all of Iraq's neighboring countries and other relevant regional and nonregional governments and international organizations, such as the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Arab League, and the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Diplomatic Options.--If appropriate, the President, acting through the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, shall seek to formalize the regional security dialogue required under subsection (a) in a multilateral support group framework and host a regional security conference.
Sense of Congress Regarding Policy.--It is the sense of Congress that the negotiations and security dialogue required under subsection (a) should not undermine United States policy in support of the security of Israel, the sovereignty of Lebanon, or the autonomy of Iraqi Kurds.
Comprehensive Agreements.--The President, acting through the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, shall seek to use the negotiations required under subsection (a) to reach comprehensive agreements with Syria and Iran regarding ending support for terrorism, nuclear nonproliferation, cessation of violence against Israel, and other outstanding issues.
The President, acting through the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense shall further demonstrate a willingness to provide the necessary security guarantees and economic and diplomatic incentives for such agreements.
Israeli-Palestinian Peace.-- (1) Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that United States support for progress in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process is an important factor for the United States to regain credibility and influence in the Middle East.
United states effort.--The President, acting through the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, shall undertake a renewed effort towards securing Israeli-Palestinian peace by encouraging negotiations aimed at the establishment of an independent and contiguous Palestinian state living alongside a secure Israel in peace, on a basis similar to the parameters for peace presented to Israel and the Palestinian Authority by former President Bill Clinton in December 2000 and the unofficial Geneva Accords of 2003.
United Nations.--The President shall direct the Permanent Representative of the United States to the United Nations to seek a new resolution in the United Nations Security Council supporting regional and international cooperation in promoting stability in Iraq and authorizing renewed United Nations assistance to promote security and political reconciliation in Iraq.
Benchmarks.--The President, in partnership with the Government of Iraq, shall develop a series of benchmarks in the areas of national reconciliation, security, and governance.
Sense of Congress Regarding Support for the Government of Iraq.--It is the sense of Congress that further political and economic support for the Government of Iraq should be conditioned on significant progress towards achieving the benchmarks referred to in subsection (a).
Special Envoy.-- (1) Appointment.--Not later than 15 days after the date determined in subsection (d), the President shall appoint an individual to serve as Special Envoy for Iraq Reconciliation.
Criteria for appointment.--An individual appointed under paragraph (1) shall be of significant stature and shall have the respect and trust of parties within Iraq.
Duties.--The Special Envoy shall-- (A) encourage dialogue between sectarian communities within Iraq with the goal of promoting peace and national reconciliation; (B) engage all political and military entities, including all militias and insurgents (except militias and insurgents associated or affiliated in any way or manner with al-Qaeda) within Iraq in a peace process; and (C) encourage religious and tribal leaders to speak out in favor of peace and reconciliation.
Role of the United Nations.--The requirement for the President to appoint a Special Envoy in accordance with subsection (c) shall be satisfied by the appointment by the United Nations of such a special envoy based on the same criteria and with the same duties as described in such subsection, provided such United Nations appointment occurs not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) the humanitarian impact of the war in Iraq, particularly the problem of refugees from Iraq, needs greater attention from the United States Government; (2) the United States should greatly increase the number of refugees from Iraq who are admitted to the United States and increase the amount of assistance provided to support Iraqi refugees elsewhere; (3) the Secretary of Homeland Security and Secretary of State, as appropriate, should seek to streamline procedures for the admission to the United States of refugees from Iraq and ease the burden of applying for refugee status; (4) the 20,000 unallocated refugee admissions authorized by Presidential Determination No.
2007-1 should be used for refugees from Iraq; and (5) special attention should be given to particularly vulnerable Iraqi refugee populations, including Iraqis who worked with United States Armed Forces, ethnically mixed families, and members of religious minority groups.
Action.--The President, acting through the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Secretary of State, as appropriate, shall, for any country containing a significant population of Iraqi refugees-- (1) if, appropriate, seek to negotiate a bilateral refugee resettlement agreement for the purpose of expediting the admission into the United States of such refugees; or (2) if the bilateral refugee resettlement agreement referred to in paragraph (1) is not achievable, devise strategies, in consultation with the host government and relevant international organizations and agencies, for the provision of assistance to facilitate the well-being, safety, and integration into their host environments of such refugees.
Sense of Congress Regarding Funding.--It is the sense of Congress that the President should submit to Congress a supplemental appropriations request to provide sufficient funding to carry out subsection (b).