This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on Missing-in-Action and Prisoners of War in Southeast Asia Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on Missing-in-Action and Prisoners of War in Southeast Asia (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of seven members as follows: (1) One individual appointed by the President from among the general public who shall serve as Chairperson of the Commission.
One individual appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate from among Members of the Senate.
One individual appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among Members of the House of Representatives.
Two individuals appointed by the President who are members of the immediate family of United States personnel who remain not accounted for as a result of service in the Armed Forces or other Federal Government service in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam era.
One individual appointed by the Secretary of Defense from among officers or employees of the Department of Defense.
One individual appointed by the Secretary of State from among officers or employees of the Department of State.
Terms.--The term of office for a member of the Commission shall be the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (1) Rate of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall serve without pay or benefits.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission may receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Initial meeting.--The Commission shall hold its initial meeting not later than 60 days after the date on which appointments are completed.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive study of the efforts made by the government of Vietnam to account for any United States personnel who remain not accounted for as a result of service in the Armed Forces or other Federal Government service in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam era.
Matters studied.--The matters studied by the Commission shall include-- (A) efforts of the POW/MIA task force of the Department of Defense to dispose of the ``discrepancy'' cases involving 55 individuals who were known to be alive on the ground during the Vietnam era but who did not return to the United States; (B) efforts of the government of the United States to account for any United States personnel who remain not accounted for as a result of service in the Armed Forces or other Federal Government service in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam era; and (C) efforts of the governments of Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and the People's Republic of China, to account for any United States personnel who remain not accounted for as a result of service in the Armed Forces or other Federal Government service in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam era.
Report.--Not later than January 1, 1997, the Commission shall submit to Congress a report on its findings and recommendations.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission, the head of the agency shall provide the information to the Commission.
Administrative Support Services.--At the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the compensation of such staff as the Commission considers necessary to perform its duties.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for such staff may not exceed the rate of basic pay under the General Schedule for positions above GS-15.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay under the General Schedule for positions above GS-15.
The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date of the submission of its report under section 4(b).
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) not later than 90 days after the date of receipt of the report under section 4(b), the appropriate committees of Congress should initiate hearings to consider the findings and recommendations of the report; and (2) the appropriate committees should consider whether to adopt a resolution stating the sense of Congress on whether diplomatic relations between the United States and Vietnam should be maintained.