This Act may be cited as the ``Immigration Enforcement Reform Act of 1994''.
TITLE I--LABOR EXPLOITATION TASK FORCE SEC.
In General.--The Secretary of Labor shall establish within the Employment Standards Administration a task force to be known as the Labor Exploitation Task Force (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Task Force'').
Composition.--The Task Force shall be composed of members who are appointed by the Secretary of Labor.
Mandatory.--The Task Force shall-- (1) assist the Secretary of Labor in the enforcement of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, the Occupational Health and Safety Act, and any other Federal laws related to labor; (2) identify industries that have a history of violating laws with respect to labor, work place safety and health, or illegal immigration; (3) in coordination with other Federal agencies and State and local agencies, develop an interagency strategy to monitor, investigate, and inspect industries for violations of laws with respect to labor, work place safety and health, or illegal immigration, including, to the extent practicable, the conduct of joint inspections of industries by Federal agencies and State and local enforcement agencies); (4) advise a State or local enforcement agency on the implementation of any strategic activity described in paragraph (3) at the local level; (5) develop and define basic principles of conduct that enforcement personnel are to follow during an inspection or investigation described in paragraph (3) or during other contact with the public; (6) develop a system that centralizes Federal, State, and local data bases with respect to industries that have violated the labor, work place safety and health, or illegal immigration laws enforced by each participating enforcement agency; and (7) disseminate information to State and local agencies on the successful outcomes of the investigative, inspection, and preventive activities described in paragraph (3).
Discretionary.--The Task Force may seek advice from, or coordinate efforts to encourage cooperation among, Federal agencies concerned with the prevention of illegal immigration and the hiring and exploitation of undocumented immigrants.
Increase in Fines.--For the purposes described in subsection (b), the Secretary of Labor may increase fines prescribed by Federal law with respect to labor law violations.
Use of Amount of Fines.--The Secretary of Labor shall use the excess amount collected from a fine increased under subsection (a) for additional labor enforcement personnel, equipment, or the provision of incentives to encourage State and local enforcement agencies to cooperate in the activities described in section 102(a)(3).
An employer may not retaliate against an employee (including the termination of such employee) for participation or cooperation in any investigative, inspection, or preventive activity carried out under this title.
For purposes of this title, the term ``State and local enforcement agencies'' means a State or local governmental entity that is responsible for the enforcement of laws related to labor.
TITLE II--CITIZENSHIP PROMOTION SEC.
CITIZENSHIP PROMOTION BUREAU WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
Establishment.--There is established within the Department of Justice a Citizenship Promotion Bureau.
Director.--The Bureau shall be headed by a Director of Citizenship Promotion, who shall be a naturalized citizen of the United States and who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Purpose.--The Bureau shall be responsible for the implementation of a comprehensive program of encouraging and assisting immigrants to become naturalized citizens as soon as they become eligible to do so.
Cooperative Agreements.--The Director is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with Federal, State, and local governmental agencies and with private entities to carry out the purpose of the Bureau.
Transfer of Functions, Personnel, and Assets.--The Attorney General shall transfer to the Bureau established all functions, personnel, and assets which the Immigration and Naturalization Service exercised, employed, or held before the date of the enactment of this Act in carrying out its responsibilities relating to citizenship and naturalization.
NATIONAL CITIZENSHIP ADVISORY BOARD.
Establishment.--The Director is authorized to establish a national citizenship advisory board for the purpose of providing advice and recommendations to the Director on matters relating to the granting of citizenship status to aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States.
Applicability of Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The advisory board shall be subject to the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code Appendix 2).
Establishment.--(1) There is established in the Treasury of the United States a Naturalization Fee Account, which shall consist of the fees described in subsection (b).
Funds in the Account shall be available to carry out the activities of the Bureau.
Transfer of Fees.--Fees collected by the Bureau in connection with the performance of naturalization services shall be deposited in the account established under subsection (a).
Fee Levels.--(1) The Director shall review and reevaluate the amount of each fee charged for the performance of naturalization services.
The Director shall assure that the total amount of fees collected would cover the full cost of efficiently providing such services, including the costs of administering the Bureau and performing related outreach activities.
The Director shall, by regulation, prescribe the amount of each fee to cover the costs described in paragraph (2).
Annual Report.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and every year thereafter, the Attorney General and the Director shall jointly submit a report to Congress which-- (1) assesses the financial condition of the Naturalization Fee Account; and (2) describes the activities of the Bureau.
REDESIGNATION OF IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE.
Redesignation.--Effective on the date of enactment of this Act, the Immigration and Naturalization Service shall be referred to as the Immigration Service.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 101(a)(34) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(34) is amended by striking ``and Naturalization''.
Section 4 of the Act entitled ``An Act to establish the Department of Commerce and Labor'', approved February 14, 1903 (8 United States Code 1551) is amended by striking ``and Naturalization''.
Section 7 of the Act entitled ``An Act in amendment to the various acts related to immigration and the importation of aliens under contract or agreement to perform labor, approved March 3, 1891 (8 United States Code 1552) is amended by striking ``and Naturalization''.
Reference in any other Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, or delegation of authority, or any document of or relating to-- (1) the Attorney General or the Commissioner with regard to functions transferred under section 201, shall be deemed to refer to the Director; (2) the Service with regard to functions transferred under section 201, shall be deemed to refer to the Bureau; and (3) the Immigration and Naturalization Service shall be deemed to refer to the Immigration Service.
TITLE III--IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT PRACTICES SEC.
Establishment of Office.--There shall be established in the Department of Justice the Office of Immigration Enforcement Complaints.
Commissioner.--There shall be at the head of the Office an Immigration Enforcement Complaint Commissioner, who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Commissioner shall be directly responsible to the Attorney General for carrying out his duties.
Duties.--The Commissioner shall-- (1) have power to investigate any complaint of an unlawful immigration enforcement practice; (2) make recommendations on specific policy and disciplinary actions to the Attorney General with respect to employees of the Department; (3) make recommendations to the Attorney General for the reform of procedures applicable to the investigation of complaints of unlawful immigration enforcement practices and for disciplinary action against Department employees who engaged in such action; and (4) make recommendations to the Attorney General with respect to bringing prosecutions against employees of the Department who committed criminal offenses in the course of an unlawful immigration enforcement practice.
Compensation.--The Commissioner is entitled to receive compensation at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate payable for a position above GS-15 of the General Schedule, under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Regional Offices.--The Commissioner, in accordance with regulations of the Attorney General, shall establish such regional offices as may be necessary to carry out his duties.
Early Warning Program.--The Commissioner shall develop a system of procedures, that may be referred to as the ``early warning program'', that is designed-- (1) to identify Border Patrol officers who have been the subject of an excessive number of legitimate complaints of unlawful immigration enforcement practices; (2) to provide assistance to such officers in avoiding such difficulty in the future, including the provision of training in communication techniques, conflict resolution, and stress management; and (3) to recommend discipline where appropriate.
Protection Against Retaliation.--It shall be unlawful for the Department, or any officer thereof, to discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because the individual has opposed any practice made an unlawful immigration enforcement practice by this section or because the individual has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this section.
Records.--The Commissioner shall collect and maintain records on all complaints of unlawful immigration enforcement practices filed with the Department.
Annual Report.--Beginning one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and every year thereafter, the Commissioner shall submit a report to Congress setting forth a statistical summary of the complaints of unlawful immigration enforcement practices filed with the Department during the preceding 12-month period.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commissioner such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``Commissioner'' means the Immigration Enforcement Complaint Commissioner appointed under subsection (a); (2) the term ``Department'' means the Department of Justice; and (3) the term ``unlawful immigration enforcement practice'' means the excessive use of force, or demonstrated difficulty in dealing appropriately with members of the public, in the course of carrying out immigration enforcement activities.