This Act may be cited as the ``Lower Connecticut River Partnership Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Connecticut River watershed in the States of Connecticut and Massachusetts is a scenic region of cities and historic villages located in an internationally and nationally significant landscape of working farms, verdant forests, mountains, and broad fertile floodplains of New England's longest river, the Connecticut River.
The Connecticut River and its tributaries provide outstanding fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, and hydropower generation for the New England region.
The Connecticut River watershed has been recognized by Congress as part of the Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge, established by the Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge Act (16 United States Code 668dd note; Public Law 102-212).
The demonstrated interest in stewardship of the River by the citizens living in the watershed led to the Presidential designation of the River as one of 14 American Heritage Rivers on July 30, 1998.
Where management of the River involves partnership with local communities and organizations, support for the partnership should be provided by the Secretary.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to authorize the Secretary to provide to the States of Connecticut and Massachusetts technical and financial assistance for management of the River and the River watershed.
For the purpose of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) River.--The term ``River'' means the Connecticut River.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means-- (A) the State of Connecticut; or (B) the State of Massachusetts.
In General.--The Secretary may provide to the States technical and financial assistance in managing the River and the River watershed in cooperation and collaboration with conservation organizations and regional planning agencies in the watershed, including assistance for the following: (1) Developing policies for water quality, flow management, and recreational boating for the River.
Developing protection plans for water quality in the tributaries that flow into the River.
Developing a coordinated, collaborative approach on the part of the States for monitoring the quality of the River for human use and ecological health.
Restoring and protecting priority riverbanks to improve water quality and aquatic and riparian habitat.
Encouraging and assisting communities, farmers, conservation organizations, and riverfront landowners in-- (A) establishing and protecting riparian buffers; and (B) preventing nonpoint source pollution.
Encouraging and assisting communities in-- (A) protecting shoreland, wetland, and flood plains; and (B) managing and treating stormwater runoff.
In cooperation with dam owners-- (A) evaluating the decommissioning of uneconomic dams in the watershed; and (B) restoring natural riverine habitat.
Protecting and restoring the habitat of native trout, anadromous fisheries, and other outstanding fish and wildlife resources.
Encouraging new and improved markets for local agricultural products.
Encouraging the protection of farmland and economically sustainable agriculture.
Developing and promoting locally planned, approved, and managed networks of heritage trails and water trails.
Coordinating and fostering opportunities for heritage tourism and agritourism.
Demonstrating economic development based on heritage tourism.
Strengthening nonregulatory protection of heritage resources.
Encouraging public access to the River from towns and cities in the Valley.
Establishing indicators of sustainability.
Monitoring the impact of increased tourism and recreational use on natural and historic resources.
Administrative Costs.--Not more than 10 percent of the funds made available to any State under this Act may be used for administrative costs.
Coordination With Other Entities.--The Secretary shall encourage States receiving assistance under this Act to work in coordination with units of local government and nonprofit organizations when carrying out activities listed in subsection (a).