ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE FOR VICTIMS OF INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM.
Designation of Position.--The Secretary of State shall designate one of the Assistant Secretaries of State authorized by section 1(c)(1) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 United States Code 2651a(c)(1)) as the Assistant Secretary of State for Victims of International Terrorism.
Directive Governing the Assistant Secretary of State.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall issue a directive governing the position of the Assistant Secretary.
Elements of the directive.--The directive issued under paragraph (1) shall set forth, consistent with this section-- (A) the duties of the Assistant Secretary; (B) the relationships between the Assistant Secretary and other officials of the Department of State; (C) any delegation of authority from the Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary; and (D) such matters as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Duties.-- (1) In general.--The Assistant Secretary shall have as his or her principal responsibility the overall supervision (including oversight of policy and resources) within the Department of State of all matters relating to American victims of international terrorism and efforts to bring international terrorists to justice.
Participation of the assistant secretary.-- (A) Primary role.--Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), the Assistant Secretary, or a designee, shall participate in all interagency groups or organizations within the executive branch of Government, particulary the Department of Justice, that assess, analyze, or review United States planned or ongoing policies, programs, or actions that have a direct bearing on efforts to bring international terrorists to justice for actions affecting Americans abroad, including interagency committees concerned with international terrorism and counter-terrorism.
Requirement for designation.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to groups or organizations on which the Secretary of State or the Undersecretary of State for Arms Control and International Security sits, unless such official designates the Assistant Secretary to attend in his stead.
National security limitation.-- (i) Waiver by president.--The President may waive the provisions of subparagraph (A) if inclusion of the Assistant Secretary would not be in the national security interests of the United States.
Waiver by others.--With respect to an interagency group or organization, or meeting thereof, working with exceptionally sensitive information contained in compartments under the control of the Director of Central Intelligence or the Secretary of Defense, such Director or Secretary, as the case may be, may waive the provision of subparagraph (A) if inclusion of the Assistant Secretary would not be in the national security interests of the United States.
Transmission of waiver to congress.-- Any waiver of participation under clause (i) or (ii) shall be transmitted in writing to the appropriate committees of Congress.
Relationship to the criminal justice community.--The Assistant Secretary shall be the principal policy community representative to the criminal justice community on international terrorism affecting Americans abroad.
Reporting responsibilities.--The Assistant Secretary shall have responsibility within the Department of State for-- (A) the report required pursuant to section 2; and (B) other reports being prepared by the Department of State as of the date of enactment of this Act relating to international terrorism affecting Americans abroad.
ANNUAL REPORT ON INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM AFFECTING AMERICANS ABROAD.
The Secretary of State shall transmit to the Congress annually a report on international terrorism affecting Americans abroad and United States efforts to bring to justice international terrorists for actions affecting Americans abroad.
The report may be submitted in classified and unclassified form and shall include the following information: (1) The number of Americans kidnapped, killed, and otherwise directly affected by the actions of international terrorists.
The actions of the Departments of State and Justice to obtain justice for American victims of international terrorism.
A list of known international terrorists.
Recommendations for legislative and other actions to bring individual terrorists to justice in the United States.