This Act may be cited as the ``National Wildlife Refuge System Centennial Commemoration Act of 2000''.
Congress finds that-- (1) President Theodore Roosevelt began an American wildlife conservation legacy by establishing the first national wildlife refuge at Indian River Lagoon on Pelican Island, Florida, on March 14, 1903; (2) the National Wildlife Refuge System is comprised of more than 93,000,000 acres of Federal land managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service in more than 520 individual refuges and thousands of Waterfowl Production Areas located in all 50 States and the territories of the United States; (3) the System is the only network of Federal land that-- (A) is dedicated singularly to wildlife conservation; and (B) has wildlife-dependent recreation and environmental education as priority public uses; (4) the System serves a vital role in the conservation of millions of migratory birds, hundreds of endangered and threatened species, some of the premier fisheries of the United States, marine mammals, and the habitats on which those species depend; (5)(A) each year the System provides millions of Americans with opportunities to participate in wildlife-dependent recreation, including hunting, fishing, and wildlife observation; and (B) through those activities, Americans develop an appreciation for the natural wonders and wildlife heritage of the United States; (6) the occasion of the centennial of the beginning of the System, in 2003, presents a historic opportunity to enhance natural resource stewardship and expand compatible public enjoyment of the national wildlife refuges of the United States; and (7) the United States Fish and Wildlife Service-- (A) recognizes that the System has a backlog of unmet critical operations and maintenance needs; (B) has worked to prioritize those needs; and (C) has made efforts to control the extent of the backlog.
In this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the National Wildlife Refuge System Centennial Commission established by section 4.
System.--The term ``System'' means the National Wildlife Refuge System established by the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd et seq.).
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Wildlife Refuge System Centennial Commission''.
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of the following members: (1) The Secretary of the Interior.
The Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
The Executive Director of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation established by the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3701 et sequentes).
Up to 10 individuals, recommended by the Secretary of the Interior and appointed by the President, who-- (A) are not officers or employees of the Federal Government; and (B) shall be broadly representative of the diverse beneficiaries of the System and have outstanding knowledge or appreciation of wildlife, fisheries, natural resource management, or wildlife-dependent recreation.
The Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate and the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives, who shall be nonvoting members.
Term; Vacancies.-- (1) Term.--A member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission-- (A) shall not affect the powers of the Commission; and (B) shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold the initial meeting of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Chairperson.--The Secretary of the Interior shall serve as Chairperson of the Commission.
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) develop and carry out, in cooperation with Federal, State, local, and nongovernmental entities (including public and private associations and educational institutions), a plan to commemorate, on March 14, 2003, the centennial of the beginning of the System; (2) provide, in cooperation with the entities, host services for conferences on the System and assist in the activities of the conferences; (3) make recommendations to the Secretary of the Interior concerning the long-term plan for the System required under section 9; and (4) make recommendations to the Secretary of the Interior concerning measures that can be taken to enhance natural resources stewardship and expand compatible public enjoyment of the System.
Reports to Congress.-- (1) Annual reports.--Not later than December 31 of the first calendar year that begins after the date on which the Commission holds its initial meeting, and December 31 of each calendar year thereafter through 2003, the Commission shall submit to the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives a report on the activities and plans of the Commission.
Final report.--Not later than December 31, 2004, the Commission shall submit to the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives a final report on the activities of the Commission, including an accounting of all funds received and expended by the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission may hold such meetings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from a Federal agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Provision of information.--On request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of the agency shall provide the information to the Commission.
Financial and Administrative Services.--Subject to subsection (e)(2), the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, shall provide to the Commission financial and administrative services (including services relating to budgeting, accounting, financial reporting, personnel, and procurement).
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.-- (1) Acceptance.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property to carry out this Act.
Administration of funds.--The National Fish and Wildlife Foundation shall administer, on behalf of the Commission, any gifts of funds received under paragraph (1) in accordance with the rules and procedures of the Foundation.
Applicable Law.--Federal laws (including regulations) governing procurement by Federal agencies shall not apply to the Commission, except for laws (including regulations) concerning working conditions, wage rates, and civil rights.
Compensation of Members.--A member of the Commission shall serve without compensation for the services of the member to the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) Executive director.--The Chief of the National Wildlife Refuge System of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall serve as the Executive Director of the Commission.
Other personnel.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws (including regulations), appoint and terminate such personnel as are necessary to enable the Commission to perform the duties of the Commission.
Compensation.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the personnel appointed under paragraph (2) without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates.
Maximum rate of pay.--The rate of pay for the personnel appointed under paragraph (2) shall not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Travel Expenses.--Each member, the Executive Director, and other personnel of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for an employee of an agency under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the home or regular place of business of the individual in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Date.--The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits the report of the Commission under section 5(b)(2).
Disposition of Commission Property.-- (1) Memorabilia.--On termination of the Commission and after consultation with the Archivist of the United States and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, the Executive Director may-- (A) deposit all books, manuscripts, miscellaneous printed matter, memorabilia, relics, and other similar materials of the Commission relating to the centennial of the beginning of the System in a Federal, State, or local library or museum; or (B) make other disposition of such materials.
Other property.--The Executive Director may-- (A) use property that is acquired by the Commission and remains on termination of the Commission (other than property described in paragraph (1)) for the purposes of the System; or (B) dispose of such property as excess or surplus property.
LONG-TERM PLAN FOR SYSTEM.
After taking into consideration the recommendations of the Commission under section 5(a)(3), the Secretary of the Interior shall develop a long-term plan for the System to address-- (1) the priority staffing and operational needs as determined through-- (A) the refuge operating needs system; and (B) comprehensive conservation plans for refuges required under section 4(e) of the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd(e)); (2) the priority maintenance and construction needs as identified in the maintenance management system, the 5-year deferred maintenance list, and the 5-year construction list, developed by the Secretary of the Interior; and (3) any transition costs as identified by the Secretary of the Interior in conducting analyses of newly acquired refuge lands.
DESIGNATION OF YEAR OF THE WILDLIFE REFUGE.
In General.--Congress designates 2003 as the ``Year of the Wildlife Refuge''.
Proclamation.--Congress requests the President to issue a proclamation calling on the people of the United States to celebrate the Year of the Wildlife Refuge with appropriate ceremonies and programs.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the activities of the Commission under this Act-- (1) $100,000 for fiscal year 2001; and (2) $250,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2004.