This Act may be cited as the ``Fallen Timbers Battlefield and Fort Miamis National Historic Site Act of 1999''.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``historic site'' means the Fallen Timbers Battlefield and Monument and Fort Miamis National Historic Site established by section 4 of this Act.
The term ``management plan'' means the general management plan developed pursuant to section 5(d).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``management entity'' means the Metropolitan Park District of the Toledo Area.
The term ``technical assistance'' means any guidance, advice, or other aid, other than financial assistance, provided by the Secretary.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The 185-acre Fallen Timbers Battlefield is the site of the 1794 battle between General Anthony Wayne and a confederation of Native American tribes led by Little Turtle and Blue Jacket.
Fort Miamis was occupied by General Wayne's legion from 1796 to 1798.
In the spring of 1813, British troops, led by General Henry Proctor, landed at Fort Miamis and attacked the fort twice, without success.
Fort Miamis and Fallen Timbers Battlefield are in Lucas County, Ohio, in the city of Maumee.
The 9-acre Fallen Timbers Battlefield Monument is listed as a National Historic Landmark.
Fort Miamis is listed in the National Register of Historic Places as a historic site.
In 1959, the Fallen Timbers Battlefield was included in the National Survey of Historic Sites and Buildings as 1 of 22 sites representing the ``Advance of the Frontier, 1763-1830''.
In 1960, the Fallen Timbers Battlefield was designated as a National Historic Landmark.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to recognize and preserve the 185-acre Fallen Timbers Battlefield site; (2) to recognize and preserve the Fort Miamis site; (3) to formalize the linkage of the Fallen Timbers Battlefield and Monument to Fort Miamis; (4) to preserve and interpret United States military history and Native American culture during the period from 1794 through 1813; (5) to provide assistance to the State of Ohio, political subdivisions of the State, and nonprofit organizations in the State to implement the management plan and develop programs that will preserve and interpret the historical, cultural, natural, recreational and scenic resources of the historic site; and (6) to authorize the Secretary to provide technical assistance to the State of Ohio, political subdivisions of the State, and nonprofit organizations in the State, including the Ohio Historical Society, the city of Maumee, the Maumee Valley Heritage Corridor, the Fallen Timbers Battlefield Commission, Heidelberg College, the city of Toledo, and the Metropark District of the Toledo Area, to implement the management plan.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FALLEN TIMBERS BATTLEFIELD AND FORT MIAMIS NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
In General.--There is established, as an affiliated area of the National Park System, the Fallen Timbers Battlefield and Fort Miamis National Historic Site in the State of Ohio.
Description.--The historic site is comprised of the following as generally depicted on the map entitled Fallen Timbers Battlefield and Fort Miamis National Historical Site-proposed, number NHS-FTFM, and dated May 1999: (1) The Fallen Timbers site, comprised generally of the following: (A) The Fallen Timbers Battlefield site, consisting of an approximately 185-acre parcel located north of United States Reports 24, west of United States Reports 23/I-475, south of the Norfolk and Western Railroad line, and east of Jerome Road.
The approximately 9-acre Fallen Timbers Battlefield Monument, located south of United States Reports 24; and (2) The Fort Miamis Park site.
Map.--The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
ADMINISTRATION OF HISTORIC SITES.
Applicability of National Park System Laws.--The historic site shall be administered in a manner consistent with this Act and all laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1, 2-4; commonly known as the National Park Service Organic Act), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes; commonly known as the Historic Sites, Buildings, and Antiquities Act).
Cooperative Agreement.--The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with the management entity to provide technical assistance to ensure the marking, research, interpretation, education and preservation of the Fallen Timbers Battlefield and Fort Miamis National Historic Site.
Reimbursement.--Any payment made by the Secretary pursuant to this section shall be subject to an agreement that conversion, use, or disposal of the project so assisted for purposes contrary to the purposes of this section as determined by the Secretary, shall result in a right of the United States to reimbursement of all funds made available to such project or the proportion of the increased value of the project attributable to such funds as determined at the time of such conversion, use, or disposal, whichever is greater.
General Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the management entity and Native American tribes whose ancestors were involved in events at these sites, shall develop a general management plan for the historic site.
The plan shall be prepared in accordance with section 12(b) of Public Law 91-383 (16 United States Code 1a-1 et sequentes; commonly known as the National Park System General Authorities Act).
Completion.--The plan shall be completed not later than 2 years after the date funds are made available.
Transmittal.--Not later than 30 days after completion of the plan, the Secretary shall provide a copy of the plan to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS There is authorized to be appropriated such funds as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.