This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Benefit Integrity Act''.
PROVISION OF AID TO FAMILIES WITH DEPENDENT CHILDREN ONLY TO CITIZENS AND NATIONALS OF THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--Section 402(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 602(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (44); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (45) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (45) the following: ``(46) provide that-- ``(A) aid under the State plan shall not be payable to any family that applies therefor and does not include a citizen or national of the United States; and ``(B) the amount of aid payable under the State plan to any family that is a recipient thereof and does not include a citizen or national of the United States shall, notwithstanding any other provision of this part, be reduced each year (but not below zero) by a dollar amount equal to \1/3\ of the amount of such aid as of the later of the effective date of this paragraph or the first day the family does not include such a citizen or national.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect at the end of the 1-year period that begins with the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall apply to payments under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act for calendar quarters ending after such 1-year period, without regard to whether regulations to implement such amendments are promulgated by the end of such 1-year period.
PROVISION OF SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME BENEFITS ONLY TO CITIZENS AND NATIONALS OF THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--Section 1614(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382c(a)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraph (B)(i) and inserting the following: ``(B)(i) is a citizen or national of the United States, or''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1621 of such Act (42 United States Code 1382j) is hereby repealed.
Phase-Out of Benefits Currently Paid to Individuals Who Are Not Citizens or Nationals.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any individual who, on the date of the enactment of this Act, is not a citizen or national of the United States and is receiving supplemental security income benefits under title XVI of the Social Security Act shall, for purposes of such title, be considered a citizen or national of the United States during the 3-year period that begins with such date of enactment, except that the benefits to which the individual shall be entitled under such title shall be reduced by \1/3\ from the level of such benefits as of such date of enactment, each year during such 3-year period.
USE OF ASSISTED HOUSING BY ALIENS.
Section 214 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 1436a) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
RESTRICTION ON USE OF ASSISTED HOUSING.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may not make financial assistance available for the benefit of any individual after the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of the Federal Benefit Integrity Act unless the individual is a citizen or national of the United States.
Prohibition of New Assistance.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may not make financial assistance available for the benefit of any individual who is not a citizen or national of the United States after the expiration of the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of the Federal Benefit Integrity Act unless such individual is receiving financial assistance on such date.
Definition of Financial Assistance.--For purposes of this section, the term `financial assistance' means financial assistance made available pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937, section 235 or 236 of the National Housing Act, or section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965.
Discretionary Continuation of Financial Assistance.--If, following completion of the applicable hearing process, financial assistance for any individual receiving such assistance on the date referred to in subsection (a) is to be terminated, the public housing agency or other local governmental entity involved (in the case of public housing or assistance under section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937) or the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (in the case of any other financial assistance) may, in its discretion, take one of the following actions: ``(1) Continued provision of assistance.--Permit the continued provision of financial assistance, if necessary to avoid the division of a family in which the head of household or spouse is a citizen or national of the United States.
Deferred termination of assistance.--Defer the termination of financial assistance, if necessary to permit the orderly transition of the individual and any family members involved to other affordable housing, except that-- ``(A) any deferral under this paragraph shall be for a 6-month period and may be renewed by the public housing agency or other entity involved for an aggregate period of 3 years; and ``(B) at the beginning of each deferral period, the public housing agency or other entity involved shall inform the individual and family members of their ineligibility for financial assistance and offer them other assistance in finding other affordable housing.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `family' means a head of household, any spouse, any parents of the head of household, any parents of the spouse, and any children of the head of household or spouse.
Declaration of Citizenship.--Financial assistance may not be provided for the benefit of an individual unless the following requirements are met: ``(1) Statement.--There is a declaration in writing by the individual (or, in the case of an individual who is a child, by another on the individual's behalf), under penalty of perjury, stating that the individual is a citizen or national of the United States.
Documentation.--There is presented such documentation as the Secretary determines constitutes reasonable evidence indicating that the individual is a citizen or national of the United States.''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE FOOD STAMP ACT OF 1977.
Amendments.--The Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2011-2032) is amended-- (1) in section 5 by striking subsection (i), (2) in the first sentence of section 6(f) by striking ``(2) either'' and all that follows through ``household.
'', and inserting ``(2) a citizen or national of the United States.
'', and (3) in section 11(e)(2) by striking ``either citizens or are aliens'' and inserting ``citizens or nationals of the United States''.
Effective Date; Application of Amendments.-- (1) Effective date.--This section shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Application of amendments.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to certification periods beginning before the effective date of this section.