This Act may be cited as the ``Abandoned Hardrock Mines Reclamation Act of 1997''.
Reservation of Reclamation Fee.--Any person producing hardrock minerals from a mine that was within a mining claim that has subsequently been patented under the general mining laws shall pay a reclamation fee to the Secretary under this section.
The amount of such fee shall be equal to a percentage of the net proceeds from such mine.
The percentage shall be based upon the ratio of the net proceeds to the gross proceeds related to such production in accordance with the following table: Net proceeds as percentage of gross Rate of fee as percentage of net proceeds proceeds Less than 10................................................... 2.00 10 or more but less than 18.................................... 2.50 18 or more but less than 26.................................... 3.00 26 or more but less than 34.................................... 3.50 34 or more but less than 42.................................... 4.00 42 or more but less than 50.................................... 4.50 50 or more..................................................... 5.00 (b) Exemption.--Gross proceeds of less than $500,000 from minerals produced in any calendar year shall be exempt from the reclamation fee under this section for that year if such proceeds are from one or more mines located in a single patented claim or on two or more contiguous patented claims.
Payment.--The amount of all fees payable under this section for any calendar year shall be paid to the Secretary within 60 days after the end of such year.
Disbursement of Revenues.--The receipts from the fee collected under this section shall be paid into an Abandoned Minerals Mine Reclamation Fund.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect with respect to hardrock minerals produced in calendar years after December 31, 1996.
ABANDONED MINERALS MINE RECLAMATION FUND.
Establishment.-- (1) There is established on the books of the Treasury of the United States an interest-bearing fund to be known as the Abandoned Minerals Mine Reclamation Fund (hereafter referred to in this section as the ``Fund'').
The Fund shall be administered by the Secretary.
The Secretary shall notify the Secretary of the Treasury as to what portion of the Fund is not, in his judgment, required to meet current withdrawals.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the Fund in public debt securities with maturities suitable for the needs of such Fund and bearing interest at rates determined by the Secretary, taking into consideration current market yields on outstanding marketplace obligations of the United States of comparable maturities.
The income on such investments shall be credited to, and from a part of, the Fund.
Use and Objectives of the Fund.--The Secretary is, subject to appropriations, authorized to use moneys in the Fund for the reclamation and restoration of land and water resources adversely affected by past mineral (other than coal and fluid minerals) and mineral material mining, including but not limited to, any of the following: (1) Reclamation and restoration of abandoned surface mined areas.
Reclamation and restoration of abandoned milling and processing areas.
Sealing, filing, and grading abandoned deep mine entries.
Planting of land adversely affected by past mining to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
Prevention, abatement, treatment, and control of water pollution created by abandoned mine drainage.
Control of surface subsidence due to abandoned deep mines.
Such expenses as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.
Eligible Areas.-- (1) Land and waters eligible for reclamation expenditures under this section shall be those within the boundaries of States that have lands subject to the general mining laws-- (A) which were mined or processed for minerals and mineral materials or which were affected by such mining or processing, and abandoned or left in an inadequate reclamation status prior to the date of enactment of this title; (B) for which the Secretary makes a determination that there is no continuing reclamation responsibility under State or Federal laws; and (C) for which it can be established that such lands do not contain minerals which could economically be extracted through the reprocessing or remining of such lands.
Sites and areas designated for remedial action pursuant to the Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act of 1978 (42 United States Code 7901 and following) or which have been listed for remedial action pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 and following) shall not be eligible for expenditures from the Fund under this section.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``gross proceeds'' means the value of any extracted hardrock mineral which was: (A) sold; (B) exchanged for any thing or service; (C) removed from the country in a form ready for use or sale; or (D) initially used in a manufacturing process or in providing a service.
The term ``net proceeds'' means gross proceeds less the sum of the following deductions: (A) The actual cost of extracting the mineral.
the actual cost of transporting the mineral to the place or places of reduction, refining and sale.
The actual cost of reduction, refining and sale.
The actual cost of marketing and delivering the mineral and the conversion of the mineral into money.
The actual cost of maintenance and repairs of: (i) All machinery, equipment, apparatus and facilities used in the mine.
All milling, refining, smelting and reduction works, plants and facilities.
All facilities and equipment for transportation.
The actual cost of fire insurance on the machinery, equipment, apparatus, works, plants and facilities mentioned in subsection (E).
Depreciation of the original capitalized cost of the machinery, equipment, apparatus, works, plants and facilities mentioned in subsection (E).
All money expended for premiums for industrial insurance, and the actual cost of hospital and medical attention and accident benefits and group insurance for all employees.
The actual cost of developmental work in or about the mine or upon a group of mines when operated as a unit.
All royalties and severance taxes paid to the Federal Government or State governments.
The term ``hardrock minerals'' means any mineral other than a mineral that would be subject to disposition under any of the following if located on land subject to the general mining laws: (A) the Mineral Leasing Act (30) United States Code 181 and following); (B) the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 100 and following); (C) the Act of July 31, 1947, commonly known as the Materials Act of 1947 (30 United States Code 601 and following; or (D) the Mineral Leasing for Acquired Lands Act (30 United States Code 351 and following).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``patented mining claim'' means an interest in land which has been obtained pursuant to sections 2325 and 2326 of the Revised Statutes (30 United States Code 29 and 30) for vein or lode claims and sections 2329, 2330, 2331, and 2333 of the Revised Statutes (30 United States Code 35, 36 and 37) for placer claims, or section 2337 of the Revised Statutes (30 United States Code 42) for mill site claims.
The term ``general mining laws'' means those Acts which generally comprise Chapters 2, 12A, and 16, and sections 161 and 162 of title 30 of the United States Code.