The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Although a 1991 Sudanese criminal law prohibited abduction, kidnapping, forced labor, unlawful confinement, and unlawful detention, and although Sudan categorically denies the practice of slavery in Sudan, slavery continues unabated in Sudan.
The United States Department of State's Country Human Rights Report for 1995 noted that ``government forces carried out massacres, extrajudicial kidnapping, forced labor, and slavery'' in Sudan.
Amnesty International reports that the Government of Sudan abducted women and children from Northern Bahr al-Ghazal and the Nuba Mountains and during one of the raids of April and May of 1995 in the Babanusa to Wau area, 500 women and 150 children were taken as slaves.
In April 1996, a report by the United Nations Special Representative for Sudan, Gaspar Biro, reported ``an alarming increase in cases of slavery, servitude, slave trade and forced labor''.
The taking of slaves, particularly in war zones, and their export to parts of central and northern Sudan, continues in Sudan.
Amnesty International reports that Sudan is party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the African Charter on Human and People's Rights, the Slavery Convention, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Yet, despite being a party to these agreements, slavery still exists in Sudan.
PROHIBITION OF ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE, MILITARY ASSISTANCE, OR ARMS TRANSFERS TO THE GOVERNMENT OF SUDAN AND THE GOVERNMENTS OF CERTAIN OTHER FOREIGN COUNTRIES.
Prohibition on Assistance to Government of Sudan.--The President may not provide economic assistance, military assistance, or arms transfers to the Government of Sudan unless the President certifies to the Congress that such Government has taken appropriate action to eliminate chattel slavery in Sudan, including-- (1) the enactment of antislavery laws that provide appropriate punishment for violators of such laws; and (2) the rigorous enforcement of such laws.
Prohibition on Assistance to Governments of Certain Other Foreign Countries.--The President may not provide economic assistance, military assistance, or arms transfers to the government of any foreign country that participates, or is otherwise involved, in the establishment or conduct of slavery originating from Sudan, directly or indirectly.
Definitions.--As used in this section: (1) Economic assistance.--The term ``economic assistance'' means any assistance under part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) and any assistance under chapter 4 of part II of such Act (22 United States Code 2346 et sequentes) (relating to economic support fund), except that such term does not include humanitarian assistance.
Military assistance or arms transfers.--The term ``military assistance or arms transfers'' means-- (A) assistance under chapter 2 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2311 et sequentes) (relating to military assistance), including the transfer of excess defense articles under sections 516 through 519 of that Act (22 United States Code 2321j through 2321m); (B) assistance under chapter 5 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2347 et sequentes) (relating to international military education and training); (C) assistance under the ``Foreign Military Financing Program'' under section 23 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2763); or (D) the transfer of defense articles, defense services, or design and construction services under the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2751 et sequentes), including defense articles and defense services licensed or approved for export under section 38 of that Act (22 United States Code 2778).
ESTABLISHMENT OF SLAVERY MONITOR IN SUDAN.
The Secretary of State shall designate an individual who is assigned to the diplomatic mission in Khartoum, Sudan, to be responsible for monitoring slavery in Sudan, when such diplomatic mission is reestablished.
REPORT ON SLAVERY IN SUDAN.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and every 6 months thereafter, the President shall prepare and transmit to the Congress a report that describes all forms of covert and overt forms of slavery in Sudan.
MULTILATERAL MEASURES TO ELIMINATE SLAVERY IN SUDAN.
Requirement To Oppose Assistance to Sudan From Certain International Financial Institutions.--The President shall instruct the United States representative to each international financial institution to which the United States is a member to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose any assistance from that financial institution to Sudan until the Government of Sudan has taken the actions described in section 2(a) to eliminate chattel slavery in Sudan.
Cooperation With Other Countries To Apply United States Sanctions Against Sudan.--The President shall instruct the United States permanent representative to the United Nations to actively pursue the passage of any resolution by the United Nations Security Council that enhances the cooperation of other countries in the application of the spirit and intent of the sanctions against Sudan described in this Act and in any other Act.
Sense of the Congress Relating to Access by Humanitarian Assistance Organizations Within Sudan.--It is the sense of the Congress that the President should work with foreign countries and appropriate international organizations to ensure that humanitarian assistance organizations have access to all parts of Sudan for the purpose of assisting individuals who have been enslaved to resettle in Sudan.