This Act may be cited as the ``Gun Violence Economic Equity Act of 1993''.
CAUSE OF ACTION; FEDERAL JURISDICTION.
In General.--Any person suffering bodily injury or death as a result of the discharge of a handgun or an assault weapon may bring an action in any United States district court against any permissible defendant for damages and such other relief as the court deems appropriate.
Permissible Defendants.--The following persons are permissible defendants in an action brought under subsection (a) with respect to a handgun or an assault weapon: (1) Any manufacturer of the handgun or assault weapon.
Any importer of the handgun or assault weapon.
Any dealer who transferred the handgun or assault weapon.
In General.--Each defendant in an action brought under section 2(a) shall be held strictly liable in tort, without regard to fault or proof of defect, for all direct and consequential damages that arise from bodily injury or death proximately resulting from the discharge of the handgun or assault weapon with respect to which the defendant is a permissible defendant, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section.
Defenses.-- (1) Injury while committing a felony.--There shall be no liability under subsection (a) if it is established by a preponderance of the evidence that the plaintiff suffered the injury while committing a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year.
Self-inflicted injury.--There shall be no liability under subsection (a) if it is established by a preponderance of the evidence that the plaintiff's injury was self-inflicted.
Injury by law enforcement officer.--There shall be no liability under subsection (a) if it is established by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury was suffered as a result of the discharge, by a law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties, of a handgun or assault weapon issued by the United States or any department or agency thereof, or any State or any department, agency, or political subdivision thereof.
Injury by member of the united states armed forces.-- There shall be no liability under subsection (a) if it is established by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury was suffered as a result of the discharge, by a member of the Armed Forces of the United States in the performance of military duties, of a handgun or assault weapon issued by the United States or any department or agency thereof.
Authority To Award a Reasonable Attorney's Fee.--In an action brought under section 2(a), the court may, in its discretion, allow the prevailing party a reasonable attorney's fee as part of the costs.
An action may not be brought under section 2(a) after the 2-year period that begins with the date the injury described therein is discovered.
This Act shall apply only to handguns and assault weapons manufactured in, imported into, or transferred in the United States, after the effective date of this Act.
NO EFFECT ON OTHER CAUSES OF ACTION.
This Act shall not be construed to limit the scope of any other cause of action available to a person injured as a result of the discharge of a handgun or an assault weapon.
As used in this Act: (1) Handgun.--The term ``handgun'' means a firearm which, at the time of manufacture, had a barrel of less than 12 inches in length.
Assault weapon.--The term ``assault weapon'' means-- (A) a firearm-- (i) which-- (I) has a barrel of 12 or more inches in length; and (II) is capable of receiving ammunition directly from a large capacity ammunition magazine; or (ii) which is-- (I) a semiautomatic firearm; and (II) not generally recognized as particularly suitable for, or readily adaptable to, sporting purposes; or (B) a firearm which is substantially functionally equivalent to a firearm described by clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (A).
Large capacity ammunition magazine.--The term ``large capacity ammunition magazine'' means a detachable magazine, belt, drum, feed strip, or similar device which has, or which can be readily restored or converted to have, a capacity of 15 or more rounds of ammunition.
Semiautomatic firearm.--The term ``semiautomatic firearm'' means any repeating firearm which utilizes a portion of the energy of a firing cartridge to extract the fired cartridge case and chamber the next round, and which requires a separate pull of the trigger to fire each cartridge.
Law enforcement officer.--The term ``law enforcement officer'' means any officer, agent, or employee of the United States, or of a State or political subdivision thereof, who is authorized by law to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of any violation of law.
Other terms.--The terms ``firearm'', ``importer'', ``manufacturer'', and ``dealer'' shall have the meanings given such terms, respectively, in paragraphs (3), (9), (10), and (11) of section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code.
This Act shall apply to conduct occurring after the end of the 20- day period that begins with the date of the enactment of this Act.