This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Employees Leave Transfer Act of 2011''.
AUTHORITY TO TRANSFER SICK LEAVE.
Direct Transfers of Leave.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter III of chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 6338 the following: ``Sec.
Sick leave ``(a) The Office of Personnel Management shall by regulation modify the program established under the preceding provisions of this subchapter so as to permit, in addition to annual leave, the transfer and use of sick leave.
To the extent feasible, the terms and conditions governing the transfer and use of sick leave under the regulations shall be the same as those governing the transfer and use of annual leave under the preceding provisions of this subchapter, subject to the following: ``(1) Sick leave may not be transferred or used in connection with any purpose for which accrued sick leave could not be used by the leave recipient under subchapter I.
Sick leave received under this subchapter-- ``(A) may not be used before the exhaustion requirement under section 6333(b) has been met; and ``(B) shall not (for restoration purposes, if applicable) be considered to have been used before all transferred annual leave has been exhausted.
Nothing in this section shall affect the maximum amount of sick leave or annual leave which may be accrued by a leave recipient while using any leave received under this subchapter in connection with a particular medical emergency.
An employee who donates sick leave pursuant to this section shall not be conferred any benefit (including an appointment, promotion, or compensation) in connection with such donation.''.
Technical and conforming amendments.-- (A) Prohibition of coercion.--Section 6338(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``annual leave'' and inserting ``annual or sick leave''.
Excepted agencies.--Section 6339(b)(1) of such title is amended-- (i) by striking ``annual leave accrued'' and inserting ``annual or sick leave accrued''; and (ii) by striking ``annual leave account'' and inserting ``annual or sick leave account (as applicable)''.
Table of contents.--The table of sections for chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 6338 the following: ``6338a.
Leave Bank Program.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter IV of chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 6371 the following: ``Sec.
Sick leave ``(a) The Office of Personnel Management shall by regulation modify the program established under the preceding provisions of this subchapter so as to permit, in addition to annual leave, the contribution and use of sick leave.
To the extent feasible, the terms and conditions governing the contribution and use of sick leave under the regulations shall be the same as those governing the contribution and use of annual leave under the preceding provisions of this subchapter, subject to the following: ``(1) Sick leave may not be used in connection with any purpose for which accrued sick leave could not be used by the leave recipient under subchapter I.
Sick leave may be contributed instead of annual leave in order to satisfy, in whole or in part, the requirements of section 6366(a)(2)(A).
Sick leave received under this subchapter may not be used before the exhaustion requirement under section 6367(c) has been met.
Nothing in this section shall affect the maximum amount of sick leave or annual leave which may be accrued by a leave recipient while using leave received under this subchapter in connection with a particular medical emergency.
An employee who donates sick leave pursuant to this section shall not be conferred any benefit (including an appointment, promotion, or compensation) in connection of such donation.''.
Technical and conforming amendments.-- (A) Prohibition of coercion.--Section 6370(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``annual leave'' and inserting ``annual or sick leave''.
Excepted agencies.--Section 6372(c)(1) of such title is amended by striking ``annual leave accrued'' and inserting ``annual or sick leave accrued''.
Table of contents.--The table of sections for chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 6371 the following: ``6371a.
Effective Date.--Regulations required to be prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management under the amendments made by this section shall become effective not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of such section.