The Congress finds the following: (1) The National Park Service administers Federal parks, monuments, and reservations, to conserve the scenery, the natural and historic objects, and wildlife therein, and provides for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.
It is the function of the Federal Aviation Administration to manage the safe and efficient use of the navigable airspace of the United States, as provided for in the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code App.
The National Park Service lands in the State of Hawaii, consisting of Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical Park, Kalaupapa National Historical Park, Pu'u honua o Honaunau National Historical Park, Pu'u Kohola Heiau National Historic Site, Haleakala National Park, and Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, are managed for the purposes of wilderness preservation, protecting natural, cultural, historical, and wildlife resources, and for promotion of the public enjoyment and use of these resources.
Haleakala and Hawaii Volcanoes National Parks are designated by the United Nations as International Biosphere Reserves because of their internationally significant scenery and plant and animal communities, and furthermore that Hawaii Volcanoes National Park is designated by the United Nations as a World Heritage Site because of the significance of Mauna Loa and Kilauea Volcanoes.
In recognition of the values for which National Park Service lands are managed, an above ground level (AGL) minimum altitude of 1,500 feet shall be established for aircraft flying in airspace over certain lands administered by the National Park Service.
The auditory and visual intrusion of aircraft flying at low altitudes is the source of public complaint in certain areas administered by the National Park Service.
Aircraft flying at low altitudes may pose a potential hazard to wildlife in certain areas administered by the National Park Service.
Aircraft flying at low altitudes over large concentrations of migratory birds may pose a potential safety hazard to pilots and passengers in certain areas administered by the National Park Service.
The Federal Aviation Administration and National Park Service shall act in cooperation to reduce the incidence of low-flying aircraft, including fixed-wing aircraft, helicopters, ultralight vehicles, balloons, and gliders over National Park Service administered land by complying with the 1,500 feet AGL minimum altitude requirement, and to avoid flying over areas which the National Park Service designates as noise-sensitive, and to respect standoff distances away from areas which the National Park Service designates as primary visitor use areas.
NATIONAL PARK SERVICE RESPONSIBILITIES.
The Director of the National Park Service shall be responsible for the following: (1) Identification of specific areas.--Identifying specific areas where low-flying aircraft may constitute an adverse impact on resources and conveying specific information, including annotated maps, which indicate designated flight-free areas and primary visitor use areas, to the Federal Aviation Administration for appropriate action as described in section 3.
Low-flying reporting system.--Developing and implementing a standardized reporting system acceptable to the Federal Aviation Administration to document instances of low- flying aircraft over National Park Service administered lands.
This reporting system shall provide for transmittal of such documentation in a timely manner to the Honolulu Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards district office.
Training.--Developing training programs and instructional materials for National Park Service personnel to enable them to recognize and report instances of low-flying aircraft in a competent and professional manner.
The appropriate training programs of the National Park Service shall expand to incorporate the subject matter into in-service training requirements.
The Director of the National Park Service shall seek the assistance of the Federal Aviation Administration to help develop training curricula.
Quarterly meeting.--Making personnel available from the National Park Service to meet quarterly with the Federal Aviation Administration and affected pilots to discuss resources management objectives and issues associated with low- flying aircraft.
The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall be responsible for the following: (1) Communication with pilots.--Communicating to pilots the concerns and objectives of the National Park Service about low- flying aircraft in specified areas, using advisories, bulletins, the Federal Aviation Administration publication The Federal Aviation News, the ongoing ``Accident Prevention Program'' for routine pilots' contact, and other means of communications with pilots, and to impress upon pilots that pilot participation is strongly encouraged to ensure protection of resources and the enjoyment of natural areas by the public.
Investigations.--Investigating instances of pilot deviations from the Federal Aviation Administration requested minimum altitude over areas, and National Park Service- designated flight-free and primary visitor use areas in lands administered by the National Park Service, and taking action to discourage deviations with the objectives of reducing or eliminating such incidents in these areas.
Military aircraft.--Assisting the National Park Service in communicating with the various agencies of the Department of Defense with regard to military aircraft operations over National Park Service administered areas.
Availability of status and results of investigations.-- Making available to the National Park Service, at the Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards district office, the status and results of the Federal Aviation Administration's investigation of instances reported by the National Park Service.
Support of aviation groups.--Enlisting the support of all aviation groups and organizations by requesting they disseminate information about problems associated with aircraft operating at low altitudes over areas administered by the National Park Service.
Meetings with national park service.--Assisting the National Park Service in combating problems associated with low-flying aircraft by participating in appropriate meetings at field and regional levels.
Kaloko Honokohau, Pu'u honua o Honaunau, Pu'u kohola Heiau, and Kalaupapa National Historical Parks.--Inasmuch as Kaloko Honokohau, Pu'u honua o Honaunau, Pu'u kohola Heiau, and Kalaupapa National Historical Parks are mandated to protect historical, cultural, and religious values, and other resources considered sacred to Hawaiian people, all, in their entirety are considered noise-sensitive and shall not be overflown by commercial tour aircraft.
Commercial fixed-wing aircraft which are not on scenic tours may overfly Kaloko Honokohau when it is unsafe to use alternative approaches to Keahole Airport.
Furthermore, inasmuch as those areas are small and are entirely primary visitor use areas, scenic tour aircraft shall maintain a 2-mile standoff distance.
Haleakala National Park.--Inasmuch as Haleakala National Park is mandated to protect natural and cultural resources, and especially rare and endangered plant and animal species, magnificent scenery, and tranquil and unique wilderness, the Crater District and Kipahulu Valley, including adjacent rain forest areas within the Park, in their entirety, are considered noise-sensitive and shall not be overflown.
Furthermore, inasmuch as the overlook near the Sliding Sands trailhead is a primary visitor use area where people often are assembled on the ground, a two-mile stand-off distance shall be maintained.
Hawaii Volcanoes National Park.--Inasmuch as Hawaii Volcanoes National Park is mandated to protect natural and cultural resources, and especially rare and endangered plant and animal species, magnificent scenery, and tranquil and unique wilderness, the designated wilderness areas, in their entirety, consisting of Mauna Loa, Ola's Forest, East Rift, and Kau Desert, and the summit of Kilauea, and the coastal area between Ka'aha and Kamoamoa are considered noise-sensitive and shall not be overflown.
Furthermore, inasmuch as the Kilauea summit, the Chain of Craters corridor, and the Kamoamoa village sites are primary visitor use areas where people often are assembled on the ground, a 2-mile standoff distance shall be maintained.
Minimum Altitude Restriction.--It shall be unlawful for any fixed wing aircraft or helicopter flying under visual flight rules to fly at an altitude of less than 1,500 feet over the surface of any National Park System lands in the State of Hawaii not subject to subsections (a) through (c) of this section.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``surface'' refers to the highest terrain within such lands which is within 1,500 feet laterally of the route of flight.
For purposes of enforcement, the prohibition pursuant to this subsection shall be treated as a requirement established pursuant to section 307 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958.
To provide information to pilots regarding the restrictions established under this subsection, the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall provide public notice of such restrictions in appropriate Federal Aviation Administration publications as soon as practicable after the enactment of this Act.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION AND NATIONAL PARK SERVICE JOINT RESPONSIBILITY.
The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Director of the National Park Service shall jointly be responsible for the following: (1) Additional assessments.--Assess situations in addition to those specified in section 4 where impacts of aircraft operations upon human, cultural, or natural resources are sufficiently serious to warrant consideration of site-specific action by the Federal Aviation Administration to minimize or eliminate the causes of such problems.
Informational materials and scientific studies.-- Prepare public informational materials, including printed matter and audio-visual programs, for communication to pilots using existing Federal Aviation Administration pilot-contact meetings and programs, aviation periodicals, and other means of generating pilot understanding of National Park Service resources management objectives.
Where appropriate, the Federal Aviation Administration and the National Park Service will share information on techniques of conducting scientific studies and data collection to facilitate understanding of the impact of aircraft operations on affected resources.
Procedures.--Work together to define procedures for use at national headquarters and field office levels to address overflight issues over public land areas.
APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN REGULATIONS TO CERTAIN SIGHTSEEING FLIGHTS.
Parts 91 and 135 of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, relating to general operating and flight rules and to air taxi operators and commercial operators, respectively, shall apply to nonstop sightseeing flights that begin and end at the same airport and are conducted within a 25 statute mile radius of the airport.