This Act may be cited as the ``Reading Readiness Act of 2001''.
READING READINESS REPORT AND EVALUATION OF CURRENT BEST READING READINESS PRACTICES.
Section 649(d) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9844(d)) is amended-- (1) in subsection (d)-- (A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (9) as paragraphs (3) through (10), respectively, and (B) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following: ``(2) determine whether every Head Start program is providing to children who participate in such program the tools necessary to succeed in school, including reading readiness, and to review current best practices of Head Start programs with respect to reading readiness;'', and (2) in the matter following paragraph (10), as so redesignated, by striking ``paragraph (9)'' and inserting ``paragraph (10)''.
REQUIRING READING READINESS IN ALL HEAD START PROGRAMS.
The Head Start Act (42 U.S.C 9831 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 636 by inserting ``(including a strong focus on reading readiness)'' after ``other services'', and (2) in section 638 by inserting ``(including a strong focus on reading readiness)'' after ``other services''.
INCENTIVE FOR HEAD START PROGRAMS TO ADOPT CURRENT BEST PRACTICES IN READING READINESS ACTIVITIES.
Financial Assistance.--Section 638 of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9833) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec.
'', and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) From the portion specified in section 639(b)(4), the Secretary shall award grants under this subsection on a competitive basis to applicants selected by the Secretary to carry out current best practices in reading readiness activities.''.
Priority Use of Allotted Funds.--Section 640(a)(2)(C) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9835(a)(2)(C)) is amended in the matter preceding clause (i) by inserting ``reading readiness and'' after ``carry out''.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS ON MAKING HEAD START SEAMLESS.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Recent early brain research has yielded evidence of the need to help children in the earliest years of life in order to ensure their success in school and in life.
The Early Head Start pilot program begun in 1994 has proven the value of intervention with younger children and their families.
Head Start programs have shown an increasing interest to expand the scope of their preschool programs to include infants, toddlers, and their families, and there is nothing in the Head Start Act that precludes the Secretary of Health and Human Services from approving the use of preschool Head Start funds to enroll children less than 3 years of age.
Sense of the Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that the Secretary of Health and Human Services should immediately take such steps as may be necessary to allow Head Start grantees that find evidence of community need, to modify the use of their current grants so as to enroll infants and toddlers in Head Start programs without obtaining a separate Early Head Start grant.
NATIONAL HEAD START ENROLLMENT CAMPAIGN.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall implement an outreach campaign to promote enrollment in Head Start programs and Early Head Start programs and shall include in such campaign-- (1) forceful messages that convey the fact that participating in such programs increases the ability of children to learn to read, and (2) outreach activities in hospitals, clinics, Federal food assistance programs, child care referral agencies, and other programs that serve the health needs of children and pregnant women.
Section 645(a)(1)(B)(i) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9840(a)(1)(B)(i)) is amended to read as follows: ``(i) programs demonstrating by community assessment that all reasonable attempt has been made to enroll children whose families' incomes are below the poverty line may make eligible for participation in the program children whose families' incomes are no greater than 150 percent of the poverty line; and''.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS REGARDING FULL FUNDING OF THE HEAD START ACT.
It is the sense of the Congress that the Congress should appropriate sufficient funds to carry out the Head Start Act so that all children who are eligible to participate in programs under such Act (including children who are on waiting lists to participate in such programs) may participate in such programs.
Section 639 of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9834) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a) by striking ``such sums'' and all that follows through ``2003'', and inserting ``$9,200,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and $11,200,000,000 for fiscal year 2003'', and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) in paragraph (2) by striking ``and'' at the end, (B) in paragraph (3) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and'', and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) not more than $1,000,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 and 2003 to provide additional funds for expansion of existing Head Start programs or for new grantees who are using current best practices in reading readiness activities identified under section 649(d)(2).