This Act may be cited as the ``Automobile National Heritage Area Act of 1998''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the industrial, cultural, and natural heritage legacies of Michigan's automobile industry are nationally significant; (2) in the areas of Michigan including and in proximity to Detroit, Dearborn, Flint, and Lansing, the design and manufacture of the automobile helped establish and expand the United States industrial power; (3) the industrial strength of automobile manufacturing was vital to defending freedom and democracy in 2 world wars and played a defining role in American victories; (4) the economic strength of our Nation is connected integrally to the vitality of the automobile industry, which employs millions of workers and upon which 1 out of 7 United States jobs depends; (5) the industrial and cultural heritage of the automobile industry in Michigan includes the social history and living cultural traditions of several generations; (6) the United Auto Workers and other unions played a significant role in the history and progress of the labor movement and the automobile industry; (7) the Department of the Interior is responsible for protecting and interpreting the Nation's cultural and historic resources, and there are significant examples of these resources within Michigan to merit the involvement of the Federal Government to develop programs and projects in cooperation with the Automobile National Heritage Area Partnership, Incorporated, the State of Michigan, and other local and governmental bodies, to adequately conserve, protect, and interpret this heritage for the educational and recreational benefit of this and future generations of Americans; (8) the Automobile National Heritage Area Partnership, Incorporated would be an appropriate entity to oversee the development of the Automobile National Heritage Area; and (9) 2 local studies, ``A Shared Vision for Metropolitan Detroit'' and ``The Machine That Changed the World'', and a National Park Service study, ``Labor History Theme Study: Phase III; Suitability-Feasibility'', demonstrated that sufficient historical resources exist to establish the Automobile National Heritage Area.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish the Automobile National Heritage Area to-- (1) foster a close working relationship with all levels of government, the private sector, and the local communities in Michigan and empower communities in Michigan to conserve their automotive heritage while strengthening future economic opportunities; and (2) conserve, interpret, and develop the historical, cultural, natural, and recreational resources related to the industrial and cultural heritage of the Automobile National Heritage Area.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Board of Directors of the Partnership.
Heritage area.--The term ``Heritage Area'' means the Automobile National Heritage Area established by section 4.
Partnership.--The term ``Partnership'' means the Automobile National Heritage Area Partnership, Incorporated (a nonprofit corporation established under the laws of the State of Michigan).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
AUTOMOBILE NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is established in the State of Michigan the Automobile National Heritage Area.
Boundaries.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the boundaries of the Heritage Area shall include lands in Michigan that are related to the following corridors: (A) The Rouge River Corridor.
The Detroit River Corridor.
The Woodward Avenue Corridor.
The Sauk Trail/Chicago Road Corridor.
Specific boundaries.--The specific boundaries of the Heritage Area shall be those specified in the management plan approved under section 6.
Map.--The Secretary shall prepare a map of the Heritage Area which shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director of the National Park Service.
Consent of local governments.--(A) The Partnership shall provide to the government of each city, village, and township that has jurisdiction over property proposed to be included in the Heritage Area written notice of that proposal.
Property may not be included in the Heritage Area if-- (i) the Partnership fails to give notice of the inclusion in accordance with subparagraph (A); (ii) any local government to which the notice is required to be provided objects to the inclusion, in writing to the Partnership, by not later than the end of the period provided pursuant to clause (iii); or (iii) fails to provide a period of at least 60 days for objection under clause (ii).
Administration.--The Heritage Area shall be administered in accordance with this Act.
Additions and Deletions of Lands.--The Secretary may add or remove lands to or from the Heritage Area in response to a request from the Partnership.
DESIGNATION OF PARTNERSHIP AS MANAGEMENT ENTITY.
In General.--The Partnership shall be the management entity for the Heritage Area.
Federal Funding.-- (1) Authorization to receive funds.--The Partnership may receive amounts appropriated to carry out this Act.
Disqualification.--If a management plan for the Area is not submitted to the Secretary as required under section 6 within the time specified in that section, the Partnership shall cease to be authorized to receive Federal funding under this Act until such a plan is submitted to the Secretary.
Authorities of Partnership.--The Partnership may, for purposes of preparing and implementing the management plan for the Area, use Federal funds made available under this Act-- (1) to make grants and loans to the State of Michigan, its political subdivisions, nonprofit organizations, and other persons; (2) to enter into cooperative agreements with or provide technical assistance to Federal agencies, the State of Michigan, its political subdivisions, nonprofit organizations, and other persons; (3) to hire and compensate staff; (4) to obtain money from any source under any program or law requiring the recipient of such money to make a contribution in order to receive such money; and (5) to contract for goods and services.
Prohibition of Acquisition of Real Property.--The Partnership may not use Federal funds received under this Act to acquire real property or any interest in real property.
MANAGEMENT DUTIES OF THE AUTOMOBILE NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA PARTNERSHIP.
Heritage Area Management Plan.-- (1) Submission for review by secretary.--The Board of Directors of the Partnership shall, within 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, develop and submit for review to the Secretary a management plan for the Area.
Plan requirements, generally.--A management plan submitted under this section shall-- (A) present comprehensive recommendations for the conservation, funding, management, and development of the Heritage Area; (B) be prepared with public participation; (C) take into consideration existing Federal, State, county, and local plans and involve residents, public agencies, and private organizations in the Heritage Area; (D) include a description of actions that units of government and private organizations are recommended to take to protect the resources of the Heritage Area; and (E) specify existing and potential sources of Federal and non-Federal funding for the conservation, management, and development of the Heritage Area.
Additional plan requirements.--The management plan also shall include the following, as appropriate: (A) An inventory of resources contained in the Heritage Area, including a list of property in the Heritage Area that should be conserved, restored, managed, developed, or maintained because of the natural, cultural, or historic significance of the property as it relates to the themes of the Heritage Area.
The inventory may not include any property that is privately owned unless the owner of the property consents in writing to that inclusion.
A recommendation of policies for resource management that consider and detail the application of appropriate land and water management techniques, including (but not limited to) the development of intergovernmental cooperative agreements to manage the historical, cultural, and natural resources and recreational opportunities of the Heritage Area in a manner consistent with the support of appropriate and compatible economic viability.
A program for implementation of the management plan, including plans for restoration and construction and a description of any commitments that have been made by persons interested in management of the Heritage Area.
An analysis of means by which Federal, State, and local programs may best be coordinated to promote the purposes of this Act.
An interpretive plan for the Heritage Area.
Approval and disapproval of the management plan.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 60 days after submission of the Heritage Area management plan by the Board, the Secretary shall approve or disapprove the plan.
If the Secretary has taken no action after 60 days, the plan shall be considered approved.
Disapproval and revisions.--If the Secretary disapproves the management plan, the Secretary shall advise the Board, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval and shall make recommendations for revision of the plan.
The Secretary shall approve or disapprove proposed revisions to the plan not later than 60 days after receipt of such revisions from the Board.
If the Secretary has taken no action for 60 days after receipt, the plan and revisions shall be considered approved.
Priorities.--The Partnership shall give priority to the implementation of actions, goals, and policies set forth in the management plan for the Heritage Area, including-- (1) assisting units of government, regional planning organizations, and nonprofit organizations-- (A) in conserving the Heritage Area; (B) in establishing and maintaining interpretive exhibits in the Heritage Area; (C) in developing recreational opportunities in the Heritage Area; (D) in increasing public awareness of and appreciation for the natural, historical, and cultural resources of the Heritage Area; (E) in the restoration of historic buildings that are located within the boundaries of the Heritage Area and related to the theme of the Heritage Area; and (F) in ensuring that clear, consistent, and environmentally appropriate signs identifying access points and sites of interest are put in place throughout the Heritage Area; and (2) consistent with the goals of the management plan, encouraging economic viability in the affected communities by appropriate means.
Consideration of Interests of Local Groups.--The Partnership shall, in preparing and implementing the management plan for the Heritage Area, consider the interest of diverse units of government, businesses, private property owners, and nonprofit groups within the Heritage Area.
Public Meetings.--The Partnership shall conduct public meetings at least annually regarding the implementation of the Heritage Area management plan.
Annual Reports.--The Partnership shall, for any fiscal year in which it receives Federal funds under this Act or in which a loan made by the Partnership with Federal funds under section 5(c)(1) is outstanding, submit an annual report to the Secretary setting forth its accomplishments, its expenses and income, and the entities to which it made any loans and grants during the year for which the report is made.
Cooperation With Audits.--The Partnership shall, for any fiscal year in which it receives Federal funds under this Act or in which a loan made by the Partnership with Federal funds under section 5(c)(1) is outstanding, make available for audit by the Congress, the Secretary, and appropriate units of government all records and other information pertaining to the expenditure of such funds and any matching funds, and require, for all agreements authorizing expenditure of Federal funds by other organizations, that the receiving organizations make available for such audit all records and other information pertaining to the expenditure of such funds.
Delegation.--The Partnership may delegate the responsibilities and actions under this section for each corridor identified in section 4(b)(1).
All delegated actions are subject to review and approval by the Partnership.
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Technical Assistance and Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may provide technical assistance and, subject to the availability of appropriations, grants to units of government, nonprofit organizations, and other persons upon request of the Partnership, and to the Partnership, regarding the management plan and its implementation.
Prohibition of certain requirements.--The Secretary may not, as a condition of the award of technical assistance or grants under this section, require any recipient of such technical assistance or a grant to enact or modify land use restrictions.
Determinations regarding assistance.--The Secretary shall decide if a person shall be awarded technical assistance or grants and the amount of that assistance.
Such decisions shall be based on the relative degree to which the Heritage Area effectively fulfills the objectives contained in the Heritage Area management plan and achieves the purposes of this Act.
Such decisions shall give consideration to projects which provide a greater leverage of Federal funds.
Provision of Information.--In cooperation with other Federal agencies, the Secretary shall provide the general public with information regarding the location and character of the Heritage Area.
Other Assistance.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with public and private organizations for the purposes of implementing this subsection.
Duties of Other Federal Agencies.--Any Federal entity conducting any activity directly affecting the Heritage Area shall consider the potential effect of the activity on the Heritage Area management plan and shall consult with the Partnership with respect to the activity to minimize the adverse effects of the activity on the Heritage Area.
LACK OF EFFECT ON LAND USE REGULATION AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
Lack of Effect on Authority of Local Government.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to modify, enlarge, or diminish any authority of Federal, State, or local governments to regulate any use of land under any other law or regulation.
Lack of Zoning or Land Use Powers.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to grant powers of zoning or land use control to the Partnership.
Local Authority and Private Property Not Affected.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect or to authorize the Partnership to interfere with-- (1) the rights of any person with respect to private property; or (2) any local zoning ordinance or land use plan of the State of Michigan or a political subdivision thereof.
The Secretary may not make any grant or provide any assistance under this Act after September 30, 2014.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated under this Act not more than $1,000,000 for any fiscal year.
Not more than a total of $10,000,000 may be appropriated for the Heritage Area under this Act.
50 Percent Match.--Federal funding provided under this Act, after the designation of the Heritage Area, may not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of any activity carried out with any financial assistance or grant provided under this Act.