This Act may be cited as the ``Full Employment Opportunity and Infrastructure Improvement Act of 1994''.
PUBLIC WORKS AND PUBLIC SERVICE JOB TRAINING PROGRAM.
In General.--The Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1501 et sequentes) (in this Act referred to as ``the Act'') is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE VIII--PUBLIC WORKS AND PUBLIC SERVICE JOB TRAINING PROGRAM ``SEC.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- ``(1) restoring the competitiveness and enhancing the productivity of the United States will require that all workers possess basic job and educational skills; and ``(2) an investment in human capital will have a substantial impact on increasing productivity in the United States.
Purposes.--The purposes of this title are to establish a public works and public service job training program designed-- ``(1) to provide on-the-job training opportunities for hard-to-employ individuals; and ``(2) to improve infrastructure and public sector service delivery.
Allotment to States.--Of the amount appropriated under section 3(g) for each fiscal year and available to carry out this title, the Secretary shall allot such amount to the States for allocation to service delivery areas within each State.
Allocation to Service Delivery Areas.--Of the amount allotted to a State under subsection (a) for a fiscal year, the Governor shall allocate such amount to service delivery areas in such State in accordance with the criteria contained in subparagraphs (A) through (C) of section 202(b)(1).
Reallotment.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the end of each program year, the Secretary shall, in accordance with the requirements of this subsection, reallot to eligible States amounts appropriated for such program year that are available for reallotment under paragraph (2).
Amount.--The amount available for reallotment is equal to the amount by which the unobligated balance of the State allotment under subsection (a) for all States at the end of the program year prior to the program year for which the determination under this subsection is made exceeds 20 percent of such allotment for that prior program year.
Eligible states defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `eligible States' means States that demonstrate progress toward achieving the objectives of this title and that require additional funds in order to accomplish such objectives, as determined by the Secretary.
In General.--A service delivery area shall use amounts allocated under section 802 to establish a public works and public service job training program under which eligible individuals participate in job projects in accordance with this title.
Conduct of Program.--In carrying out the program established under subsection (a), the service delivery area shall-- ``(1) prepare a plan for the establishment and conduct of job projects pursuant to criteria prescribed by the Secretary; ``(2) submit such plan to the Secretary for review and approval; ``(3) provide for an objective assessment of the skill levels and service needs of each participant to determine the appropriate job project for each such participant; ``(4) provide participants with limited English speaking ability such instruction as the service delivery area considers appropriate; ``(5) use objective measures to monitor the success or failure of the participant in the job project and maintain records on each participant; ``(6) conduct outreach activities to attract eligible individuals; ``(7) provide pre-employment skills and work responsibility training; ``(8) provide each participant with-- ``(A) information about and referrals to pre- college and adult continuing education and related training programs; ``(B) appropriate social services, including information relating to educational programs; and ``(C) information about programs and services provided by the State apprenticeship council; ``(9) establish a job counseling and job placement service to assist each participant in obtaining employment upon completion of the job project, including the training-related placement of minorities in nontraditional employment and apprenticeships; and ``(10) prepare and submit an annual report to the Secretary on the activities of the service delivery area with respect to the program.
Job Project Requirements.--Each job project shall meet the following requirements: ``(1) Each job project shall be capable of completion within 24 months.
Each job project shall provide for on-the-job training and employment of eligible individuals, including the training of minorities in nontraditional employment.
A participant who has not received a high school diploma or its equivalent shall, in order to continue employment in the project, maintain satisfactory progress toward receiving a high school diploma or its equivalent.
Personnel.--A service delivery area shall-- ``(1) employ an administrator and support personnel sufficient to carry out the program established under subsection (a); and ``(2) select a project manager for each job project assisted under this title, in accordance with criteria established by the Secretary.
Progress Reports.--The administrator shall prepare and submit to the private industry council of the service delivery area monthly progress reports on the job projects.
Administrative Costs.--Not more than 10 percent of amounts allocated under section 802 to a service delivery area for a fiscal year may be used for administrative expenses in carrying out the program established under subsection (a).
Criteria Relating to Profit or Loss of Employers.--The Secretary shall develop criteria to be used by each private industry council to evaluate the projected profit or loss of an employer with respect to a job project carried out by such employer.
Job Project Defined.--For purposes of this title, the term `job project' means-- ``(1) the construction, renovation, repair, or other improvement, and maintenance of a public building or other public facility (including a surface transportation, aviation, water resources, solid waste management, or drinking water facility) with commercial, industrial, public, service, or other value, or ``(2) work in such fields as environmental quality, health care, education, public safety, crime prevention and control, prison rehabilitation, transportation, recreation, maintenance of parks, streets, and other public facilities, solid waste removal, pollution control, housing and neighborhood improvements, rural development, conservation, beautification, and other fields of human betterment and community improvement, that will be carried out by a public agency or a private nonprofit organization and would not otherwise be conducted with existing funds.
In General.--Subject to the limitations in subsection (b), an individual shall be eligible to participate in a job project under this title if such individual-- ``(1)(A) has a high school diploma or its equivalent; or ``(B) is enrolled in a program which leads to a high school diploma or its equivalent and is making substantial progress toward such diploma or equivalent; ``(2) is at least 18 years of age; ``(3) has resided in the service delivery area for at least 60 consecutive days prior to applying for employment under the job project; and ``(4)(A) has been unemployed for at least 35 consecutive days prior to applying for such employment; ``(B) sought employment during such 35-day period; and ``(C) provides assurances that he or she will continue to seek employment during the last 6 months of the job project.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum income.--An individual whose income from all sources for the year preceding the year in which the determination of employment under the job project is made is equal to or greater than 150 percent of the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (42 United States Code 9902(2)) shall not be eligible to participate in a job project under this title.
Retirement benefits.--An individual eligible for retirement benefits under the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 301 et sequentes), under any retirement system for Federal Government employees, under the railroad retirement system, under the military retirement system, or under any private pension program shall not be eligible to participate in a job project under this title.
WAGES AND BENEFITS AND SUPPORTIVE SERVICES.
Wages and Benefits.--Notwithstanding section 141(k), each participant in a job project under this title shall receive the following: ``(1) Wages in an amount equal to-- ``(A) the wages described in section 143(d) with respect to laborers and mechanics described in such section; or ``(B) in cases where subparagraph (A) does not apply, wages equal to the higher of-- ``(i) the minimum wage established under section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 206(a)(1)); or ``(ii) the minimum wage established under the applicable State minimum wage law.
Benefits and employment conditions comparable to the benefits and conditions provided to other employees employed in similar occupations by a comparable employer, as determined by the private industry council.
Supportive Services.--Each service delivery area shall make available to each participant in a job project under this title appropriate supportive services to enable a participant to work.
``The service delivery area may waive the education requirement under section 803(c)(3) with respect to a participant in a job project.
``In carrying out the program under this title, each service delivery area shall establish appropriate linkages with other appropriate programs, including programs under titles II and III and any other provision of this Act, to avoid duplication and enhance the delivery of services.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 3 of the Act (29 United States Code 1502) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out title VIII.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of the Act is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``TITLE VIII--PUBLIC WORKS AND PUBLIC SERVICE JOB TRAINING PROGRAM ``Sec.
Wages and benefits and supportive services.
REQUIREMENT THAT STATE APPRENTICESHIP COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVE BE MEMBER OF PRIVATE INDUSTRY COUNCIL.
Paragraph (3) of section 102(a) of the Act (29 United States Code 1512(a)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(F) The State apprenticeship council.