This Act may be cited as the ``Aviation Bilateral Accountability Act of 1998''.
Section 40105 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Congressional Approval.-- ``(1) In general.--A civil aviation agreement that is entered into under this section after the date of the enactment of this subsection shall enter into force with respect to the United States only if-- ``(A) the Secretary involved transmits to Congress a document containing a copy of the final text of the agreement, together with an explanation of the agreement; and ``(B) the approval resolution introduced under this subsection with respect to the agreement is enacted into law.
Rules of house of representatives and senate.--This subsection is enacted by Congress-- ``(A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such these provisions are deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of approval resolutions described in paragraph (3); and they supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and ``(B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Approval resolution defined.--The term `approval resolution' means only a joint resolution of the two Houses of Congress, the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: `That Congress approves the civil aviation agreement between the United States and ________________ transmitted by ________________ to the Congress on ________________.
', the first blank space being filled with the name of the country involved, the second blank space being filled with the title of the Secretary involved, and the third blank space being filled with the appropriate date.
Introduction and referral.--On the day on which a civil aviation agreement is transmitted to the House of Representatives and the Senate under this subsection, an approval resolution with respect to such agreement shall be introduced (by request) in the House by the majority leader of the House, for himself and the minority leader of the House, or by Members of the House designated by the majority leader and minority leader of the House; and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the majority leader of the Senate, for himself and the minority leader of the Senate, or by Members of the Senate designated by the majority leader and minority leader of the Senate.
If either House is not in session on the day on which such an agreement is transmitted, the approval resolution with respect to such agreement shall be introduced in that House, as provided in the proceeding sentence, on the first day thereafter on which that House is in session.
The approval resolution introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and the approval resolution introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
Amendments prohibited.--No amendment to an approval resolution shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate; and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in order in either House, nor shall it be in order in either House for the Presiding Officer to entertain a request to suspend the application of this paragraph by unanimous consent.
Period for committee and floor consideration.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), if the committee of either House to which an approval resolution has been referred has not reported it at the close of the 60th day after its introduction, such committee shall be automatically discharged from further consideration of the resolution and it shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
A vote on final passage of the resolution shall be taken in each House on or before the close of the 30th day after the resolution is reported by the committee of that House to which it was referred, or after such committee have been discharged from further consideration of the resolution.
If prior to the passage by one House of an approval resolution of that House, that House receives the same approval resolution from the other House, then-- ``(i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no approval resolution had been received from the other House; but ``(ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the approval resolution of the other House.
Computing number of days.--For the purpose of subparagraph (A), in computing a number of days in either House, there shall be excluded any day on which that House is not in session.
Floor consideration in the house.-- ``(A) Motion to proceed.--A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of an approval resolution shall be highly privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate.--Debate in the House of Representatives on an approval resolution shall be limited to not more than 5 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable.
It shall not be in order to move to recommit an approval resolution or to move to reconsider the vote by which an approval resolution is agreed to or disagreed to.
Motions to postpone.--Motions to postpone, made in the House of Representatives with respect to the consideration of an approval resolution, and motions to proceed to the consideration of other business, shall be decided without debate.
Appeals.--All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to an approval resolution shall be decided without debate.
Applicability of other rules.--Except to the extent specifically provided in the preceding provisions of this subsection, consideration of an approval resolution shall be governed by the Rules of the House of Representatives applicable to other bills and resolutions in similar circumstances.
Floor consideration in the senate.-- ``(A) Motion to proceed.--A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of an approval resolution shall be privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate.--Debate in the Senate on an approval resolution, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Appeals.--Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection with an approval resolution shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the resolution, except that in the event the manager of the resolution is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of an approval resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
Motion to limit debate; motion to recommit.-- A motion in the Senate to further limit debate is not debatable.
A motion to recommit an approval resolution is not in order.