This Act may be cited as the ``Child Support Enforcement Act of 1994''.
TITLE I--CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT SEC.
HOLD ON OCCUPATIONAL, PROFESSIONAL, AND BUSINESS LICENSES.
State Hold Based on Warrant or Support Delinquency.--Section 466(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 666(a)) is amended by inserting after paragraph (11) the following: ``(12) Procedures under which the State occupational licensing and regulating departments and agencies may not issue or renew any occupational, professional, or business license of-- ``(A) a noncustodial parent who is the subject of an outstanding failure to appear warrant, capias, or bench warrant related to a child support proceeding that appears on the State's crime information system, until removed from the system; and ``(B) an individual who is delinquent in the payment of child support, until the obligee or a State prosecutor responsible for child support enforcement consents to, or a court that is responsible for the order's enforcement orders, the release of the hold on the license, or an expedited inquiry and review is completed while the individual is granted a 60-day temporary license.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to an individual who makes an adequate showing to the State that the failure to issue or renew an occupational, professional, or business license will result in undue hardship.''.
Federal Hold Based on Support Delinquency.--A Federal agency may not issue or renew any occupational, professional, or business license of an individual who is delinquent in the payment of child support, until the obligee, the obligee's attorney, or a State prosecutor responsible for child support enforcement consents to, or a court that is responsible for the order's enforcement orders, the release of the hold on the license, or an expedited inquiry and review is completed while the individual is granted a 60-day temporary license.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to an individual who makes an adequate showing to the State that the failure to issue or renew an occupational, professional, or business license will result in undue hardship.
DENIAL OF FEDERAL BENEFITS, LOANS, GUARANTEES, AND EMPLOYMENT TO CERTAIN PERSONS WITH LARGE CHILD SUPPORT ARREARAGES.
Benefits, Loans, and Guarantees.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government may not, under any program that the agency or instrumentality supervises or administers, provide a benefit to, make a loan to, or provide any guarantee for the benefit of, any individual-- (1) whose child support arrearages, determined under a court order or an order of an administrative process established under State law, exceed $1,000; and (2) who is not in compliance with a plan or an agreement to repay the arrearages.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to an individual who makes an adequate showing to the State that the failure to provide a benefit, loan, or guarantee will result in undue hardship.
Employment.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an individual shall be considered ineligible to accept employment in a position in the Federal Government if-- (A) such individual has child support arrearages, determined under a court order or an order of an administrative process established under State law, exceeding $1,000; and (B) such individual is not in compliance with a plan or agreement to repay the arrearages.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to an individual who makes an adequate showing to the State that ineligibility to accept employment will result in undue hardship.
Regulations.--Regulations to carry out paragraph (1) shall-- (A) with respect to positions in the executive branch, be prescribed by the President (or his designee); (B) with respect to positions in the legislative branch, be prescribed jointly by the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives (or their designees); and (C) with respect to positions in the judicial branch, be prescribed by the Chief Justice of the United States (or his designee).
Child support defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``child support'' has the meaning given such term in section 462(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 662(b)).
DENIAL OF PASSPORTS TO NONCUSTODIAL PARENTS SUBJECT TO STATE ARREST WARRANTS IN CASES OF NONPAYMENT OF CHILD SUPPORT.
The Secretary of State is authorized to refuse a passport or revoke, restrict, or limit a passport in any case in which the Secretary of State determines or is informed by competent authority that the applicant or passport holder is a noncustodial parent who is the subject of an outstanding State warrant of arrest for nonpayment of child support, where the amount in controversy is not less than $10,000.
FAIR CREDIT REPORTING ACT AMENDMENT.
Section 604 of the Consumer Credit Protection Act (15 United States Code 1681b) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) To a State agency administering a State plan under section 454 of the Social Security Act, for use to establish or modify a child support award.''.
NATIONAL REPORTING OF NEW HIRES AND CHILD SUPPORT INFORMATION.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, shall establish a system of reporting of new employees by requiring employers to provide a copy of every new employee's W-4 form to the child support enforcement agency of the State in which the employment is located.
Expanded Use of Form.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall modify the W-4 form completed by the new employee to include-- (1) whether a child support obligation is owed by the new employee, and if so, to whom such obligation is payable and the amount of such obligation, (2) whether payment of such obligation is to be by income withholding, and (3) whether the new employee has health care insurance available.
TITLE II--INTERSTATE CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT SEC.
INTERSTATE RECOGNITION OF CHILD SUPPORT AND PARENTAGE ORDERS.
In General.--Chapter 115 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1738A the following: ``Sec.
Full faith and credit to child support and parentage orders ``(a) As used in this section: ``(1) The term `child' means any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years, and any individual who has attained the age of 18 years for whom a child support order has been issued pursuant to the laws of a State.
The term `child support' includes periodic and lump- sum payments for current and past due economic support, payments of premiums for health insurance for children, payments for or provision of child care, and payments for educational expenses.
The term `child support order' means a judgment, decree or order of a court requiring the payment of money, whether in periodic amounts or lump sum, for the support of a child and includes permanent and temporary orders, initial orders and modifications, ongoing support and arrearages.
The term `child's State' means, with respect to a child, the State in which the child resides with a parent or an individual acting as a parent.
The term `contestant' means an individual, including a parent, who claims a right to receive child support or is under an order to pay child support, and includes States and political subdivisions to which support rights have been assigned.
The term `court' means a court, administrative process, or quasijudicial process of a State that is authorized to-- ``(A) adjudicate parentage; ``(B) establish the amount of support payable by a contestant; or ``(C) modify the amount of support payable by a contestant.
The term `home State' means, with respect to a child, the State in which, immediately preceding the time involved, the child lived with his or her parents, a parent, or an individual acting as parent, for at least 6 consecutive months (including any periods of temporary absence), and if the child has not attained the age of 6 months, the State in which the child lived from birth with any of such individuals.
The term `individual acting as a parent' means an individual, other than a parent, who has physical custody of a child and who has either been awarded custody by a court or claims a right to custody.
The terms `modification' and `modify' refer to a change in a child support order or an order adjudicating parentage that modifies, replaces, supersedes, or otherwise is made subsequent to such prior order, whether or not made by the same court that issued such prior order.
The term `State' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, a territory or possession of the United States, and Indian country as defined in section 1151 of title 18, United States Code.
The courts of each State shall recognize and enforce according to its terms a child support order or an order adjudicating parentage against an individual over whom personal jurisdiction has been exercised consistent with this section, and shall not modify such an order except as provided in subsection (f).
A court of a State may exercise personal jurisdiction over a nonresident contestant if there is any basis consistent with the constitution of the State and the Constitution of the United States for the exercise.
A court of a State which has issued a child support order or an order adjudicating parentage consistent with this section shall have continuing, exclusive jurisdiction of the order for so long as the State remains the child's State or the residence of any contestant, unless another State, acting in accordance with subsection (f), has modified the order.
Before a court of a State makes a child support order or adjudicates parentage, reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard shall be given to the contestants.
A court of a State may modify a child support order or an order adjudicating parentage issued by a court of another State if-- ``(1) each contestant has filed written consent for the court of the State to modify the order and assume continuing, exclusive jurisdiction of the order; and ``(2) the court of the State otherwise has jurisdiction to issue such an order.
A court of a State which no longer has continuing, exclusive jurisdiction of a child support order or an order adjudicating parentage may enforce the order with respect to unsatisfied obligations which accrued before the date the order is modified in accordance with subsection (f).
A court of a State shall not exercise jurisdiction in any proceeding for a child support order or an adjudication of parentage commenced during the pendency of a proceeding in a court of another State when the court of the other State is exercising jurisdiction consistent with this section unless-- ``(1) the proceeding was filed in the State before the expiration of time allowed in the other State for filing a responsive pleading challenging the exercise of jurisdiction by the other State; ``(2) the contesting party timely challenges the exercise of jurisdiction by the other State; and ``(3) if applicable, the court is in the home State of the child.
(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), the forum State's law shall apply in a proceeding to establish, modify, or enforce a child support order or an order adjudicating parentage.
The courts of a State shall apply the law of the State that issued a child support order or an order adjudicating parentage in interpreting such an order.
In an action to enforce a child support order or an order adjudicating parentage, the statute of limitations under the laws of the forum State or the issuing State, whichever is longer, shall apply.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The chapter analysis for such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1738A the following: ``1738B.
Full faith and credit to child support and parentage orders.''.
TITLE III--HIDING ASSETS SEC.
Section 466(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 666(a)), as amended by section 101, is amended by inserting after paragraph (12) the following: ``(13) Procedures requiring that, in any case related to child support, any transfer of property by an individual who owes a child support arrearage shall be presumed to be made with the intent to avoid payment of the arrearage, and may be rebutted by evidence to the contrary.''.
Section 466(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 666(a)), as amended by section 101 and section 301, is amended by inserting after paragraph (12) the following new paragraph: ``(14) Procedures that allow the State to void fraudulent conveyances of property that are made in an attempt to avoid child support obligations.