CARRYOVER OF UNUSED BENEFITS FROM CAFETERIA PLANS AND FLEXIBLE SPENDING ARRANGEMENTS.
In General.--Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to cafeteria plans) is amended by redesignating subsections (h) and (i) as subsections (i) and (j), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection: ``(h) Allowance of Carryovers of Unused Benefits to Later Taxable Years.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title-- ``(A) a plan or other arrangement shall not fail to be treated as a cafeteria plan or flexible spending or similar arrangement, and ``(B) no amount shall be required to be included in gross income by reason of this section or any other provision of this chapter, solely because under such plan or other arrangement any nontaxable benefit which is unused as of the close of a taxable year may be carried forward to 1 or more succeeding taxable years.
Limitation.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to amounts carried from a plan to the extent such amounts exceed $3,000 (applied on an annual basis).
For purposes of this paragraph, all plans and arrangements maintained by an employer or any related person shall be treated as 1 plan.
Allowance of rollover.-- ``(A) In general.--Each flexible spending or similar arrangement which permits a carryover under paragraph (1) of an amount of unused benefit shall provide that each participant may elect, in lieu of a carryover of such amount, to have such amount distributed to the participant.
Amounts not included in income.--Any distribution under subparagraph (A) shall not be included in gross income to the extent that such amount is transferred in a trustee-to-trustee transfer, or is contributed within 60 days of the date of the distribution, to-- ``(i) an individual retirement plan, ``(ii) a qualified cash or deferred arrangement described in section 401(k), ``(iii) a plan under which amounts are contributed by an individual's employer for an annuity contract described in section 403(b), ``(iv) an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457, ``(v) a medical savings account (within the meaning of section 220), ``(vi) an education individual retirement account (within the meaning of section 530(b)), or ``(vii) a health care reimbursement rollover account described in section 530A.
Any amount rolled over under this subparagraph shall be treated as a rollover contribution for the taxable year from which the unused amount would otherwise be carried.
Treatment of rollover.--Any amount rolled over under subparagraph (B) shall be treated as an eligible rollover under section 219, 220, 401(k), 403(b), 457, 530, or 530A, whichever is applicable, and shall not be taken into account in applying any limitation (or participation requirement) on contributions under such section or any other provision of this chapter for the taxable year of the rollover.
Cost-of-living adjustment.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 1999, the $3,000 amount under paragraph (2) shall be adjusted at the same time and in the same manner as under section 415(d)(2), except that the base period taken into account shall be the calendar quarter beginning October 1, 1999, and any increase which is not a multiple of $50 shall be rounded to the next lowest multiple of $50.''
Health Care Reimbursement Rollover Account.--Subchapter F of chapter 1 of subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART IX--HEALTH CARE REIMBURSEMENT ROLLOVER ACCOUNTS ``Sec.
Health care reimbursement rollover accounts.
HEALTH CARE REIMBURSEMENT ROLLOVER ACCOUNTS.
General Rule.--A health care reimbursement rollover account shall be exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such account has ceased to be a health care reimbursement rollover account.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such account is subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Health care reimbursement rollover account.--The term `health care reimbursement rollover account' means a trust created or organized in the United States exclusively for the purpose of paying the qualified medical expenses of the account holder, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted unless it is a rollover contribution allowed under section 125(h)(3).
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)), an insurance company (as defined in section 816), or another person (including the employer of the account holder) who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which such person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
The assets of the trust will be invested only in appropriate guaranteed principle and interest investments which provide 100 percent liquidity.
Contributions to the trust will not be invested until the second year after the year the contributions are made.
The interest of an individual in the balance in his account is nonforfeitable.
Qualified medical expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified medical expenses' means, with respect to an account holder, amounts paid by such holder for medical care (as defined in section 213(d)) for such individual, the spouse of such individual, and any dependent (as defined in section 152) of such individual, but only to the extent such amounts are not compensated for by insurance or otherwise.
Health insurance may not be purchased from account.-- ``(i) In general.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any payment for coverage under a group health plan of an employer of the account holder or the spouse of the account holder.
Exceptions.--Clause (i) shall not apply to any expense for coverage under-- ``(I) a health plan during any period of continuation coverage required under any Federal law, ``(II) a qualified long-term care insurance contract (as defined in section 7702B(b)), or ``(III) a medicare supplemental policy under section 1882 of the Social Security Act.
Account holder.--The term `account holder' means the individual on whose behalf the health care reimbursement rollover account was established.
Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to rules under section 408(h) (relating to custodial accounts) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Tax Treatment Of Account Terminations.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2) and (4) of section 408(e) shall apply to health care reimbursement rollover accounts and any amount treated as distributed under such rules shall be treated as not used to pay qualified medical expenses.
Tax Treatment Of Distributions.-- ``(1) Amounts used for qualified medical expenses.--Any amount paid or distributed out of a health care reimbursement rollover account which is used exclusively to pay qualified medical expenses of any account holder shall not be includible in gross income.
Inclusion of amounts not used for qualified medical expenses.--Any amount paid or distributed out of a health care reimbursement rollover account which is not used exclusively to pay the qualified medical expenses of the account holder shall be included in the gross income of such holder.
Coordination with medical expense deduction.--For purposes of determining the amount of the deduction under section 213 or 162(l), any payment or distribution out of a health care reimbursement rollover account for qualified medical expenses shall not be treated as an expense paid for medical care.
Transfer of account incident to divorce.--The transfer of an individual's interest in a health care reimbursement rollover account to an individual's spouse or former spouse under a divorce or separation instrument described in subparagraph (A) of section 71(b)(2) shall not be considered a taxable transfer made by such individual notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle, and such interest shall, after such transfer, be treated as a health care reimbursement rollover account with respect to which such spouse is the account holder.
Treatment after death of account holder.-- ``(A) Exclusion from estate tax.--The value of the gross estate under chapter 11 shall be determined without regard to the value of health care reimbursement rollover account.
Transfer of account to designated beneficiary.--If any individual acquires the account holder's interest in a health care reimbursement rollover account by reason of being the designated beneficiary of such account at the death of such account holder, such account shall be treated as if the beneficiary were the account holder.
Special rule.--If any person other than an individual acquires the account holder's interest in a health care reimbursement rollover account by reason of being the designated beneficiary of such account at the death of such account holder, such account shall cease to be a health care reimbursement rollover account as of the date of death.
Reports.--The Secretary may require the trustee of a health care reimbursement rollover account to make such reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the account holder with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary determines appropriate.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by the Secretary.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter F of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Health care reimbursement rollover accounts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.