This Act may be cited as the ``Turkish Human Rights Compliance Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Department of State, in its 1995 report entitled ``Country Reports on Human Rights'', documented a systematic and widespread pattern of human rights abuses by the Government of Turkey.
According to the portion of the report relating to Turkey, ``the human rights situation in Turkey worsened significantly in 1994''.
Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, the United Nations Committee Against Torture, the European Parliament, the International Human Rights Law Group, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, Physicians Without Frontiers, Freedom House, the Humanitarian Law Project, the Turkish Human Rights Associations, and other human rights monitoring organizations have documented extensive and continuing human rights abuses by the Government of Turkey, including the widespread use of torture.
The actions of the Government of Turkey are in violation of several international human rights agreements to which Turkey is a party, including the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and the European Convention on Human Rights.
The Government of Turkey continues to deny the existence of its 15,000,000 Kurdish citizens and has used military force to deny them an identity, destroying more than 2,000 Kurdish villages and uprooting more than 2,000,000 Kurds.
Turkey continues its illegal military occupation of Cyprus and has obstructed efforts to reach a just and lasting resolution to the division of Cyprus and the massive uprooting of Greek Cypriots caused by the 1974 invasion by Turkey of Cyprus.
The Government of Turkey continues to blockade Armenia, obstructing the delivery of American and international humanitarian relief supplies.
Turkey continues to place prohibitive restrictions on the religious leadership of Christian communities within Turkey and has failed to protect these communities adequately from acts of violence and vandalism.
The Congress, in the fiscal year 1995 budget for foreign assistance, withheld 10 percent of the principal amount of direct loans to Turkey because of that country's human rights record and the situation in Cyprus.
The Government of Turkey has stated that it would reject any United States assistance tied to its human rights record, which, according to independent human rights monitoring organizations, has continued to deteriorate.
RESTRICTIONS ON ASSISTANCE FOR TURKEY.
Restrictions.--Of the funds made available for fiscal year 1996 for assistance to the Government of Turkey under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and the Arms Export Control Act, the President shall withhold, first from grant assistance, if any, and then from loan assistance, $500,000 for each day that Turkey does not meet the conditions of section 4.
Waiver.--The President may waive the application of subsection (a) if the President determines that it is in the national security interest of the United States to do so.
The conditions of this section are met when the President certifies to Congress that the Government of Turkey-- (1) allows free and unfettered monitoring of the human rights situation within its territory by domestic and international human rights monitoring organizations, including but not limited to, the Turkish Human Rights Association, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, Amnesty International, and Human Rights Watch; (2) recognizes the civil, cultural, and human rights of its Kurdish citizens, ceases its military operations against Kurdish civilians, and takes demonstrable steps toward a peaceful resolution of the Kurdish issue; (3) takes demonstrable steps toward the total withdrawal of its military forces from Cyprus and demonstrates its support for a settlement recognizing the sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity of Cyprus, with a constitutional democracy based on majority rule, the rule of law, and the protection of minority rights; (4) completely removes its blockade of United States and international assistance to Armenia; and (5) removes official restrictions on Christian churches and schools and offers sufficient protection against acts of violence and harassment directed at members of the clergy, and offers sufficient protection against acts of vandalism directed at church and school property.