This Act may be cited as the ``California Trail Interpretive Center Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the nineteenth century westward movement in the United States over the California National Historic Trail, which occurred from 1840 until the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869, was an important cultural and historical event in-- (A) the development of the western land of the United States; and (B) the prevention of colonization of the west coast by Russia and the British Empire; (2) the movement over the California Trail was completed by over 300,000 settlers, many of whom left records or stories of their journeys; and (3) additional recognition and interpretation of the movement over the California Trail is appropriate in light of-- (A) the national scope of nineteenth century westward movement in the United States; and (B) the strong interest expressed by people of the United States in understanding their history and heritage.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to recognize the California Trail, including the Hastings Cutoff and the trail of the ill-fated Donner-Reed Party, for its national, historical, and cultural significance; and (2) to provide the public with an interpretive facility devoted to the vital role of the California Trail and other trails in the West in the development of the United States.
In this Act: (1) California trail.--The term ``California Trail'' means the California National Historic Trail, established under section 5(a)(18) of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1244(a)(18)).
Center.--The term ``Center'' means the California Trail Interpretive Center established under section 4(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Nevada.
CALIFORNIA TRAIL INTERPRETIVE CENTER.
Establishment and Operation.--In furtherance of the purposes of section 7(c) of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1246(c)), the Secretary may establish and operate an interpretive center, to be known as the ``California Trail Interpretive Center'', near the city of Elko, Nevada, to preserve and interpret the history of development and use of the California Trail in the settling of the American West.
Development Plan.--The Secretary shall prepare a plan for the establishment and operation of the Center that includes-- (1) a detailed description of the design of the Center; (2) a description of the site on which the Center is to be located; (3) a description of the method and estimated cost of acquisition of the site on which the Center is to be located; (4) an estimate of the cost of construction of the Center; (5) an estimate of the cost of operation and maintenance of the Center; and (6) a description of the manner and extent to which non- Federal entities will participate in the acquisition, construction, and operation of the Center.
Special Considerations.-- (1) Master plan study.--In preparing the development plan required by subsection (b) and establishing the Center, the Secretary shall consider the findings contained in the master plan study for the California Trail Interpretive Center prepared pursuant to the authorization on page 15 of Senate Report 106-99 to accompany the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Bill, 2000 (S. 1292).
Local participation.--The Secretary may provide for local review of, and input concerning, the establishment and operation of the Center by the Advisory Board for the National Historic California Emigrant Trails Interpretive Center of the city of Elko, Nevada.
Acquisition Authority.--The Secretary may acquire land and interests in land for the construction of the Center by-- (1) donation; (2) purchase with donated or appropriated funds; or (3) exchange.
Operation and Maintenance Budget.--The Secretary shall periodically prepare a budget and funding request for the maintenance and operation of the Center.
Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with-- (1) the State regarding the provision by the State of assistance in-- (A) the removal of snow from roads serving the Center; (B) rescue, firefighting, and law enforcement services for the Center; and (C) the coordination of activities of nearby law enforcement and firefighting departments or agencies; and (2) a Federal, State, or local agency to develop or operate facilities and services to carry out this Act.
Acceptance and Use of Contributions.-- (1) Authority to accept.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may accept donations of funds, property, or services from an individual, foundation, corporation, or public entity to assist the Secretary in establishing or operating the Center.
State and local contributions.--The Secretary shall accept contributions for the Center (to be payable during the construction of the Center) from-- (A) the State, in the amount of $3,000,000; (B) Elko County, Nevada, in the amount of $1,000,000; and (C) the city of Elko, Nevada, in the amount of $2,000,000.
Use of contributions.--The Secretary shall use contributions received under this subsection to establish and operate the Center.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $12,000,000 to establish the Center.