This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Pay for Performance Act''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Federal deficit'' has the meaning given the term deficit by section 3(6) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 622(6)); (2) the term ``deficit target'', as used with respect to a fiscal year, means the maximum allowable Federal deficit for such fiscal year, as set forth in the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 1996; (3) the term ``concurrent resolution on the budget'' has the meaning given such term by section 3(4) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 622(4)); and (4) the term ``Member of Congress'' means an individual who holds a position referred to in section 601(a) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 United States Code 31), as amended by section 4.
PAY AS A FUNCTION OF EFFORTS TO ELIMINATE THE FEDERAL DEFICIT.
If Deficit Targets Are Not Met.-- (1) Interim targets.--If, for any of fiscal years 1996 through 2001, inclusive, the Federal deficit for such fiscal year exceeds the deficit target for such fiscal year by more than $1 billion, then, effective as of the first day of the first applicable pay period of the first calendar year beginning after the end of such fiscal year, the rate of basic pay for each Member of Congress shall be equal to the rate in effect on the day before the date of the adjustment under this paragraph, reduced by the percentage derived by multiplying 0.5 percent by the number of billions of dollars (after rounding to the next lower multiple of $1 billion) by which such target was so exceeded, except that nothing in this paragraph shall cause any rate to be reduced below zero.
Final target.--If the Federal deficit for fiscal year 2002 is $1 billion or greater, then, effective as of the first day of the first applicable pay period in calendar year 2003, the rate of basic pay for each Member of Congress shall be zero.
If Deficit Targets Are Met.-- (1) Other than by eliminating the deficit.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), if, for any of fiscal years 1996 through 2001, inclusive, the Federal deficit for such year is less than, or within $1 billion of, the deficit target for such fiscal year, then no change shall be made in the rate of basic pay for any Member of Congress based on the size of the Federal deficit for such year.
By eliminating the deficit.--If, for any of fiscal years 1996 through 2002, inclusive, the Federal deficit for such year is less than $1 billion, then, effective as of the first day of the first applicable pay period of the first calendar year beginning after the end of such fiscal year-- (A) the rate of basic pay for each Member of Congress shall be restored to the rate in effect as of December 31, 1995; and (B) this section shall cease to be effective.
Determining the Size of the Deficit.--For purposes of this section, the size of the Federal deficit for any fiscal year shall be as determined by the Congressional Budget Office (in writing)-- (1) on the basis of the Final Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipts and Outlays of the United States Government, published by the Department of the Treasury; and (2) excluding any increase in tax revenues, attributable to the fiscal year involved, which occurs by reason of any provision of law enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Exception.--The rate of basic pay for an individual shall, for the duration of such individual's first term of office as a Member of Congress, be determined as if this section had never been enacted.
Suspension in Time of War.-- (1) In general.--In the event of a war declared by Congress, rates of pay shall be restored to the rates that would then be payable if, and shall be subject to adjustment in the same way as if, this section had never been enacted, subject to paragraph (2).
End of war.--After any such war ends, the preceding subsections of this section shall again become effective, except that, in applying such subsections-- (A) any reference to fiscal year 1996 shall be deemed to be a reference to the first fiscal year beginning after the date on which such war ends; and (B) any reference to any later fiscal year shall be determined accordingly.
The respective fiscal years to which the deficit targets set forth in any concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 1996 shall be determined in like manner for purposes of so applying such subsections.
ELIMINATION OF AUTOMATIC ANNUAL PAY ADJUSTMENTS FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 601(a) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 United States Code 31) is repealed.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 601(a)(1) of such Act is amended-- (1) by striking ``(a)(1)'' and inserting ``(a)''; (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) as paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), respectively; and (3) by striking ``, as adjusted by paragraph (2) of this subsection''.