This Act may be cited as the ``Base Transition Acceleration Act of 1995''.
REVISION OF DISPOSAL PROCESS.
Section 2905(b) of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (9); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following new paragraph (8): ``(8)(A) Except as provided in paragraphs (1) and (9) and notwithstanding any other provision of law, the disposal of buildings and property located at installations approved for closure under this part after January 1, 1995, shall be governed by the provisions of this paragraph.
No individual, group, or other entity (other than a department or agency of the Federal Government acting solely on behalf of such department or agency) may seek the use, by transfer or otherwise, of buildings and property at installations covered by this paragraph except through the redevelopment plans for such installations under this paragraph.
(i) The Secretary shall take such actions as the Secretary determines necessary to ensure that final determinations regarding whether another department or agency of the Federal Government has identified a use for any portion of an installation covered by this paragraph, or will accept transfer of any portion of such an installation, are completed not later than 60 days after the date of approval of closure of the installation.
Upon the completion of the determinations referred to in clause (i) with respect to an installation, the Secretary shall publish the results of the determinations in the Federal Register.
In publishing such results, the Secretary shall clearly identify the buildings and property at the installation for which another department or agency has identified a use or of which another department or agency will accept transfer.
(i) Not later than 180 days after the date of completion of determinations with respect to an installation under subparagraph (B), the redevelopment authority for the installation shall prepare and submit to the Secretary a redevelopment plan for the installation.
The redevelopment plan shall address the buildings and property of the installation that are not identified by the Secretary under the second sentence of subparagraph (B)(ii).
(I) Notwithstanding section 2910(9), the redevelopment authority for an installation covered by this paragraph shall consist of any State and local governments and tribal governments affected by the closure of the installation and any United States citizens, or groups of such citizens, residing in a community in the vicinity of the installation, which governments and citizens are recognized by the Secretary as the redevelopment authority for purposes of this paragraph.
The chief executive officer of the State in which an installation covered by this paragraph is located may resolve any disputes among citizens or groups of citizens as to the individuals and groups constituting the redevelopment authority for the installation.
(i) Not later than 60 days after the date of the submittal of a redevelopment plan under subparagraph (C), the Secretary shall-- ``(I) review the plan for purposes of determining whether to accept or reject the plan; and ``(II) accept or reject the plan.
The Secretary shall notify the redevelopment authority concerned of the acceptance or rejection of a plan by the Secretary under clause (i).
If the Secretary rejects the plan, the Secretary shall set forth in the notice the reasons for rejecting the plan.
If the Secretary rejects a redevelopment plan under subparagraph (D)(i)(II), the redevelopment authority concerned may prepare and submit to the Secretary a revised redevelopment plan for the installation concerned.
The redevelopment authority shall submit a revised redevelopment plan under this subparagraph, if at all, not later than 90 days after the date on which the Secretary notifies the redevelopment authority of the rejection of the plan concerned by the Secretary under subparagraph (D).
(i) Not later than 30 days after the date of the submittal of a revised redevelopment plan under subparagraph (E), the Secretary shall-- ``(I) review the plan for purposes of determining whether to accept or reject the plan; and ``(II) accept or reject the plan.
The Secretary shall notify the redevelopment authority concerned of the acceptance or rejection of a plan by the Secretary under clause (i).
(i) The Secretary shall dispose of buildings and property at an installation covered by this paragraph-- ``(I) in the case of buildings or property for which another Federal department or agency has identified a use or of which another Federal department or agency has requested transfer under subparagraph (B), by transfer or other appropriate means of disposal of such buildings or property to the department or agency; and ``(II) in the case of buildings or property covered by the provisions of a redevelopment plan approved by the Secretary under this paragraph, in accordance with the provisions of the redevelopment plan.
The provisions of section 120(h) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9620(h)) shall apply to any transfer of real property under this paragraph.
The Secretary may, in consultation with the redevelopment authority concerned, postpone or extend any deadline provided for under this paragraph in the case of an installation covered by this paragraph for such period as the Secretary determines appropriate if the Secretary determines that such postponement is in the best interests of the communities affected by the closure of the installation.