SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that it is inappropriate for the Department of Labor, as the principal enforcer of fiduciary standards in connection with employee pension benefit plans and employee welfare benefit plans (as defined in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002(1), (2))), to take any action to promote or otherwise encourage economically targeted investments.
PROHIBITIONS ON DEPARTMENT OF LABOR REGARDING ECONOMICALLY TARGETED INVESTMENTS.
In General.--Interpretive Bulletin 94-1, issued by the Secretary of Labor on June 23, 1994 (59 Fed.
32606; 29 Code of Federal Regulations 2509.94-1), is null and void and shall have no force or effect.
The provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1001 et sequentes) shall be interpreted and enforced without regard to such Interpretive Bulletin.
Restrictions on Department of Labor Regulations.--The Secretary of Labor may not issue any rule, regulation, or interpretive bulletin which promotes or otherwise encourages economically targeted investments as a specified class of investments.
Restrictions on Activities of the Department of Labor.--No officer or employee of the Department of Labor may travel, lecture, or otherwise expend resources available to such Department for the purpose of promoting, directly or indirectly, economically targeted investments.
Economically Targeted Investment Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``economically targeted investment'' has the meaning given such term in Interpretive Bulletin 94-1, as issued by the Secretary of Labor on June 23, 1994 (59 Fed.
32606; 29 Code of Federal Regulations 2509.94-1).
PROHIBITION ON FEDERAL AGENCIES AGAINST ESTABLISHING OR MAINTAINING ANY CLEARINGHOUSE OR OTHER DATABASE RELATING TO ECONOMICALLY TARGETED INVESTMENTS.
In General.--Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1131 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``prohibition on federal agencies against establishing or maintaining any clearinghouse or other database relating to economically targeted investments ``Sec.
In General.--No agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government may establish or maintain, or contract with (or otherwise provide assistance to) any other party to establish or maintain, any clearinghouse, database, or other listing-- ``(1) for the purpose of making available to employee benefit plans information on economically targeted investments, ``(2) for the purpose of encouraging, or providing assistance to, employee benefit plans or any other party related to an employee benefit plan to undertake or evaluate economically targeted investments, or ``(3) for the purpose of identifying economically targeted investments with respect to which such agency or instrumentality will withhold from undertaking enforcement actions relating to employee benefit plans under any otherwise applicable authority of such agency or instrumentality.
Economically Targeted Investment Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `economically targeted investment' has the meaning given such term in Interpretive Bulletin 94-1, as issued by the Secretary on June 23, 1994 (59 Fed.
32606; 29 Code of Federal Regulations 2509.94- 1).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting at the end of the items relating to part 5 of subtitle B of title I the following new item: ``Sec.
Prohibition on Federal agencies against establishing or maintaining any clearinghouse or other database relating to economically targeted investments.''.
The head of each agency and instrumentality of the Government of the United States shall immediately take such actions as are necessary and appropriate to terminate any contract or other arrangement entered into by such agency or instrumentality which is in violation of the requirements of the provisions of this Act or the amendments made thereby.
AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.
Nothing in this Act is intended to affect the ability of the Department of Labor to issue advisory opinions, information letters, technical releases, prohibited transactions, exemptions, or other pronouncements interpreting and applying ERISA's fiduciary responsibility rules to particular factual situations, or exempting specific transactions from the prohibited transaction provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (pursuant to 29 United States Code 1106, 1108).
The preceding provisions of this Act (and the amendments made thereby) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives September 12, 1995.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.