This Act may be cited as the ``Fort Peck Fish Hatchery Authorization Act of 2000''.
Congress finds that-- (1) Fort Peck Lake, Montana, is in need of a warm water fish hatchery; (2) the burden of carrying out efforts to raise and stock warm water fish species in the State of Montana has been disproportionately borne by the State despite the existence of many Federal projects on waterways in the State; (3)(A) as of the date of enactment of this Act, eastern Montana has only 1 warm water fish hatchery, which is inadequate to meet the demands of the region; and (B) a disease or infrastructure failure at that hatchery could imperil fish populations throughout the region; (4) although the multipurpose project at Fort Peck, Montana, authorized by the first section of the Act of August 30, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 1034, chapter 831), was intended to include irrigation projects and other activities designed to promote economic growth, many of those projects were never completed, to the detriment of the local communities flooded by the Fort Peck Dam; (5) the process of developing an environmental impact statement for the update of the Corps of Engineers Master Manual for the operation of the Missouri River recognized the need for greater support of recreation activities and other authorized purposes of the Fort Peck project; (6)(A) although fish stocking is included among the authorized purposes of the Fort Peck project, the State of Montana has funded the stocking of Fort Peck Lake since 1947; and (B) the obligation to fund the stocking constitutes an undue burden on the State; and (7) a viable warm water fishery would spur economic development in the region.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to authorize and provide funding for the design and construction of a warm water fish hatchery at Fort Peck Lake, Montana; and (2) to ensure stable operation and maintenance of the fish hatchery.
In this Act: (1) Fort peck lake.--The term ``Fort Peck Lake'' means the reservoir created by the damming of the upper Missouri River in northeastern Montana.
Hatchery project.--The term ``hatchery project'' means the project authorized by section 5.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
The Secretary shall carry out a project at Fort Peck Lake, Montana, for the design and construction of a fish hatchery and such associated facilities as are necessary to sustain a warm water fishery.
Design and Construction.-- (1) Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of design and construction of the hatchery project shall be 75 percent.
Form of non-federal share.-- (A) In general.--The non-Federal share of the cost of the hatchery project may be provided in the form of cash or in the form of land, easements, rights-of-way, services, roads, or any other form of in-kind contribution determined by the Secretary to be appropriate.
Required crediting.--The Secretary shall credit toward the non-Federal share of the cost of the hatchery project-- (i) the cost to the State of Montana of stocking Fort Peck Lake during the period beginning January 1, 1947; and (ii) the cost to the State of Montana and the counties having jurisdiction over land surrounding Fort Peck Lake of construction of local access roads to the lake.
Operation, Maintenance, Repair, and Replacement.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), the operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the hatchery project shall be a non-Federal responsibility.
Cost associated with threatened and endangered species.--The cost of operation and maintenance associated with raising threatened or endangered species shall be a Federal responsibility.
Power.--The Secretary shall offer to the hatchery project low-cost project power for all hatchery operations.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act-- (1) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; (2) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; and (3) such sums as are necessary to carry out section 6(b)(2).
Availability of Funds.--Sums made available under subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.