In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 309(d)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(d)(1)(A)) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) Any person who knowingly and willfully commits a violation of any provision of this Act which involves the making, receiving, or reporting of any contribution, donation, or expenditure-- ``(i) aggregating $25,000 or more during a calendar year shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both; or ``(ii) aggregating $2,000 or more (but less than $25,000) during a calendar year shall be fined under such title, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to violations occurring on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
In General.--Section 406(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 455(a)) is amended by striking ``3'' and inserting ``5''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to violations occurring on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
In General.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall-- (1) promulgate a guideline, or amend an existing guideline under section 994 of title 28, United States Code, in accordance with paragraph (2), for penalties for violations of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 and related election laws; and (2) submit to Congress an explanation of any guidelines promulgated under paragraph (1) and any legislative or administrative recommendations regarding enforcement of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 and related election laws.
Considerations.--The Commission shall provide guidelines under subsection (a) taking into account the following considerations: (1) Ensure that the sentencing guidelines and policy statements reflect the serious nature of such violations and the need for aggressive and appropriate law enforcement action to prevent such violations.
Provide a sentencing enhancement for any person convicted of such violation if such violation involves-- (A) a contribution, donation, or expenditure from a foreign source; (B) a large number of illegal transactions; (C) a large aggregate amount of illegal contributions, donations, or expenditures; (D) the receipt or disbursement of governmental funds; and (E) an intent to achieve a benefit from the Government.
Provide a sentencing enhancement for any violation by a person who is a candidate or a high-ranking campaign official for such candidate.
Assure reasonable consistency with other relevant directives and guidelines of the Commission.
Account for aggravating or mitigating circumstances that might justify exceptions, including circumstances for which the sentencing guidelines currently provide sentencing enhancements.
Assure the guidelines adequately meet the purposes of sentencing under section 3553(a)(2) of title 18, United States Code.
Effective Date; Emergency Authority To Promulgate Guidelines.-- (1) Effective date.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall promulgate guidelines under this section not later than the later of-- (A) 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act; or (B) 90 days after the date on which at least a majority of the members of the Commission are appointed and holding office.
Emergency authority to promulgate guidelines.--The Commission shall promulgate guidelines under this section in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 21(a) of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1987, as though the authority under such Act has not expired.
PROHIBITION ON CONTRIBUTIONS AND DONATIONS BY FOREIGN NATIONALS.
In General.--Section 319(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441e(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Prohibitions on Contributions and Donations.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), it shall be unlawful for-- ``(A) a foreign national, or an entity that is a domestic subsidiary of a foreign national, to make, directly or through any other person, any contribution of money or other thing of value, or promise expressly or impliedly to make any such contribution, in connection with an election to any political office or in connection with any primary election, convention, or caucus held to select a candidate for any political office or make any donation, or promise expressly or impliedly to make any such donation; or ``(B) any person to solicit, accept, or receive any such contribution or donation from a foreign national.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to an entity that is a domestic subsidiary of a foreign national if the entity can demonstrate through a reasonable accounting method that the entity has sufficient funds in the entity's account, other than funds given or loaned by the foreign national parent of the entity, from which the contribution or donation is made.''.
Definition of Donation.--Section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(20) Donation.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `donation' means a gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything else of value made by any person to a national committee of a political party or a Senatorial or Congressional Campaign Committee of a national political party for any purpose, but does not include a contribution (as defined in paragraph (8)).
Foreign national.--In the case of a person which is a foreign national (as defined in section 319(b)), the term `donation' includes a gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything else of value made by such person to a State or local committee of a political party or a candidate for State or local office.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 319 of Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by striking the heading and inserting ``RESTRICTIONS ON FOREIGN NATIONALS''.
PROHIBITION ON DONATIONS IN NAME OF ANOTHER.
Section 320 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441f) is amended by inserting ``or donation'' after ``contribution'' each place it appears.