This Act may be cited as the ``Restore Fiscal Discipline and Safeguard Social Security Act of 2002''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) When Congress enacted the fiscal year 2002 budget resolution, it did so based on the assurance that the Government would balance the budget without relying on social security surpluses for the remainder of the decade and beyond.
Congress was also assured that it would not have to act to increase the statutory debt limit until 2008.
The Government is projected to run on-budget deficits that will require it to spend the social security and medicare trust fund surpluses for the rest of the decade, even before additional spending for defense and homeland security is counted, and after the economy recovers and returns to strong growth.
The total debt is increasing because we have not kept the commitment to save the social security and medicare trust fund surpluses.
The Secretary of the Treasury has formally requested that Congress increase the statutory limit on the public debt by $750 billion, from the current level of $5.95 trillion to $6.70 trillion.
Congress will have to vote to raise the debt limit because we have been borrowing those trust fund surpluses to cover a deficit in the rest of the budget instead of saving them.
A $750 billion increase in the debt limit would be the second largest increase in history and is irresponsible in the absence of a framework to protect taxpayers from even further increases in the national debt.
Congress should authorize a limited increase in the debt limit to prevent a financial default, but should also work together with the President to develop a plan to restore fiscal discipline before further increasing our debt.
Current law provides for enforcement of budget resolutions: (A) Legislation violating discretionary spending totals set in a budget resolution or the suballocations set by the Committee on Appropriations is subject to a point of order under section 302(f) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
Legislation reducing receipts below a budget resolution's total is subject to a point of order under section 311(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is-- (1) to provide a responsible, measured increase in the debt limit to ensure that the Government meets its current legal obligations; (2) effective immediately thereafter, to limit strictly the size of further increases in the debt limit until the enactment of a plan to bring the budget into balance in five years without reliance on the social security trust fund surplus, such that any larger increase in the debt limit this fall would require a plan to balance the budget in fiscal year 2007, but if this deficit reduction should prove insufficient, the restrictions are automatically reestablished by the next regular semi-annual report of the Congressional Budget Office; (3) to require that the President submit a budget plan before the end of this fiscal year to achieve balance, without reliance on the social security trust fund surplus, by fiscal year 2007; (4) as a backup and discipline for these debt limit provisions, to establish points of order against any budget resolution that does not within five years and in all subsequent years eliminate any deficits projected by the Congressional Budget Office, without reliance on the social security trust fund surplus, using the enforcement provisions in current law to require that all subsequent spending and tax legislation conform to the budget resolution's deficit-reduction plan; and (5) thereby to restore fiscal discipline and to preserve social security for future retirees.
TITLE I--INCREASE IN DEBT LIMIT SEC.
INCREASE IN DEBT LIMIT.
Increase in Statutory Debt Limit.--Section 3101(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking ``$5,950,000,000,000'' and inserting ``$6,100,000,000,000''.
Point of Order.--(1) Effective immediately, except as provided by paragraph (2) or (3), it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, or conference report that includes any provision that increases the limit on the public debt above the limit set forth in section 3101(b) of title 31, United States Code, as in effect immediately before the date of consideration of that measure by more than $100,000,000,000.
Except as provided by paragraph (3), any bill or joint resolution may carry an increase in such limit of more than $100,000,000,000 only if the concurrent resolution on the budget for the budget year has been adopted and-- (A) sets forth or assumes a budget that is in on-budget balance or surplus within 4 fiscal years after the budget year and is in on-budget balance or surplus for every subsequent fiscal year covered by that resolution; and (B) does not contain any reduction in social security benefits.
Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply in the House of Representatives or the Senate if the chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the House or of the Senate, as applicable, certifies, based on the report of the Congressional Budget Office pursuant to section 202(e)(1) or (2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, whichever report is the most recent, that the budget will be in on-budget balance or surplus within 4 fiscal years after the budget year and is in on- budget balance or surplus for every subsequent fiscal year covered by that report.
If legislation to extend the discretionary spending limits beyond fiscal year 2002 is enacted before the date of release of such report, the Congressional Budget Office shall assume such discretionary spending levels.
Any such certification shall only have force and effect until the date of submission of the next report under either such section.
PRESIDENTIAL PLAN TO BALANCE THE BUDGET.
Presidential Plan.--The President shall submit to the Congress by September 30, 2002, a proposal to bring the budget of the Government (excluding the receipts and disbursements of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund) into balance or surplus by fiscal year 2007.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the plan described in subsection (a) should be based on the most recent economic and technical assumptions of the Congressional Budget Office.
TITLE II--CIRCUIT BREAKER TO PROTECT SOCIAL SECURITY SEC.
CIRCUIT BREAKER TO PROTECT SOCIAL SECURITY.
Circuit Breaker Points of Order.--(1) Effective January 1, 2003, whenever the most recent report of the Congressional Budget Office pursuant to section 202(e)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 projects an on-budget deficit for any fiscal year, it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any concurrent resolution on the budget that-- (A) sets forth or assumes an on-budget deficit for any such fiscal year that is larger than such Congressional Budget Office projection for that fiscal year; (B) sets forth or assumes a budget that is not in on-budget balance or surplus within 4 fiscal years after the budget year and is not in on-budget balance or surplus for any subsequent fiscal year covered by that resolution; or (C) contains any reduction in social security benefits.
Effective January 1, 2003, whenever the most recent report of the Congressional Budget Office pursuant to section 202(e)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 projects both on-budget surpluses (or a balanced budget) and deficits for the fiscal years included in that report, it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any concurrent resolution on the budget that-- (A) sets forth or assumes an on-budget deficit for any fiscal year for which such Congressional Budget Office projection for that fiscal year is for an on-budget surplus or balance; or (B) contains any reduction in social security benefits.
Suspension of Requirement During War or Low Economic Growth.-- (1) Low growth.--If the most recent of the Department of Commerce's advance, preliminary, or final reports of actual real economic growth indicate that the rate of real economic growth (as measured by real GDP) for each of the most recently reported quarter and the immediately preceding quarter is less than 1 percent, this section is suspended.
War.--If a declaration of war is in effect, this section is suspended.