This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Major League Baseball Act of 1994''.
There is hereby established the National Commission on Major League Baseball (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of five members, all of whom shall be appointed by the President.
The President shall appoint-- (1) one member after consultation with the Major League Baseball Players Association; (2) one member after consultation with the owners of Major League Baseball; and (3) three members (after consultations with baseball fan organizations and the informal solicitation of recommendations from the general public), one of whom the President shall designate as Chairman of the Commission.
Term.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for a six- year term.
No individual may serve as a member for more than one term.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but the Commission may provide for the taking of testimony and the reception of evidence at meetings at which there are present not less than three members of the Commission.
Appointment Date.--The first appointments made under subsection (a) shall be made within 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
First Meeting.--The first meeting of the Commission shall be called by the Chairman and shall be held within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Public Meetings.--All Commission meetings shall be open to the public.
Vacancy.--If any member of the Commission is unable to serve a full term or becomes unqualified to serve in such position, a new member shall be appointed to serve the remainder of such term of office, within 45 days of the vacancy, in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The duties of the Commission are to oversee and regulate any aspect of Major League Baseball, where, in the opinion of the Commission, it is in the best interests of baseball to intervene, including but not limited to the-- (1) conduct of binding arbitration in the event of a labor impasse; (2) setting of ticket prices; (3) expansion and relocation of franchises; (4) financing of any stadium; (5) regulation of television revenues; (6) regulation of marketing and merchandising revenues; and (7) revenue sharing disputes among the owners of Major League Baseball.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Meetings.--The Commission or, on authorization of the Commission, a panel of at least three members of the Commission, may hold such hearings, sit and act at such time and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as the Commission considers appropriate.
Obtaining Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department, agency, or court information and assistance necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such agency or department shall furnish such information or assistance to the Commission.
In addition, the Commission may request any relevant information from any appropriate parties with an interest in Major League Baseball.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) Issuance.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence that relates to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within a judicial district at any designated place of hearing within the judicial district.
Enforcement.--If a person issued a subpoena under paragraph (1) refuses to obey the subpoena or is guilty of contumacy, any court of the United States within the judicial district within which the hearing is conducted or within the judicial district within which the person is found or resides or transacts business may (upon application by the Commission) order the person to appear before the Commission to produce evidence or to give testimony relating to the matter under investigation.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt of the court.
Manner of service.--A subpoena of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Place of service.--All process of any court to which application may be made under this section may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
Facilities and Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such facilities and support services as the Commission may request.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of a Federal department or agency may make any of the facilities and services of such agency available to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Expenditures and Contracts.--The Commission or, on authorization of the Commission, a member of the Commission may make expenditures and enter into contracts for the procurement of such supplies, services, and property as the Commission or member considers appropriate for the purposes of carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Such expenditures and contracts may be made only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriations Acts.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal departments and agencies of the United States.
COMPENSATION OF THE COMMISSION.
Pay.--Each member of the Commission shall be a full-time Federal employee and shall be paid at an annual rate of basic pay payable for level II of the Executive Schedule under section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
Travel.--Members of the Commission shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Staff.-- (1) Appointment.--The Chairman of the Commission may appoint and terminate no more than ten staff personnel to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
Compensation.--The Chairman of the Commission may fix the compensation of personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
No later than three years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit a report to the Congress on the need for continuing the antitrust exemption for Major League Baseball and the possible effects resulting from the elimination of such exemption.
There is authorized to be appropriated $1,500,000 to carry out this Act.
This Act shall take effect on the date of enactment.