This Act may be cited as the ``Maritime Revitalization Act of 1993''.
MODIFICATIONS IN EXCISE TAX ON TRANSPORTATION OF PASSENGERS BY WATER.
In General.--Section 4471 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) Tax on vessels having a capacity of at least 150 passengers.--In the case of a vessel having berth or stateroom accommodations for at least 150 passengers, the amount of the tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be equal to 5 percent of the amount paid by each passenger for a covered voyage.''
Modification to Covered Voyages.--Clause (i) of section 4472(1)(A) of such Code is amended by inserting before the comma ``and which has a port of call not located in the United States or a possession of the United States''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXCISE TAX ON CONTAINERS USED TO IMPORT OR EXPORT COMMERCIAL CARGO.
In General.--Chapter 36 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to certain other excise taxes) is amended by inserting after subchapter B the following new subchapter: ``Subchapter C--Containers Used To Import or Export Cargo ``Sec.
General Rule.--There is hereby imposed a tax on any taxable container use.
Amount of Tax.--The amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a) on any taxable container use is $15 per 20-foot equivalent unit of the container.
Liability and Time of Imposition of Tax.-- ``(1) Liability.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid by the shipper.
Time of imposition.--Except as otherwise provided by regulations, the tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be imposed-- ``(A) at the time of exportation in the case of a use described in subsection (d)(1), and ``(B) at the time of entry in the case of a use in subsection (d)(2).
Taxable Container Use.--For purposes of this section, the term `taxable container use' means-- ``(1) the loading of a container containing commercial cargo on a commercial vessel at a port if-- ``(A) such cargo is being exported from the United States, and ``(B) such vessel is to provide the transport from the United States, and ``(2) the unloading of a container containing commercial cargo from a commercial vessel at a port if such cargo is being entered into the United States.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The terms `commercial cargo', `commercial vessel', and `port' have the respective meanings given such terms under section 4462.
United states.--The term `United States' includes the possessions of the United States.
Special Rules.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (d), (e), (f), (h), and (i) of section 4462 shall apply for purposes of this section.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of subchapters for chapter 36 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to subchapter B the following new item: ``Subchapter C. Containers used to import or export cargo.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 1996.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
Creation of Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Maritime Revitalization Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--There are hereby appropriated to the Maritime Revitalization Fund amounts equivalent to the net revenues received in the Treasury from the maritime taxes.
Net revenues.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `net revenues' means the amount estimated by the Secretary based on the excess of-- ``(A) the maritime taxes received in the Treasury, over ``(B) the decrease in the tax imposed by chapter 1 resulting from the maritime taxes.
Maritime taxes.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `maritime taxes' means-- ``(A) the taxes imposed by section 4471 (relating to transportation of passengers by water) to the extent the taxes received in the Treasury under such section exceed the amount that the Secretary estimates would have been received under such section without regard to the amendments made by the Maritime Revitalization Fund Act of 1993, and ``(B) the taxes imposed by section 4476 (relating to containers used to import or export commercial cargo).
Expenditures From Fund.--Amounts in the Maritime Revitalization Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, only for purposes of making expenditures to carry out any law which is substantially similar to the title IV of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936 (46 App.
United States Code 1171) proposed to be added by H.R.
2151 (The Maritime Security and Competitiveness Act of 1993) of the 103d Congress, as introduced.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Sec.