AMENDMENT OF ACT ESTABLISHING SLEEPING BEAR DUNES NATIONAL LAKESHORE.
Extensions.--Section 10 of the Act of October 21, 1970, establishing the Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore (84 United States Statutes at Large 1079; 16 United States Code 460x-9) is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``(e) Extensions of Use and Occupancy.-- ``(1) Notice.--The Secretary shall transmit a notice to all owners of improved property described in section 11(a) (16 United States Code 460x-10(a)) who have retained a right of use and occupancy, or their successors in interest who currently possess such rights.
The notice shall notify such owners, occupiers, or successors in interest of their right to extend such right of use and occupancy pursuant to this subsection.
Election.--Any owner notified under paragraph (1) may elect, within 180 days of receiving notice pursuant to paragraph (1), to extend his or her right of use and occupancy beyond the otherwise applicable termination date.
Such extension shall terminate on the later of the following: ``(A) The date of death of the person who owned or occupied the property on January 1, 1996.
The date 25 years after the date of the election under this paragraph.
If the person who owned or occupied the property on January 1, 1996, dies before the date 25 years after the date of the election under this paragraph, the right of use and occupancy of the property may be transferred by such person, by will or otherwise, only to a member or members of such person's immediate family for the remainder of the term of the extension under this subsection.
Conditions.--Any extension under this subsection shall be subject to subsections (c) and (d) in the same manner and to the same extent as is a retained right under subsection (b), except that termination of the extension by the Secretary shall take effect only after 180 days after the Secretary has notified the person holding the extension of the Secretary's intention to terminate the extension.
Any extension under this subsection shall be conditioned upon the annual payment by person to whom such extension is issued of an amount determined in accordance with paragraph (4).
Any such extension shall also be conditioned upon the following: ``(A) An agreement by the person to whom such extension is issued to assume all responsibilities for maintenance, repair, and replacement of all improvements located on the property concerned and to indemnify and hold harmless the United States for any liability which may arise in connection with such property.
An agreement by the person to whom such extension is issued to make pro rata payments to local governments providing services to persons residing within the boundaries of the lakeshore in such reasonable amounts and at such times as may be determined by such local governments in order to reimburse such local governments for the costs of providing such services.
Amount.--The amount of each payment to be made by a person under paragraph (3) shall be such person's annual pro rata share of an amount determined according to a formula where the numerator is the value of the property used or occupied by such person and the denominator is 100.
The value of the property for purposes of this paragraph shall be the value of the property at the time of its acquisition by the United States, indexed for inflation according to the Consumer Price Index, as determined by the Secretary.
Notwithstanding sections 1341 and 3302 of title 31 of the United States Code, such annual payments shall be retained by the Secretary and shall be available for use by the Secretary without further appropriation for purposes of maintenance and administration of the national lakeshore.
Authority to Lease to Family.--Following an extension under subsection (e) of a right of use and occupancy for any property, the Secretary may lease the property to any member or members of the immediate family of such owner for a definite or indefinite term, at the discretion of the Secretary.
The Secretary may, after 180 days notice to the lessee, terminate any such lease when the Secretary determines that the structures on the property will be removed and the property will be restored to its natural condition in order to improve the natural landscape and provide better opportunities for public access and enjoyment.
Any such lease shall be subject to the same conditions as referred to in paragraph (3) of subsection (e) and lease payments shall be retained by the Secretary in the same manner as provided in paragraph (4) of subsection (e).''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--Section 10(c) of such Act is amended by striking ``many'' and inserting ``may''.
Section 11(a)(2) of such Act is amended by striking ``section 10 (b) or (d)'' and inserting ``section 10''.