This Act may be cited as the ``Maritime Regulatory Reform Act of 1994''.
SAFETY MANAGEMENT AND ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.
Chapter 21 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding a new section 2103a to read as follows: ``SEC.
SAFETY MANAGEMENT AND ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.
To implement the International Management Code for the Safe Operation of Ships and for Pollution Prevention adopted by the International Maritime Organization and to establish voluntary alternative compliance programs, the Secretary may prescribe regulations governing the merchant marine of the United States, merchant marine personnel, and shore-based management of vessels that affect the safety of vessels and personnel subject to this subtitle and marine pollution prevention.
Compliance with regulations implementing the International Management Code for the Safe Operation of Ships and for Pollution Prevention shall be voluntary until the dates for mandatory compliance provided for in the International Convention for the Safety of life at Sea.
In implementing the International Management Code for the Safe Operation of Ships and for Pollution Prevention and alternative compliance programs established pursuant to this section, the Secretary may establish optional regulatory requirements commensurate with the level of quality control adopted by the shipowner or operator, provided that an equivalent level of safety is maintained.
The Secretary may require vessel owners and operators to maintain records and submit reports and other information which the Secretary deems necessary to carry out the objectives of this section.''.
The table of sections for chapter 21 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting between the items relating to section 2103 and section 2104 the following: ``Sec.
Safety management and alternative compliance.''.
USE OF REPORTS, DOCUMENTS, AND CERTIFICATES.
Chapter 31 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding a new section 3103 to read as follows: ``SEC.
USE OF REPORTS, DOCUMENTS, AND CERTIFICATES.
``In carrying out this part, the Secretary may utilize reports, documents, and certificates issued by persons who the Secretary determines may be relied upon with regard to marine safety, security, and environmental protection.''.
The table of sections for chapter 31 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Use of reports, documents, and certificates.''.
Section 3306(b) of title 46, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1) Equipment subject to regulation under this section may not be used on any vessel without prior approval as prescribed by regulation.
Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, the Secretary may accept approvals of fire and life safety equipment and materials by foreign governments which the Secretary determines utilize design and testing standards that meet the requirements of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea to which the United States is a party, and its associated International Maritime Organization guidance documents.
In determining whether to accept approvals issued by foreign governments, the Secretary shall give due regard to whether adherence to standards promulgated by regulation under this subsection is necessary in order to preserve higher levels of safety.''.
Section 3307 of title 46, United States Code, is amended as follows: (1) In paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``and'' and inserting a comma in its place; (B) by inserting after ``nautical school vessel'', ``, and small passenger vessel carrying more than 12 passengers on an international voyage''; and (C) by adding ``and'' at the end.
By striking paragraph (2).
In paragraph (3)-- (A) by changing the designation of paragraph (3) to paragraph (2); and (B) by striking ``2 years'' and inserting ``5 years'' in its place.
Section 3710(b) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking ``24 months'' and substituting ``5 years''.
Section 3309(c) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by deleting the words ``(but not more than 60 days)'' after the words ``At least 30 days''.
Section 3316 of title 46, United States Code, is amended as follows: (1) Subsection (a) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) In carrying out this part, the Secretary may rely on reports, documents, and certificates issued by the American Bureau of Shipping or other classification society recognized by the Secretary as meeting acceptable standards for such a society, or an agent of the Bureau or society.''.
Subsection (c)(1) is amended to read as follows: ``(c)(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary may delegate to the Bureau or other classification society recognized by the Secretary as meeting acceptable standards for such a society, or an agent of the Bureau or society, the inspection or examination, in the United States or in a foreign country, of a vessel documented or to be documented as a vessel of the United States.
The Bureau, society, or agent may issue the certificate of inspection required by this part and other certificates essential to documentation.''.
Subsection (d) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) The Secretary also may make an agreement with or use the Bureau or other classification society recognized by the Secretary as meeting acceptable standards for such a society, or an agent of the Bureau or society, for reviewing and approving plans required for issuing a certificate of inspection.''.
The item for section 3316 of the table of sections for chapter 33 of title 46, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.