That (a) part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from income) is amended by redesignating section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after section 136 the following new section: ``SEC.
CERTAIN PENSIONS AND ANNUITIES UNDER STATE OR LOCAL RETIREMENT SYSTEMS.
General Rule.--Gross income does not include any amount (otherwise includible in gross income) received by an individual as a qualified governmental pension.
Dollar Limitation.--The aggregate amount excluded under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed-- ``(1) the social security exclusion amount applicable to the taxpayer for such year, reduced by ``(2) the sum of-- ``(A) the aggregate amount excluded from gross income under section 72(b) with respect to any qualified governmental pension, and ``(B) the social security benefits (within the meaning of section 86(d)) received by the taxpayer during such year which were excluded from gross income.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified governmental pension.--The term `qualified governmental pension' means any pension or annuity received under a State or local retirement system to the extent such pension or annuity is not attributable to service-- ``(A) which constitutes employment for purposes of chapter 21 (relating to the Federal Insurance Contributions Act), or ``(B) which is covered by an agreement made pursuant to section 218 of the Social Security Act.
Social security exclusion amount.--The social security exclusion amount applicable to any taxpayer for any taxable year is the portion of the aggregate amount received as a qualified governmental pension by such individual during such taxable year which would not be includible in gross income if the amounts so received were social security benefits (as defined in section 86(d)).
For purposes of the preceding sentence, amounts received as a qualified governmental pension during such taxable year shall not be taken into account to the extent such amounts exceed the applicable maximum benefit amount.
Applicable maximum benefit amount.--The term `applicable maximum benefit amount' means-- ``(A) in the case of an unmarried individual, the maximum individual social security benefit, ``(B) in the case of a joint return, 150 percent of the maximum individual social security benefit, or ``(C) in the case of a married individual filing a separate return, 75 percent of the maximum individual social security benefit.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, marital status shall be determined under section 143.
Maximum individual social security benefit.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `maximum individual social security benefit' means, with respect to any taxable year, the maximum total amount (as certified by the Secretary of Health and Human Services to the Secretary) which could be paid for all months in the calendar year ending in the taxable year as old-age insurance benefits under section 202(a) of the Social Security Act (without regard to any reduction, deduction, or offset under section 202(k) or section 203 of such Act) to any individual who attained age 65, and filed application for such benefits, on the first day of such calendar year.
Part years.--In the case of an individual who receives a qualified governmental pension with respect to a period of less than a full taxable year, the maximum individual social security benefit for such individual for such year shall be reduced as provided in regulations prescribed by the Secretary to properly correspond to such period.
State or local retirement system.--The term `State or local retirement system' means any pension, annuity, retirement, or similar fund or system established by a State, any political subdivision of a State, or the District of Columbia.''
Subparagraph (A) of section 86(b)(2) of such Code (defining modified adjusted gross income) is amended by inserting ``137,'' before ``911''.
The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code (relating to items specifically excluded from income) is amended by redesignating the item relating to section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after the item relating to section 136 the following new item: ``Sec.
Certain pensions and annuities under State or local retirement systems.''
The amendments made by this Act shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.