This Act may be cited as the ``Railroad Grade Crossing Safety and Research Act of 1994''.
INSTITUTE FOR RAILROAD AND GRADE CROSSING SAFETY.
The Secretary of Transportation (hereinafter Secretary), in conjunction with a university or college having expertise in highway driver and railroad safety, shall establish within one year of enactment of this Act, an Institute for Railroad and Grade Crossing Safety (hereinafter Institute).
The Institute shall research, develop, fund, or test measures for reducing the number of fatalities and injuries in rail operations.
The Institute shall focus on improvements in railroad grade crossing safety, railroad trespass prevention, prevention of railroad vandalism and the improved enforcement of laws in such areas.
There is hereby authorized to be appropriated an additional $1,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996 through 2000 for the Institute, which will make periodic reports to the Secretary of Transportation and the Congress.
RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING, TRESPASSING AND VANDALISM PREVENTION STRATEGY.
Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and in consultation with affected parties, the Secretary shall evaluate and review current local, State and Federal codes regarding trespass on railroad property and vandalism affecting railroad safety and develop model prevention and enforcement codes and enforcement strategies for the consideration of State and local legislatures and governmental entities.
Within one year of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop and maintain a comprehensive outreach program to improve communications among Federal railroad safety inspectors, Federal Rail Administration-certified State inspectors, railroad police, and State and local law enforcement, for the purpose of addressing trespass and vandalism dangers on railroad property, and strengthening relevant law enforcement strategies.
This program shall increase public and police awareness of the legality of, dangers inherent in, and the extent of, trespassing on railroad rights-of-way, to develop strategies to improve the prevention of trespass and vandalism, and to improve the enforcement of laws relating to railroad trespass, vandalism and grade crossing safety.
For purposes of this Act, a trespasser is defined as a person who is on that part of railroad property used in railroad operations and whose presence is prohibited, forbidden or unlawful.
CIVIL PENALTY FOR VANDALISM.
Not later than six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall amend the Secretary's regulations under section 202 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 United States Code 431) to make subject to a civil penalty of up to $5,000.00 under such Act any person who defaces, disables, damages, vandalizes or commits any act that adversely affects the function of any railroad grade crossing related signal system, sign, gate, device, sensor, or equipment.
CIVIL PENALTY FOR TRESPASS ON RAILROAD PROPERTY.
Not later than six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall amend the Secretary's regulations under section 202 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 United States Code 431) to make subject to a civil penalty of up to $2,500.00 under such an Act any person who trespasses on a railroad owned or railroad leased right-of-way, road or bridge.
WARNING OF CIVIL LIABILITY.
The Secretary shall permit and encourage railroads to warn the public about potential Federal civil liability for violations of Federal regulations related to vandalism of railroad crossing related devices, signs and equipment and trespass on railroad property.
Upon the date of enactment, no state or political subdivision thereof shall impose a whistle ban with respect to any railroad grade crossing or series of railroad grade crossings unless one of the following actions has been taken: (1) The affected crossing is closed during the pendency of the ban.
Crossing gates and median barriers have been installed and are operational at the affected crossing.
Four quadrant gates have been installed and are in operation at the affected crossing.
An automated horn system crossing device has been installed.
The Federal rail administrator has granted specific, time-limited permission for such ban.
The Secretary shall conduct a review of the Department of Transportation's rules with respect to rail car visibility.
As part of this review, the Secretary shall collect relevant data from operational experience of railroads having enhanced visibility measures in service.
Not later than June 30, 1996, the Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding to issue regulations requiring substantially enhanced visibility standards for newly manufactured and remanufactured rail cars.
In such rulemaking proceedings the Secretary shall consider at a minimum-- (1) visibility from the perspective of automobile drivers; (2) whether certain rail car paint colors should be prohibited or required; (3) the use of reflective materials; (4) the visibility of lettering on rail cars; (5) the effect of any enhanced visibility measures on the health and safety of train crew members; and (6) the ratio of cost to benefit of any new regulations.
In issuing regulations under paragraph (b), the Secretary may exclude from any specific visibility requirement any category of trains or rail operations if the Secretary determines that such an exclusion is in the public interest and is consistent with rail safety including railroad grade crossing safety.
As used in this subsection, the term ``railcar visibility'' means the enhancement of driver, pedestrian and railroad worker ability to observe trains consistent with public safety with particular consideration of enhancing safety at railroad grade crossings.
STATEWIDE RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING FREEZE.
Not later than two years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding to issue regulations which-- (1) impose a freeze on the total number of railroad grade crossings in each State of the United States of America; (2) after the effective date of the regulation require any new railroad grade crossing opening to receive the specific approval of the Federal Rail Administrator; (3) require that unless otherwise in the public interest, or necessary to facilitate interstate commerce, three existing railroad grade crossings be closed in the requesting State for each new railroad grade crossing opened after the effective date of this regulation; and (4) permit the Federal Rail Administrator to waive the application of this regulation once a State has achieved significant and sufficient reductions in the total number railroad grade crossings or has an optimal number of railroad grade crossings for the entire State.
The Secretary of Transportation shall incorporate the enhancement of railroad grade crossing safety, the prevention of trespassing on railroad property and the prevention of vandalism to railroad grade crossing safety devices, signs and equipment into the research, technology development and testing priorities of the Department of Transportation.
In carrying out activities authorized by this Act, the Secretary shall consult with such other governmental agencies concerning the availability and affordability of appropriate technologies, especially defense related technologies for application to railroad crossing safety, trespass and vandalism prevention and other rail safety initiatives.
EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION OF GRADE CROSSING PROBLEMS.
Toll Free Telephone Number.--The Secretary of Transportation shall designate not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and thereafter maintain an emergency notification system utilizing a toll free ``800'' telephone number that can be used by the public to convey to railroads, either directly or through public safety personnel, information about malfunctions or other safety problems at railroad-highway grade crossings.