This Act may be cited as the ``Health Promotion and Disease Prevention for Persons with Disabilities Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE PREVENTION PROGRAM FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 280g et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE PREVENTION PROGRAM FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants to, or enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with, public and nonprofit private entities for the purpose of carrying out programs for promoting good health, disease prevention, and wellness for persons with disabilities and preventing secondary conditions in persons with disabilities.
Certain Authorized Activities.--With respect to promoting good health and wellness for persons with disabilities described in subsection (a), activities for which the Secretary may make a grant under such subsection include-- ``(1) coordinating activities for preventing secondary disabling conditions; for health promotion, disease prevention, disease prevention and wellness for persons with disabilities; ``(2) conducting demonstrations and interventions; ``(3) conducting surveillances and studies on cost- effectiveness and efficacy of interventions; ``(4) studying the effects and costs of environmental barriers for persons with disabilities; ``(5) educating the public; and ``(6) educating and training health professionals (including allied health professionals) and conducting activities to improve the clinical skills of such professionals.
Reports to Secretary.--The Secretary may not make a grant under subsection (a) unless the applicant for the grant agrees to submit to the Secretary such reports as the Secretary may require with respect to the grant.
Priorities.--The Secretary shall establish a National Advisory Committee on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention for Persons With Disabilities which shall set priorities to carry out this section and annually evaluate the progress of the program under this section in implementing the priorities.
Requirement of Application.--The Secretary may not make a grant under subsection (a) unless an application for such assistance is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Limitation Regarding Education of Health Professionals.-- In making grants under subsection (a), the Secretary may not, for activities described in subsection (b)(6), obligate more than 10 percent of the amounts appropriated under subsection (k) for any fiscal year.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may provide training, technical assistance, and consultations with respect to the planning, development, and operation of any program preventing secondary disabling conditions in persons with disabilities.
Provision of Supplies and Services in Lieu of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--On the request of grantee under subsection (a), the Secretary may, subject to paragraph (2), provide supplies, equipment, and services for the purpose of aiding the grantee in carrying out such subsection and, for such purpose, may detail to the grantee any officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Corresponding reduction in payments.--With respect to a request described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall reduce the amount of payments under subsection (a) to the grantee by an amount equal to the costs of detailing personnel (including pay, allowances, and travel expenses) and the fair market value of any supplies, equipment, or services provided by the Secretary.
The Secretary shall, for the payment of expenses incurred in complying with such request, expend the amounts withheld.
Evaluations and Reports.-- ``(1) Evaluations.--The Secretary shall, directly or through contracts with public or private entities, provide for evaluations of programs carried out pursuant to subsection (a).
Reports.--The Secretary shall, not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of the Health Promotion and Disease Prevention for Persons with Disabilities Act, and annually thereafter, submit to the Congress a report summarizing evaluations carried out pursuant to paragraph (1) during the preceding fiscal year.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `prevention of secondary conditions' means activities that address the causes of secondary conditions and activities and refer to the functional limitations involved and the elimination or reduction of such limitations, including activities that-- ``(A) eliminate or reduce the factors that cause or predispose a person with disabilities to acquire secondary conditions or increase functional limitations; ``(B) increase the early identification of existing problems to eliminate factors that create or increase functional limitations; ``(C) mitigate against the effects of disabilities throughout the life of the individual; and ``(D) implement programs of health promotion, disease prevention and wellness to assure the greatest degree of quality of life for persons with disabilities.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of making grants and contracts under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary.