This Act may be cited as the ``Health Services Cost Control Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to reduce health care costs by encouraging cooperation between hospitals and other medical facilities in order to contain costs and achieve a more efficient and effective health care delivery system through the elimination of unnecessary duplication of expensive medical or high technology services or equipment while preserving services in geographical proximity to the communities traditionally served by the facilities.
TECHNOLOGY AND SERVICES SHARING DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Part D of title VI of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 291k et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
TECHNOLOGY AND SERVICES SHARING DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary and the Attorney General (in this section jointly referred to as the `Administrators') shall jointly carry out a demonstration program under which twenty three-year grants are awarded for fiscal year 1994 to eligible applicants to facilitate collaboration among two or more licensed hospitals or other medical facilities with respect to the provision of expensive, capital-intensive medical technology or other highly resource-intensive services.
Such program shall be designed to demonstrate the extent to which such agreements result in a reduction in costs to the facilities and individuals involved, in an increase in access to care for individuals, and in improvements in the quality of care.
Service area.--The Administrators shall determine the region to be served by a demonstration program under paragraph (1).
In carrying out this section, the Administrators shall ensure that the operation of such a program preserves the availability of health services in geographical proximity to the communities traditionally served by the facilities participating in the program.
Eligible Applicants.-- ``(1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), a medical facility or facilities shall prepare and submit to the Administrators an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Administrators may require, including-- ``(A) a statement that such entity desires to negotiate and enter into a voluntary agreement under which such entity is operating in one State or region for the sharing of medical technology or services; ``(B) a description of the nature and scope of the activities contemplated under the cooperative agreement; ``(C) a description of the financial arrangement between the entities that are parties to the agreement; ``(D) a description of the geographical area generally served by the entities; ``(E) a description of anticipated benefits and advantages to the providers and to individuals; and ``(F) any other information determined appropriate by the Administrators.
Development of evaluation guidelines.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Administrators shall develop regulations, including criteria and evaluation guidelines with respect to applications submitted under paragraph (1).
Evaluations of applications.--The Administrators shall evaluate applications submitted under paragraph (1).
In determining which applications to approve for purposes of awarding grants under subsection (a), the Administrators shall consider whether the agreement described in each such application meets the criteria and guidelines developed under paragraph (2) and is likely to result in-- ``(A) the enhancement of the quality of care; ``(B) the preservation of services in geographical proximity to the communities traditionally served by the applicant; ``(C) improvements in the cost-effectiveness of high-technology services by the entities involved; ``(D) improvements in the efficient utilization of the entities' resources and capital equipment; ``(E) the provision of services that would not otherwise be available; ``(F) the elimination of unnecessary duplication of hospital resources; ``(G) a reduction in costs to individuals; or ``(H) no undue harm to the care provided individuals seeking services.
Allocation of Grant Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--Amounts provided under a grant awarded under subsection (a) shall be used to facilitate collaboration among entities.
Such permissible uses may include reimbursements for the expenses associated with specialized personnel, administrative services, support services, transportation, and instructional programs.
Funds may not be used to purchase expensive, capital-intensive medical technology or other highly resource-intensive services not previously owned or provided by the facility.
Grant award amount.--Entities applying for grants under subsection (a) shall specify the desired grant award amount.
The Administrators shall determine the appropriate amount in granting such awards.
Geographic and size diversity.--In awarding grants under this section, the Administrators shall assure that, to the extent reasonably practicable, there is a sufficiently representative geographic and size distribution of grantees.
Medical Technology and Services.-- ``(1) In general.--Agreements carried out under this section shall provide for the sharing of medical technology or eligible services among the entities which are parties to such agreements.
Medical technology.--For purposes of this section, the term `medical technology' includes the drugs, devices, equipment and medical and surgical procedures utilized in medical care, and the organizational and support systems within which such care is provided, that-- ``(A) have high capital costs or extremely high annual operating costs; and ``(B) are technologies with respect to which there is a reasonable expectation that shared ownership will avoid a significant degree of the potential excess capacity of such service in the community or region to be served under such agreement.
Eligible services.--With respect to services that may be shared under an agreement entered into under this section, such services shall-- ``(A) either have high capital costs or extremely high annual operating costs; and ``(B) be services with respect to which there is a reasonable expectation that shared ownership will avoid a significant degree of the potential excess capacity of such services in the community or region to be served under such agreement.
Such services may include mobile services.
Term.--The demonstration program established under this section shall continue for 3 calendar years.
Reports.-- ``(1) In general.--Grantees shall submit annual reports to the Administrators containing information on the demonstration projects funded under this section, as required by the Administrators.
To congress.--On the date that occurs 42 months after the establishment of the demonstration program under this section, the Administrators shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress, a report concerning results of the demonstration and the potential for cooperative agreements of the type entered into under this section to-- ``(A) contain health care costs; ``(B) increase the access of individuals to medical services; and ``(C) improve the quality of health care.
Such report shall also contain the recommendations of the Administrators with respect to future programs to facilitate cooperative agreements and recommendations for legislation.
Relation to Antitrust Laws.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any provision of the antitrust laws, it shall not be considered a violation of the antitrust laws for an entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) to enter into and carry out activities under a cooperative agreement in accordance with this section.
Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `antitrust laws' means-- ``(A) the Act entitled ``An Act to protect trade and commerce against unlawful restraints and monopolies'', approved July 2, 1890, commonly known as the ``Sherman Act'' (26 United States Statutes at Large 209; chapter 647; 15 United States Code 1 et sequentes); ``(B) the Federal Trade Commission Act, approved September 26, 1914 (38 United States Statutes at Large 717; chapter 311; 15 United States Code 41 et sequentes); ``(C) the Act entitled ``An Act to supplement existing laws against unlawful restraints and monopolies, and for other purposes'', approved October 15, 1914, commonly known as the ``Clayton Act'' (38 United States Statutes at Large 730; chapter 323; 15 United States Code 12 et sequentes; 18 United States Code 402, 660, 3285, 3691; 29 United States Code 52, 53); and ``(D) any State antitrust laws that would prohibit the activities described in paragraph (1).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $2,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1996.
Any appropriation pursuant to the preceding sentence shall be subject to section 601 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (relating to discretionary spending limits).''.
CERTIFICATE OF REVIEW PROCESS.
Issuance of Certificate of Review.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General may issue a certificate of review with a three-year term to licensed hospitals and other medical facilities that enter into cooperative agreements with respect to the provision of expensive, capital-intensive medical technology or other highly resource-intensive services if such agreements-- (A) are designed to result in a reduction in unnecessary duplication of services, in a reduction in costs to individuals, in an increase in access to care for individuals, or in improvements in the quality of care; (B) will not unreasonably enhance, stabilize, or depress prices within the United States for the equipment or services of the class under the agreement; and (C) will not constitute unfair methods of competition against competitors engaged in providing the services of the class under the agreement.
Deadline for response to application.--The Attorney General shall respond to a request for a certificate of review under paragraph (1) not later than 90 days after receiving the request.
Protection Conferred by Certificate of Review.-- (1) Protection from civil or criminal antitrust actions.-- Except as provided in paragraph (2), no criminal or civil action may be brought under the antitrust laws against a hospital or other medical facility to which a certificate of review under subsection (a) is issued which is based on conduct which is specified in, and compliance with the terms of, such certificate of review which certificate was in effect when the conduct occurred.
Civil actions.-- (A) Any person who has been injured as a result of conduct engaged in under a certificate of review under subsection (a) may bring a civil action for injunctive relief, actual damages, the loss of interest on actual damages, and the cost of suit (including a reasonable attorney's fee) for the failure to comply with the standards of such subsection.
Any action commenced under this subsection shall proceed as if it were an action commenced under section 4 or section 16 of the Clayton Act, except that the standards of subsection (a) and the remedies provided in this paragraph shall be the exclusive standards and remedies applicable to such action.
Any action brought under subparagraph (A) shall be filed within two years of the date the plaintiff has notice of the failure to comply with the standards of subsection (a) but in any event within 4 years after the cause of action accrues.
In any action brought under subparagraph (A), there shall be a presumption that conduct which is specified in and complies with a certificate of review does comply with the standards of subsection (a).
In any action brought under subparagraph (A), if the court finds that the conduct does comply with the standards of subsection (a), the court shall award to the hospital or other medical facility against which the claim is brought the cost of suit attributable to defending against the claim (including a reasonable attorney's fee).
The Attorney General may file a suit pursuant to section 15 of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 25) to enjoin conduct threatening clear and irreparable harm to the national interest.