This Act may be cited as the ``National Park System Reform Act of 1994''.
TITLE I--NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM PLAN SEC.
PREPARATION OF NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM PLAN.
Preparation of Plan.--The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall prepare a National Park System Plan (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``plan'') to guide the direction of the National Park System into the next century.
The plan shall include each of the following: (1) A statement of goals and objectives for use in defining the mission and role of the National Park Service in preserving our national natural and cultural heritage, relative to other efforts at the Federal, State, local, and private levels.
Detailed criteria to be used in determining which natural and cultural resources are appropriate for inclusion as units of the National Park System.
Identification of what constitutes adequate representation of a particular resource type and which aspects of the national heritage are adequately represented in the existing National Park System or in other protected areas.
Identification of appropriate aspects of the national heritage not currently represented in the National Park System.
Priorities of the themes and types of resources which should be added to the National Park System in order to provide more complete representation of our Nation's heritage.
A statement of the role of the National Park Service with respect to such topics as preservation of natural areas and ecosystems, preservation of industrial America, preservation of nonphysical cultural resources, and provision of outdoor recreation opportunities.
A statement of what areas constitute units of the National Park System and the distinction between units of the system, affiliated areas, and other areas within the system.
Consultation.--During the preparation of the plan under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult with other Federal land managing agencies, State and local officials, the National Park System Advisory Board, resource management, recreation and scholarly organizations and other interested parties as the Secretary deems advisable.
These consultations shall also include appropriate opportunities for public review and comment.
Transmittal to Congress.--Prior to the end of the third complete fiscal year commencing after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit the plan developed under this section to the Committee on Natural Resources of the United States House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate.
MANAGEMENT REVIEW OF NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM.
Review.--(1) Using the National Park System Plan prepared pursuant to section 101 as a guide, the Secretary shall review the existing National Park System to determine whether there are more appropriate alternatives for managing specific units or portions of units within the system, including partnerships or direct management by States, local governments, other agencies and the private sector.
The Secretary shall develop a report which contains a list of areas within the National Park System where National Park Service management should be modified or terminated.
In developing the list under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider such factors as duplication within the National Park System, better representation of a particular resource type under management of another entity, lack of significance, lack of management feasibility, cost, lack of visitor accessibility, modifications that change the character of the resource, lack of collaboration to protect resources, suitability for management by another agency, and the compatibility of the resource with the present mission and role of the National Park Service.
For any areas for which termination of National Park Service management is recommended, the Secretary shall make recommendations regarding management by an entity or entities other than the National Park Service.
For any area determined to have national significance, prior to including such area on the list under paragraph (1) the Secretary shall identify feasible alternatives to National Park Service management which will protect the resources thereof and assure continued public access thereto.
Consultation.--In developing the list referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult with other Federal land managing agencies, State and local officials, the National Park System Advisory Board, resource management, recreation and scholarly organizations and other interested parties as the Secretary deems advisable.
These consultations shall also include appropriate opportunities for public review and comment.
Transmittal to Congress.--Not later than 1 year after the Secretary completes the plan referred to in section 101 of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit the report developed under this section simultaneously to the Natural Resources Committee of the United States House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate.
The report shall contain the recommendations of the Secretary concerning modifications or termination of National Park Service management for any areas within the National Park System and the recommendations regarding alternative management by an entity or entities other than the National Park Service.
NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM REVIEW COMMISSION.
Establishment of Commission.--If the Secretary fails to transmit the report developed under section 102 within the 1-year period specified in section 102, a National Park System Review Commission shall be established to review existing National Park System units to determine whether there are more appropriate alternatives for managing specific units or portions thereof.
Within one year after the date of its establishment, the Commission shall prepare and transmit to the Natural Resources Committee of the United States House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate a report containing a list of National Park System units or portions thereof where National Park Service management should be modified or terminated.
In developing the list, the Commission shall consider the factors referred to in section 102(a)(2).
For any listed areas, the Commission shall suggest alternative management by an entity or entities other than the National Park Service, and for any area determined to have national significance, prior to including such area on the list the Commission shall identify feasible alternatives to National Park Service management which will protect the resources of the area and assure continued public access to thereto.
In developing the list, the Commission shall consult with other Federal land managing agencies, State and local officials, the National Park System Advisory Board, resource management, recreation and scholarly organizations and other interested parties as the Secretary deems advisable.
These consultations shall also include appropriate opportunities for public review and comment.
Membership and Appointment.--The Commission shall consist of 7 members each of whom shall have substantial familiarity with, and understanding of, the National Park System.
Three members of the Commission, one of whom shall be the Director of the National Park Service, shall be appointed by the Secretary.
Two members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives and two shall be appointed by the President Pro Tem of the United States Senate.
Each member shall be appointed within 3 months after the expiration of the 1-year period specified in section 102(c).
Chair.--The Commission shall elect a chair from among its members.
Vacancies.--Vacancies occurring on the Commission shall not affect the authority of the remaining members of the Commission to carry out the functions of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall be promptly filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Quorum.--A simple majority of Commission members shall constitute a quorum.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at least quarterly or upon the call of the chair or a majority of the members of the Commission.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation as such.
Members of the Commission, when engaged in official Commission business, shall be entitled to travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in government service under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Termination.--The Commission established pursuant to this section shall terminate 90 days after the transmittal of the report to Congress as provided in subsection (a).
Limitation on National Park Service Staff.--The Commission may hire staff to carry out its assigned responsibilities.
Not more than one-half of the professional staff of the Commission shall be made up of current employees of the National Park Service.
Staff of Other Agencies.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist the Commission.
Experts and Consultants.--Subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Commission, the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates determined by the Commission to be advisable.
Powers of the Commission.--(1) The Commission shall for the purpose of carrying out this title hold such public hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission deems advisable.
The Commission may make such bylaws, rules, and regulations, consistent with this title, as it considers necessary to carry out its functions under this title.
When so authorized by the Commission any member or agent of the Commission may take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and upon the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
The Secretary shall provide to the Commission any information available to the Secretary and requested by the Commission regarding the plan referred to in section 101 and any other information requested by the Commission which is relevant to the duties of the Commission and available to the Secretary.
TITLE II--NEW AREA ESTABLISHMENT SEC.
STUDY OF NEW PARK SYSTEM AREAS.
Section 8 of the Act of August 18, 1970, entitled ``An Act to improve the administration of the national park system by the Secretary of the Interior, and to clarify the authorities applicable to the system, and for other purposes'' (16 United States Code 1a-1 and following) is amended as follows: (1) By inserting ``General Authority.--'' after ``(a)''.
By striking the second through the seventh sentences of subsection (a).
By redesignating the last sentence of subsection (a) as subsection (e) and inserting in such sentence before the words ``For the purposes of carrying'' the following: ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--''.
By striking subsection (b).
By inserting the following after subsection (a): ``(b) Studies of Areas for Potential Addition.--(1) At the beginning of each calendar year, along with the annual budget submission, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate a list of areas recommended for study for potential inclusion in the National Park System.
In developing the list to be submitted under this subsection, the Secretary shall give consideration to those areas that have the greatest potential to meet the established criteria of national significance, suitability, and feasibility.
The Secretary shall give special consideration to themes, sites, and resources not already adequately represented in the National Park System as identified in the National Park System Plan to be developed under section 101 of the National Park System Reform Act of 1994.
No study of the potential of an area for inclusion in the National Park System may be initiated after the date of enactment of this section, except as provided by specific authorization of an Act of Congress.
Nothing in this Act shall limit the authority of the National Park Service to conduct preliminary resource assessments, gather data on potential study areas, provide technical and planning assistance, prepare or process nominations for administrative designations, update previous studies, or complete reconnaissance surveys of individual areas requiring a total expenditure of less than $25,000.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to or to affect or alter the study of any river segment for potential addition to the national wild and scenic rivers system or to apply to or to affect or alter the study of any trail for potential addition to the national trails system.
Report.--The Secretary shall complete the study for each area for potential inclusion into the National Park System within 3 complete fiscal years following the date of enactment of specific legislation providing for the study of such area.
Each study under this section shall be prepared with appropriate opportunity for public involvement, including at least one public meeting in the vicinity of the area under study, and reasonable efforts to notify potentially affected landowners and State and local governments.
In conducting the study, the Secretary shall consider whether the area under study-- ``(1) possesses nationally significant natural or cultural resources, or outstanding recreational opportunities, and that it represents one of the most important examples of a particular resource type in the country; and ``(2) is a suitable and feasible addition to the system.
Each study shall consider the following factors with regard to the area being studied: the rarity and integrity of the resources, the threats to those resources, whether similar resources are already protected in the National Park System or in other Federal, state or private ownership, the public use potential, the interpretive and educational potential, costs associated with acquisition, development and operation, the socioeconomic impacts of any designation, the level of local and general public support and whether the unit is of appropriate configuration to ensure long term resource protection and visitor use.
Each such study shall also consider whether direct National Park Service management or alternative protection by other agencies or the private sector is appropriate for the area.
Each such study shall identify what alternative or combination of alternatives would in the professional judgment of the Director of the National Park Service, be most effective and efficient in protecting significant resources and providing for public enjoyment.
The letter transmitting each completed study to Congress shall contain a recommendation regarding the Administration's preferred management option for the area.
List of Areas.--At the beginning of each calendar year, along with the annual budget submission, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate a list of areas which have been previously studied which contain primarily cultural or historical resources and a list of areas which have been previously studied which contain primarily natural resources in numerical order of priority for addition to the National Park System.
In developing the list, the Secretary should consider threats to resource values, cost escalation factors and other factors listed in subsection (c) of this section.''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 28, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.