This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Schools Act of 1998''.
In General.--The Attorney General may make grants to States, units of local government, Indian tribal governments and other public and private entities and multijurisdiction or regional consortia thereof to increase police presence, to expand and improve cooperative efforts between law enforcement agencies and members of the community to address crime and disorder problems in and around schools.
Preferential Consideration.--In awarding grants under this Act, the Attorney General may give preferential consideration, to the extent practicable, to applications for hiring and rehiring additional career law enforcement officers that involve a non-Federal contribution exceeding the 25 percent minimum under subsection (d).
Technical Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General may provide technical assistance to States, units of local government, Indian tribal governments, and to other public and private entities, in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
Model.--The technical assistance provided by the Attorney General may include the development of a flexible model that will define for State and local governments, and other public and private entities, definitions and strategies associated with community and school-based policing and methodologies for its implementation.
Training centers and facilities.--The technical assistance provided by the Attorney General may include the establishment and operation of training centers or facilities, either directly or by contracting or cooperative arrangements.
The functions of the centers or facilities established under this paragraph may include instruction and seminars for police executives, managers, trainers, supervisors, and such others as the Attorney General considers to be appropriate concerning community and school-based policing and improvements in police- community interaction and cooperation that further the purposes of this Act.
Matching Funds.--The portion of the costs of a program, project, or activity provided by a grant under subsection (a) may not exceed 75 percent, unless the Attorney General waives, wholly or in part, the requirement under this subsection of a non-Federal contribution to the costs of a program, project, or activity.
In relation to a grant for a period exceeding 1 year for hiring or rehiring career law enforcement officers, the Federal share shall decrease from year to year for up to 5 years, looking toward the continuation of the increased hiring level using State or local sources of funding following the conclusion of Federal support, as provided in an approved plan pursuant to section 4(c)(8).
Termination of Grants for Hiring Officers.--The authority under subsection (a) of this section to make grants for the hiring and rehiring of additional career law enforcement officers shall lapse at the conclusion of 6 years from the date of enactment of this Act.
Prior to the expiration of this grant authority, the Attorney General shall submit a report to Congress concerning the experience with and effects of such grants.
The report may include any recommendations the Attorney General may have for amendments to this Act and related provisions of law in light of the termination of the authority to make grants for the hiring and rehiring of additional career law enforcement officers.
Grants made under this Act may be used-- (1) to rehire law enforcement officers who have been laid off as a result of State and local budget reductions for deployment in school-based policing; and (2) to hire and train new, additional career law enforcement officers for deployment in school-based policing across the Nation.
In General.--No grant may be made under this Act unless an application has been submitted to, and approved by, the Attorney General.
Application.--An application for a grant under this Act shall be submitted in such form, and contain such information, as the Attorney General may prescribe by regulations or guidelines.
Contents.--In accordance with the regulations or guidelines established by the Attorney General, each application for a grant under this Act shall-- (1) include a long-term strategy and detailed implementation plan that reflects consultation with community groups and appropriate private and public agencies; (2) demonstrate a specific public safety need; (3) explain the applicant's inability to address the need without Federal assistance; (4) identify related governmental and community initiatives which complement or will be coordinated with the proposal; (5) certify that there has been appropriate coordination with all affected agencies; (6) outline the initial and ongoing level of community support for implementing the proposal including financial and in-kind contributions or other tangible commitments; (7) specify plans for obtaining necessary support and continuing the proposed program, project, or activity following the conclusion of Federal support; (8) if the application is for a grant for hiring or rehiring additional career law enforcement officers, specify plans for the assumption by the applicant of a progressively larger share of the cost in the course of time, looking toward the continuation of the increased hiring level using State or local sources of funding following the conclusion of Federal support; (9) assess the impact, if any, of the increase in police resources on other components of the criminal justice system; (10) explain how the grant will be utilized to reorient the affected law enforcement agency's mission toward school-based policing or enhance its involvement in or commitment to school- based policing; and (11) provide assurances that the applicant will, to the extent practicable, seek, recruit, and hire members of racial and ethnic minority groups and women in order to increase their ranks within the sworn positions in the law enforcement agency.
Special Provision.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, in relation to applications under this Act of units of local government or law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction over areas with populations of less than 50,000, the Attorney General may waive 1 or more of the requirements of subsection (c) and may otherwise make special provisions to facilitate the expedited submission, processing, and approval of such applications.
Monitoring Components.--Each program, project, or activity funded under this Act shall contain a monitoring component, developed pursuant to guidelines established by the Attorney General.
The monitoring required by this subsection shall include systematic identification and collection of data about activities, accomplishments, and programs throughout the life of the program, project, or activity and presentation of such data in a usable form.
Evaluation Components.--Selected grant recipients shall be evaluated on the local level or as part of a national evaluation, pursuant to guidelines established by the Attorney General.
Such evaluations may include assessments of individual program implementations.
In selected jurisdictions that are able to support outcome evaluations, the effectiveness of funded programs, projects, and activities may be required.
Outcome measures may include crime and victimization indicators, quality of life measures, community perceptions, and police perceptions of their own work.
Periodic Review and Reports.--The Attorney General may require a grant recipient to submit to the Attorney General the results of the monitoring and evaluations required under subsections (a) and (b) and such other data and information as the Attorney General deems reasonably necessary.
REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF FUNDING.
If the Attorney General determines, as a result of the reviews required by section 5, or otherwise, that a grant recipient under this Act is not in substantial compliance with the terms and requirements of an approved grant application submitted under section 4, the Attorney General may revoke or suspend funding of that grant, in whole or in part.
The Attorney General may promulgate regulations and guidelines to carry out this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $175,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002.