This Act may be cited as the ``United Nations Withdrawal Act of 1995''.
REPEAL OF UNITED NATIONS PARTICIPATION ACT.
Repeal.--Effective 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the United Nations Participation Act of 1945 (Public Law 79- 264) is repealed.
Closure of United States Mission to United Nations.--Effective 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the United States Mission to the United Nations shall be closed and all staff and any remaining functions of such office shall be carried out through the Secretary of State and the Department of State.
Notice.--Not later than 1 year before the effective date of the repeal under subsection (a), the Secretary of State shall notify the United Nations of the withdrawal of the United States from the United Nations as of the effective date of the repeal under subsection (a).
REPEAL OF UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS AGREEMENT ACT.
Repeal.--Effective 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the United Nations Headquarters Agreement Act (Public Law 80- 357) is repealed.
Notice.--Not later than 1 year before the effective date of the repeal under subsection (a), the Secretary of State shall notify the United Nations that the United States will unilaterally withdraw from the agreement between the United States of America and the United Nations regarding the headquarters of the United Nations (signed at Lake Success, New York, on June 26, 1947, which was brought into effect by the United Nations Headquarters Agreement Act) as of the effective date of the repeal under subsection (a).
Negotiations for New Agreement.--It is the sense of the Congress that the President should enter into such negotiations as are necessary for a new agreement with the United Nations for essential and necessary services such as utilities and police protection and compensation for such services.
Any such new agreement shall be submitted to the Congress for approval prior to implementation.
UNITED STATES ASSESSED AND VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE UNITED NATIONS.
Reduction.--Except as provided in subsection (c), for the first fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act and for each of the 3 subsequent fiscal years, the total amount which is authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available for assessed and voluntary contributions of the United States to the United Nations shall be the total amount appropriated or otherwise made available for the previous fiscal year reduced by 25 percent.
Termination.--For any fiscal year beginning more than 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, no funds are authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available for assessed or voluntary contributions of the United States to the United Nations.
Limitation.--The provisions of this section shall not apply to any independent or voluntary agency of the United Nations.
Special Envoy.--Effective 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint a special envoy to represent the United States in all matters concerning the United States and the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, who shall have the rank of ambassador.
Prohibition.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the duties and functions of the special envoy appointed pursuant to subsection (a) shall be limited to representation of the United States in matters concerning the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS.
Reductions.--For the first fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act and for each of the 3 subsequent fiscal years, the total amount which is authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available for United States assessed or voluntary contributions for peacekeeping operations of the United Nations shall not exceed the amount appropriated or otherwise made available for such peacekeeping operations for fiscal year 1995.
Termination.--For any fiscal year beginning more than 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, no funds are authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available for any United States contribution to any United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Limitations on United States Participation in United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.--For any fiscal year beginning more than 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, no funds may be obligated or expended to support the participation of any member of the Armed Forces of the United States as part of any United Nations peacekeeping operation or force.
REPEAL OF UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC, AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION ACT.
Repeal.--Effective 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization Act (Public Law 79-565) is repealed.
Notice.--Not later than 1 year before the effective date of the repeal under subsection (a), the Secretary of State shall notify the United Nations that the United States will withdraw from membership in the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization as of the effective date of the repeal under subsection (a).
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS PRESENCE IN THE UNITED STATES.
It is the sense of the Congress that the United States should request the withdrawal of the United Nations headquarters (and its affiliated missions) from the United States.