This Act may be cited as the ``Technology for the Classroom Act of 1993''.
It is the purpose of this Act to establish a program to develop and expand the use of high quality curriculum-based learning resources using state-of-the-art technologies and techniques which are or can be designed to increase the achievement levels of students in subject areas including mathematics, science, geography, history and language arts.
Competitive Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible consortia to enable such eligible consortia to develop instructional programs or technology-based systems for complete courses or units of study for a specific subject and grade level, if such programs or systems are commercially unavailable in the local area served by such eligible consortia.
Eligible consortium.--For the purpose of this section the term ``eligible consortium'' means a consortium consisting of-- (A) State or local educational agencies in partnership with businesses; and (B) institutions of higher education or other public or private nonprofit organizations.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to applications describing programs or systems that are developed-- (1) so that the program or system may be adapted and applied nationally; and (2) to raise the achievement levels of students, particularly disadvantaged students who are not realizing their potential.
Duration and Amount.--Each grant made under this section shall be awarded for a period not to exceed 3 years and in an amount not to exceed $3,000,000.
Matching Requirement.--The Secretary may not make a grant to an eligible consortium under subsection (a) unless the eligible consortium agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the eligible consortium in carrying out the program or system for which the grant was awarded, the eligible consortium will make available (from private sources) non-Federal contributions in an amount not less than 25 percent of the Federal funds provided under the grant.
Application.-- (1) In general.--Each consortium desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may prescribe.
Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall include-- (A) a description of how the program or system shall improve the achievement levels of students; (B) a description of how teachers associated with the program or system will be trained to integrate technology into the classroom; and (C) an assurance that the program or system shall effectively serve a large number or percentage of economically disadvantaged students.
Criteria for Awarding Grants.--In awarding a grant under this section to develop a program or system, the Secretary shall consider the appropriateness and quality of the following elements of the program or system: (1) Identification of specific learning objectives and strategies of the proposed course or unit of study, that take into consideration the national education standards for various disciplines as such standards are developed.
Incorporation in creative ways of a variety of technology-based learning resources such as computer software, databases, films, transparencies, video and audio discs, telecommunications (including educational radio and television), and print materials.
Design that allows tailoring of the program or system to meet individual needs of students, particularly students at greatest risk of not reaching their educational potential.
Flexibility of use by teachers or local schools.
Methods for updating or revising information and material.
Programs or materials to train and guide teachers.
Coordination with teacher training programs.
Explanatory materials for students and parents.
Field testing and evaluation in terms of stated learning objectives.
Plans for pricing technology-based materials that are affordable for public schools and agencies.
Plans for distribution that ensure access for the poorest schools and school districts.
Demonstration of cost-effectiveness in relation to existing programs and to achieving stated learning objectives.
GRANTS TO STATES TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY.
Grants Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to States to enable States to carry out the activities described in the plan submitted pursuant to subsection (c).
Amount of grant.--(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall award grants under this section to each State having a plan approved under subsection (c) in an amount which bears the same relationship to the amount reserved to carry out this section under section 9 as the amount such State received under chapter 1 of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 bears to the amount received under such chapter by all States.
No State shall receive a grant pursuant to subparagraph (A) in an amount which is less than $100,000.
Use of Grant.--Grants awarded under this section shall be used to-- (1) identify schools or school districts which have a large number of educationally disadvantaged students and limited access to technology-based learning resources; and (2) develop jointly, with local education agencies or individual schools, strategies to improve the accessibility and use of technology-based learning resources, including specific plans for-- (A) training of teachers and school personnel; (B) acquisition of hardware or software, if such acquisition presents a major barrier for accessibility to participation in the activities assisted under this section; and (C) partnership arrangements with businesses, institutions of higher education, or other public or private nonprofit organizations.
Plan.-- (1) In general.--Each State desiring a grant under this section shall submit to the Secretary a plan at such time, in such manner and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each plan submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall-- (A) describe the activities and services for which assistance is sought; (B) indicate how such State shall identify schools in need of the assistance provided under this section; (C) include a strategy for providing such assistance; and (D) contain assurances that such grant funds shall be focused on schools with a large percentage of educationally disadvantaged students.
The Secretary shall coordinate and share information regarding curriculum-based educational technology programs assisted under this Act with other Federal agencies which administer programs that support the development of such programs, including the National Science Foundation, the Department of Defense, the Office of Technology Assessment, the Department of Energy, and the Department of Agriculture.
The Secretary shall collect information about products developed pursuant to provisions of this Act and the evaluation of such products, and shall disseminate such information in regular reports to State and local educational agencies, and other organizations or individuals as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any royalties paid to any State or local educational agency as a result of assistance provided under this Act shall be used by such agency for further development of curriculum-based learning resources authorized by this Act.
As used in this Act-- (1) the terms ``institution of higher education'' and ``local educational agency'' have the same meanings given such terms by subsections (a) and (g), respectively, of section 1201 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1141); and (2) the term ``Secretary'', unless otherwise specified, means the Secretary of Education.
For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated $90,000,000 for the fiscal year 1994 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years, of which-- (1) 50 percent of such funds shall be available in each such fiscal year to award grants pursuant to section 3; and (2) 50 percent of such funds shall be available in each such fiscal year to award grants pursuant to section 4.