TAX CREDIT FOR REGIONAL JET AIRCRAFT SERVING UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES.
Allowance of Credit.-- (1) In general.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amount of credit) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) in the case of an eligible small air carrier, the underserved community jet access credit.''
Underserved community jet access credit.--Section 48 of such Code (relating to the energy credit and the reforestation credit) is amended by adding after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Underserved Community Jet Access Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 46, the underserved community jet access credit of an eligible small air carrier for any taxable year is an amount equal to 10 percent of the qualified investment in any qualified regional jet aircraft.
Eligible small air carrier.--For purposes of this subsection and section 46-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible small air carrier' means, with respect to any qualified regional jet aircraft, an air carrier-- ``(i) to which part 121 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, applies, and ``(ii) which has less than 10,000,000,000 (10 billion) revenue passenger miles for the calendar year preceding the calendar year in which such aircraft is originally placed in service.
Air carrier.--The term `air carrier' means any air carrier holding a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Secretary of Transportation under section 41102 of title 49, United States Code.
Start-up carriers.--If an air carrier has not been in operation during the entire calendar year described in subparagraph (A)(ii), the determination under such subparagraph shall be made on the basis of a reasonable estimate of revenue passenger miles for its first full calendar year of operation.
Aggregation.--All air carriers which are treated as 1 employer under section 52 shall be treated as 1 person for purposes of subparagraph (A)(ii).
Qualified regional jet aircraft.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified regional jet aircraft' means a civil aircraft-- ``(A) which is originally placed in service by the taxpayer, ``(B) which is powered by jet propulsion and is designed to have a maximum passenger seating capacity of not less than 30 passengers and not more than 100 passengers, and ``(C) at least 50 percent of the flight segments of which during any 12-month period beginning on or after the date the aircraft is originally placed in service are between a hub airport (as defined in section 41731(a)(3) of title 49, United States Code, and an underserved airport.
Underserved airport.--The term `underserved airport' means, with respect to any qualified regional jet aircraft, an airport which for the calendar year preceding the calendar year in which such aircraft is originally placed in service had less than 600,000 enplanements.
Qualified investment.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `qualified investment' means, with respect to any taxable year, the basis of any qualified regional jet aircraft placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Qualified progress expenditures.-- ``(A) Increase in qualified investment.--In the case of a taxpayer who has made an election under subparagraph (E), the amount of the qualified investment of such taxpayer for the taxable year (determined under paragraph (5) without regard to this subsection) shall be increased by an amount equal to the aggregate of each qualified progress expenditure for the taxable year with respect to progress expenditure property.
Progress expenditure property defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `progress expenditure property' means any property which is being constructed for the taxpayer and which it is reasonable to believe will qualify as a qualified regional jet aircraft of the taxpayer when it is placed in service.
Qualified progress expenditures defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified progress expenditures' means the amount paid during the taxable year to another person for the construction of such property.
Only construction of aircraft to be taken into account.--Construction shall be taken into account only if, for purposes of this subpart, expenditures therefor are properly chargeable to capital account with respect to the qualified regional jet aircraft.
Election.--An election under this paragraph may be made at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
Such an election shall apply to the taxable year for which made and to all subsequent taxable years.
Such an election, once made, may not be revoked except with the consent of the Secretary.
Coordination with other credits.--This subsection shall not apply to any property with respect to which the energy credit or the rehabilitation credit is allowed unless the taxpayer elects to waive the application of such credits to such property.
Special lease rules.--For purposes of section 50(d)(5), section 48(d) (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall be applied for purposes of this section without regard to paragraph (4)(B) thereof (relating to short-term leases of property with class life of under 14 years).
Application.--This subsection shall apply to periods after the date of the enactment of this subsection and before January 1, 2009, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).''
Recapture.--Section 50(a) of such Code (relating to recapture in the case of dispositions, etc.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Special rules for aircraft credit.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of determining whether a qualified regional jet aircraft ceases to be investment credit property, an airport which was an underserved airport as of the date such aircraft was originally placed in service shall continue to be treated as an underserved airport during any period this subsection applies to the aircraft.
Property ceases to qualify for progress expenditures.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraph (2) shall apply in the case of qualified progress expenditures for a qualified regional jet aircraft under section 48(c).''
Technical amendments.-- (A) Subparagraph (C) of section 49(a)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iv) the portion of the basis of any qualified regional jet aircraft attributable to any qualified investment (as defined by section 48(c)(5)).''
Paragraph (4) of section 50(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``and (2)'' and inserting ``, (2), and (6)''.
(i) The section heading for section 48 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 48 and inserting the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to periods after the date of the enactment of this Act, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990.
Reduced Passenger Tax Rate on Rural Domestic Flight Segments.-- Section 4261(e)(1)(C) of such Code (relating to segments to and from rural airports) is amended to read as follows: ``(C) Reduction in general tax rate.-- ``(i) In general.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall apply to any domestic segment beginning or ending at an airport which is a rural airport for the calendar year in which such segment begins or ends (as the case may be) at the rate determined by the Secretary under clause (ii) for such year in lieu of the rate otherwise applicable under subsection (a).
Determination of rate.--The rate determined by the Secretary under this clause for each calendar year shall equal the rate of tax otherwise applicable under subsection (a) reduced by an amount which reflects the net amount of the increase in revenues to the Treasury for such year resulting from the amendments made by subsections (a) and (c) of section ____ of the Wendell H. Ford National Air Transportation System Improvement Act of 1998.
Transportation involving multiple segments.--In the case of transportation involving more than 1 domestic segment at least 1 of which does not begin or end at a rural airport, the rate applicable by reason of clause (i) shall be applied by taking into account only an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount paid for such transportation as the number of specified miles in domestic segments which begin or end at a rural airport bears to the total number of specified miles in such transportation.''.
Treatment of Certain Deductible Liquidating Distributions of Regulated Investment Companies and Real Estate Investment Trusts.-- (1) In general.--Section 332 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to complete liquidations of subsidiaries) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Deductible Liquidating Distributions of Regulated Investment Companies and Real Estate Investment Trusts.--If a corporation receives a distribution from a regulated investment company or a real estate investment trust which is considered under subsection (b) as being in complete liquidation of such company or trust, then, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such corporation shall recognize and treat as a dividend from such company or trust an amount equal to the deduction for dividends paid allowable to such company or trust by reason of such distribution.''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) The material preceding paragraph (1) of section 332(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``subsection (a)'' and inserting ``this section''.
Paragraph (1) of section 334(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 332(a)'' and inserting ``section 332''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to distributions after May 21, 1998.