This Act may be cited as the ``Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Convention Act of 1993''.
REPRESENTATION OF UNITED STATES UNDER CONVENTION.
Commissioners.-- (1) Appointments, generally.--The Secretary shall appoint not more than three individuals to serve as the representatives of the United States on the General Council and the Fisheries Commission, who shall each-- (A) be known as a ``United States Commissioner to the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization''; and (B) serve at the pleasure of the Secretary.
Requirements for appointments.-- (A) The Secretary shall ensure that of the individuals serving as Commissioners.-- (i) at least one is appointed from among representatives of the commercial fishing industry; and (ii) one (but no more than one) is an official of the Government.
The Secretary may not appoint as a Commissioner an individual unless the individual is knowledgeable and experienced concerning the fishery resources to which the Convention applies.
Terms.-- (A) The term of an individual as a Commissioner-- (i) shall be specified by the Secretary at the time of appointment; and (ii) may not exceed four years.
An individual who is not a Government official may not serve more than two consecutive terms as a Commissioner.
Alternate Commissioners.-- (1) Appointment.--The Secretary may, for any anticipated absence of a duly appointed Commissioner at a meeting of the General Council or the Fisheries Commission, designate an individual to serve as an Alternate Commissioner.
Functions.--An Alternate Commissioner may exercise all powers and perform all duties of the Commissioner for whom the Alternate Commissioner is designated, at any meeting of the General Council or the Fisheries Commission for which the Alternate Commissioner is designated.
Representatives.-- (1) Appointment.--The Secretary shall appoint not more than three individuals to serve as the representatives of the United States on the Scientific Council, who shall each be known as a ``United States Representative to the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization Scientific Council''.
Eligibility for appointment.-- (A) The Secretary may not appoint an individual as a Representative unless the individual is knowledgeable and experienced concerning the scientific issues dealt with by the Scientific Council.
The Secretary shall appoint as a Representative at least one individual who is an official of the Government.
Term.--An individual appointed as a Representative-- (A) shall serve for a term of not to exceed four years, as specified by the Secretary at the time of appointment; (B) may be reappointed; and (C) shall serve at the pleasure of the Secretary.
Alternate Representatives.-- (1) Appointment.--The Secretary may, for any anticipated absence of a duly appointed Representative at a meeting of the Scientific Council, designate an individual to serve as an Alternate Representative.
Functions.--An Alternate Representative may exercise all powers and perform all duties of the Representative for whom the Alternate Commissioner is designated, at any meeting of the Scientific Council for which the Alternate Representative is designated.
Experts and Advisers.--The Commissioners, Alternate Commissioners, Representatives, and Alternate Representatives may be accompanied at meetings of the Organization by experts and advisers.
Coordination and Consultation.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out their functions under the Convention, Commissioners, Alternate Commissioners, Representatives, and Alternate Representatives shall-- (A) coordinate with the appropriate Regional Fishery Management Councils established by section 302 of the Magnuson Act (16 United States Code 1852); and (B) consult with the committee established under section 9.
Relationship to other law.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to coordination and consultations under this subsection.
REQUESTS FOR SCIENTIFIC ADVICE.
Restriction.--The Representatives may not make a request or specification described in subsection (b)(1) or (2), respectively, unless the Representatives have first-- (1) consulted with the appropriate Regional Fishery Management Councils; and (2) received the consent of the Commissioners for that action.
Requests and Terms of Reference Described.--The requests and specifications referred to in subsection (a) are, respectively-- (1) any request, under Article VII(1) of the Convention, that the Scientific Council consider and report on a question pertaining to the scientific basis for the management and conservation of fishery resources in waters under the jurisdiction of the United States within the Convention Area; and (2) any specification, under Article VIII(2) of the Convention, of the terms of reference for the consideration of a question referred to the Scientific Council pursuant to Article VII(1) of the Convention.
AUTHORITIES OF SECRETARY OF STATE WITH RESPECT TO CONVENTION.
The Secretary of State may, on behalf of the Government of the United States-- (1) receive and transmit reports, requests, recommendations, proposals, and other communications of and to the Organization and its subsidiary organs; (2) object, or withdraw an objection, to the proposal of the Fisheries Commission; (3) give or withdraw notice of intent not to be bound by a measure of the Fisheries Commission; (4) object or withdraw an objection, to an amendment to the convention; and (5) act upon, or refer to any other appropriate authority, any other communication referred to in paragraph (1).
Authorities of Secretary.--In carrying out the provisions of the Convention and this Act, the Secretary may arrange for cooperation with other agencies of the United States, the States, the New England Fishery Management Council, and private institutions and organizations.
Other Agencies.--The head of any Federal agency may-- (1) cooperate in the conduct of scientific and other programs, and furnish facilities and personnel, for the purposes of assisting the Organization in carrying out its duties under the Convention; and (2) accept reimbursement from the Organization for providing such services, facilities, and personnel.
The Secretary shall promulgate regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Convention and this Act.
Any such regulation may be made applicable, as necessary, to all persons and all vessels subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, wherever located.
PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES.
Prohibition.--It is unlawful for any person or vessel that is subject to the jurisdiction of the United States-- (1) to violate any regulation issued under this Act or any measure that is legally binding on the United States under the Convention; (2) to refuse to permit any authorized enforcement officer to board a fishing vessel that is subject to the person's control for purposes of conducting any search or inspection in connection with the enforcement of this Act, any regulation issued under this Act, or any measure that is legally binding on the United States under the Convention; (3) forcibly to assault, resist, oppose, impede, intimidate, or interfere with any authorized enforcement officer in the conduct of any search or inspection described in paragraph (2); (4) to resist a lawful arrest for any act prohibited by this section; (5) to ship, transport, offer for sale, sell, purchase, import, export, or have custody, control, or possession of, any fish taken or retained in violation of this section; or (6) to interfere with, delay, or prevent, by any means, the apprehension or arrest of another person, knowing that the other person has committed an act prohibited by this section.
Civil Penalty.--Any person who commits any act that is unlawful under subsection (a) shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty, or may be subject to a permit sanction, under section 308 of the Magnuson Act (16 United States Code 1858).
Criminal Penalty.--Any person who commits an act that is unlawful under paragraph (2), (3), (4), or (6) of subsection (a) shall be guilty of an offense punishable under section 309(b) of the Magnuson Act (16 United States Code 1859(b)).
Civil Forfeiture.-- (1) In general.--Any vessel (including its gear, furniture, appurtenances, stores, and cargo) used in the commission of an act that is unlawful under subsection (a), and any fish (or the fair market value thereof) taken or retained, in any manner, in connection with or as a result of the commission of any act that is unlawful under subsection (a), shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture as provided in section 310 of the Magnuson Act (16 United States Code 1860).
Disposal of fish.--Any fish seized pursuant to this Act may be disposed of pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction or, if perishable, in a manner prescribed by regulations issued by the Secretary.
Enforcement.--The Secretary and the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall enforce the provisions of this Act and shall have the authority specified in sections 311(a), (b)(1), and (c) of the Magnuson Act (16 United States Code 1861(a), (b)(1), and (c)) for that purpose.
Jurisdiction of Courts.--The district courts of the United States shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any case or controversy arising under this section and may, at any time-- (1) enter restraining orders or prohibitions; (2) issue warrants, process in rem, or other process; (3) prescribe and accept satisfactory bonds or other security; and (4) take such other actions as are in the interests of justice.
UNITED STATES-CANADA FISHERY MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT.
Negotiations.--Not later than one hundred and eighty days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce and the Committee established under section 9, is authorized and encouraged to initiate negotiations with the Government of Canada for the purpose of entering into an international fishery agreement with Canada for the conservation and management of fisheries of mutual concern in the northwest Atlantic Ocean, with particular emphasis on transboundary stocks of groundfish and ensuring the success of New England groundfish restoration efforts pursuant to the Magnuson Act.
Contents of Agreement.--An agreement entered into pursuant to this section shall-- (1) provide for timely and periodic exchanges of scientific information relating to the conservation and management of fisheries stocks of mutual concern; (2) provide for routine meetings between the officials of the United States and Canada responsible for the conservation and management of fisheries; (3) establish procedures for the identification of conservation and management measures that would be mutually beneficial; and (4) identify procedures for the implementation within each country of conservation and management measures identified as mutually beneficial.
Application of Existing Law.--An agreement entered into pursuant to this section shall be subject to section 203 of the Magnuson Act (16 United States Code 1823).
Letter.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter until the effective date of an agreement entered into pursuant to this section, the Secretary of State shall transmit to the Congress a letter describing activities of the Secretary under this section.
Establishment.--The Secretary of State and the Secretary of Commerce, shall jointly establish a consultative committee to advise the Secretaries on issues related to the Convention and in the development and implementation of a fishery agreement pursuant to section 8.
Membership.--(1) The membership of the Committee shall include representatives from the New England Fishery Management Council, the States represented on that Council, the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission, the fishing industry, the seafood processing industry, and others knowledgeable and experienced in the conservation and management of fisheries in the Northwest Atlantic Ocean.
Terms and Reappointment.--Each member of the consultative committee shall serve for a term of two years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
Duties of the Committee.-- (1) Northwest atlantic fisheries organization.--Members of the consultative committee may attend-- (A) all public meetings of the General Council or the Fisheries Commission; (B) any other meetings to which they are invited by the General Council or the Fisheries Commission; and (C) all nonexecutive meetings of the United States Commissioners.
United states-canada fisheries management agreement.-- Members of the consultative committee shall advise the the Secretaries on any agreements established under section 8.
Relationship to Other Law.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the consultative committee established under this section.
Prohibition on Compensation.--A person shall not receive any compensation from the Government by reason of any service of the person as-- (1) a Commissioner, Alternate Commissioner, Representative, or Alternative Representative; (2) an expert or adviser authorized under section 2(e); or (3) a member of the consultative committee established by section 9.
Travel and Expenses.--The Secretary of State shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, pay all necessary travel and other expenses of persons described in subsection (a)(1) and of not more than six experts and advisers authorized under section 2(e) with respect to their actual performance of their official duties pursuant to this Act, in accordance with the Federal Travel Regulations and sections 5701, 5702, 5704 through 5708, and 5731 of title 5, United States Code.
Status as Federal Employees.--A person shall not be considered to be a Federal employee by reason of any service of the person in a capacity described in subsection (a), except for purposes of injury compensation and tort claims liability under chapter 81 of title 5, United States Code, and chapter 17 of title 28, United States Code, respectively.
In this Act the following definitions apply: (1) Authorized enforcement officer.--The term ``authorized enforcement officer'' means a person authorized to enforce this Act, any regulation issued under this Act, or any measure that is legally binding on the United States under the Convention.
Commissioner.--The term ``Commissioner'' means a United States Commissioner to the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization appointed under section 2(a).
Convention.--The term ``Convention'' means the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries, done at Ottawa on October 24, 1978.
Fisheries commission.--The term ``Fisheries Commission'' means the Fisheries Commission provided for by Articles II, XI, XII, XIII, and XIV of the Convention.
General council.--The term ``General Council'' means the General Council provided for by Article II, III, IV, and V of the Convention.
Magnuson act.--The term ``Magnuson Act'' means the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1801 et sequentes).
Organization.--The term ``Organization'' means the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization provided for by Article II of the Convention.
Person.--The term ``person'' means any individual (whether or not a citizen or national of the United States), and any corporation, partnership, association, or other entity (whether or not organized or existing under the laws of any State).
Representative.--The term ``Representative'' means a United States Representative to the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Scientific Council appointed under section 2(c).
Scientific council.--The term ``Scientific Council'' means the Scientific Council provided for by Articles II, VI, VII, VIII, IX, and X of the Convention.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, including use for payment as the United States contribution to the Organization as provided in Article XVI of the Convention, $500,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996.