This Act may be cited as the ``Secure Annuity Income for Life Act of 2003''.
EXCLUSION OF PERCENTAGE OF LIFETIME ANNUITY PAYMENTS.
Qualified Plans.--Subsection (e) of section 402 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exempt trusts) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(7) Exclusion of percentage of lifetime annuity payments.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of a lifetime annuity payment from a qualified trust (within the meaning of subsection (c)(8)(A)) to a qualified distributee, gross income shall not include 15 percent of the amount otherwise includible in gross income (determined without regard to this paragraph).
Definitions and special rules.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) Lifetime annuity payment.-- ``(I) In general.--The term `lifetime annuity payment' means a distribution which is a part of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (made not less frequently than annually) made over the life of the qualified distributee or the joint lives of the qualified distributee and the qualified distributee's designated beneficiary.
Exceptions.--Annuity payments shall not fail to be treated as part of a series of substantially equal periodic payments because the amount of the periodic payments may vary in accordance with investment experience, reallocations among investment options, actuarial gains or losses, cost of living indices, or similar fluctuating criteria.
The availability of a commutation benefit, a minimum period of payments certain, or a minimum amount to be paid in any event shall not affect the treatment of a distribution as a lifetime annuity payment.
In the case of lifetime annuity payments being made to a qualified trust, payments by the qualified trust to a qualified distributee of the entire amount received by the qualified trust with respect to the qualified distributee shall constitute lifetime annuity payments.
Qualified distributee.--The term `qualified distributee' means the employee, the surviving spouse of the employee, and an alternate payee who is the spouse or former spouse of the employee.
Limitation.--With respect to any qualified distributee, subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any lifetime annuity payment to the extent that such payments, when added to all previous payments under such annuity to such qualified distributee during the taxable year, exceed 50 percent of the applicable amount for such year under section 415(c)(1)(A).
For purposes of this clause, all lifetime annuity payments received by a qualified distributee shall be taken into account to the extent that such payments are subject to this paragraph or to rules similar to the rules of this paragraph.
Recapture tax.-- ``(i) In general.--If-- ``(I) a portion of a lifetime annuity payment is not includible in gross income by reason of subparagraph (A), and ``(II) the series of payments of which such payment is a part is subsequently modified (other than by reason of death or disability) so that some or all future payments are not lifetime annuity payments, the qualified distributee's gross income for the first taxable year in which such modification occurs shall be increased by an amount, determined under rules prescribed by the Secretary, equal to the amount which (but for subparagraph (A)) would have been includible in the qualified distributee's gross income if the modification had been in effect at all times, plus interest for the deferral period.
Deferral period.--For purposes of clause (i), the term `deferral period' means the period beginning with the taxable year in which (without regard to subparagraph (A)) the payment would have been includible in gross income and ending with the taxable year in which the modification described in clause (i)(II) occurs.''.
Section 403(a) Plans.--Paragraph (4) of section 403(a) of such Code (relating to qualified annuity plans) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Exclusion of percentage of lifetime annuity payments.--Rules similar to the rules of section 402(e)(7) shall apply to distributions under any annuity contract to which this subsection applies.''.
Section 403(b) Plans.--Section 403(b) of such Code (relating to purchased annuities) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(14) Exclusion of percentage of lifetime annuity payments.--Rules similar to the rules of section 402(e)(7) shall apply to distributions under any annuity contract to which this subsection applies.''.
IRAs.--Section 408(d) of such Code (relating to tax treatment of distributions) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Exclusion of percentage of lifetime annuity payments.--Rules similar to the rules of section 402(e)(7) shall apply to distributions out of an individual retirement plan.''.
Section 457 Plans.--Section 457(e) of such Code (relating to special rules for deferred compensation plans) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(18) Exclusion of percentage of lifetime annuity payments.--Rules similar to the rules of section 402(e)(7) shall apply to distributions from an eligible deferred compensation plan of an eligible employer described in subsection (e)(1)(A).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to distributions made after December 31, 2003.
NOTICE OF EQUIVALENT ANNUITY.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 402(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (E) and inserting ``and'', and by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraph: ``(F) in the case of a participant receiving a benefit to which section 401(a)(11)(A) does not apply, in accordance with rules prescribed by the Secretary, of the amount of a lifetime annuity payment (as defined in section 402(e)(7)(D)) that is the actuarial equivalent of account balances specified in such rules.''.
Rules and Model Notice.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, within 180 days of the date of enactment of this Act, issue rules and a model notice provision under section 402(f)(1)(F) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to distributions made after the date that is one year after the date of enactment of this Act.