This Act may be cited as the ``Regional Presidential Primary and Caucus Act of 2007''.
In this Act: (1) Caucus.--The term ``caucus'' means any convention, meeting, or series of meetings held for the selection of delegates to a national Presidential nominating convention of a political party.
Election year.--The term ``election year'' means a year during which a Presidential election is to be held.
National committee.--The term ``national committee'' means the organization which, by virtue of the bylaws of a political party, is responsible for the day-to-day operation of such political party at the national level, as determined by the Federal Election Commission.
Political party.--The term ``political party'' means an association, committee, or organization which-- (A) nominates a candidate for election to any Federal office whose name appears on the election ballot as the candidate of such association, committee, or organization; and (B) won electoral votes in the preceding Presidential election.
Primary.--The term ``primary'' means a primary election held for the selection of delegates to a national Presidential nominating convention of a political party, but does not include a caucus, convention, or other indirect means of selection.
Schedule.-- (1) First election cycle.-- (A) Lottery.--The Election Assistance Commission shall establish procedures for the conduct of a lottery by not later than March 1, 2010, to select which of the 4 regions described in subsection (b) will hold the first primary in accordance with the schedule under subparagraph (B).
Based on such selection, the primaries shall be conducted in the following order: (i) In the case where Region I is selected to hold the first primary-- (I) Region II shall hold the second primary; (II) Region III shall hold the third primary; and (III) Region IV shall hold the fourth primary.
In the case where Region II is selected to hold the first primary-- (I) Region III shall hold the second primary; (II) Region IV shall hold the third primary; and (III) Region I shall hold the fourth primary.
In the case where Region III is selected to hold the first primary-- (I) Region IV shall hold the second primary; (II) Region I shall hold the third primary; and (III) Region II shall hold the fourth primary.
In the case where Region IV is selected to hold the first primary-- (I) Region I shall hold the second primary; (II) Region II shall hold the third primary; and (III) Region III shall hold the fourth primary.
Schedule.--Subject to paragraph (3), in 2012, each State that elects to hold a primary shall hold a primary in accordance with this Act, according to the following schedule: (i) First primary.--Each such State in the region selected to hold the first primary under subparagraph (A) shall hold a primary during the period beginning on the first Tuesday in March and ending on the sixth day following such Tuesday.
Second primary.--Each such State in the region required to hold the second primary under subparagraph (A) shall hold a primary during the period beginning on the first Tuesday in April and ending on the sixth day following such Tuesday.
Third primary.--Each such State in the region required to hold the third primary under subparagraph (A) shall hold a primary during the period beginning on the first Tuesday in May and ending on the sixth day following such Tuesday.
Fourth primary.--Each such State in the region required to hold the fourth primary under subparagraph (A) shall hold a primary during the period beginning on the first Tuesday in June and ending on the sixth day following such Tuesday.
Subsequent election cycles.-- (A) General rule.--Subject to paragraph (3), except as provided in subparagraph (B), in each subsequent election year after 2012, each State in each region that elects to hold a primary shall hold a primary during the period beginning on the first Tuesday of the month following the month in which the State held a primary in the preceding election year (or, in the case where the State did not elect to hold a primary in the preceding election year, the month in which the State would have held a primary if it had elected to do so) and ending on the sixth day following such Tuesday.
Limitation.--If the States in a region were required to hold primaries during the period beginning on the first Tuesday in June of the preceding election year and ending on the sixth day following such Tuesday, the States in such region that elect to hold a primary shall hold a primary during the period beginning on the first Tuesday in March of the succeeding election year and ending on the sixth day following such Tuesday.
Exception.--The States described in paragraphs (1)(G) and (3)(C) of subsection (b) may hold a primary on a date prior to the beginning of the period described in paragraph (1)(B)(i).
In the case where such a State does not elect to hold a primary prior to the beginning of such period, if the State elects to hold a primary, the State shall hold a primary during the period in which the region the State is in (as determined under subsection (b)) is scheduled to hold a primary (as determined under paragraphs (1) and (2)).
Regions.--For purposes of subsection (a): (1) Region i.--Region I shall be comprised of the following: (A) Connecticut.
Region ii.--Region II shall be comprised of the following: (A) Alabama.
Region iii.--Region III shall be comprised of the following: (A) Illinois.
Region iv.--Region IV shall be comprised of the following: (A) Alaska.
Territories.--The national committees shall jointly determine the region of each territory of the United States.
STATE CAUCUS TO SELECT DELEGATES.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), in the case where a State elects to select delegates to a national Presidential nominating convention of a political party through a caucus held by any political party which has the authority to nominate a candidate, the State shall hold a caucus during the period in which the region the State is in (as determined under section 3(b)) is scheduled to hold a primary (as determined under paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 3(a)).
Exception.--The States described in paragraphs (1)(G) and (3)(C) of section 3(b) may hold a caucus on a date prior to the beginning of the period described in section 3(a)(1)(B)(i).
In the case where such a State does not elect to hold a caucus prior to the beginning of such period, if the State elects to hold a caucus, the State shall hold a caucus during the period in which the region the State is in (as determined under section 3(b)) is scheduled to hold a primary (as determined under paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 3(a)).
Nothing in this Act-- (1) shall be construed as requiring a State to hold a primary or a caucus for the selection of delegates to a national Presidential nominating convention of a political party; or (2) is intended to confer to the Election Assistance Commission any power concerning the selection of delegates other than that expressly provided under section 3(a)(1)(A).
This Act shall apply with respect to any primary or caucus held in connection with a general election held in the year 2012 and in each election year thereafter.