This Act may be cited as the ``Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge Protection Act of 1999''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) On September 21, 1998, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service announced an agreement with the Metropolitan Airports Commission of the State of Minnesota, which is the public agency that operates the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport.
The agreement would allow construction of a new runway for that airport that would have severe impacts on the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge.
The agreement authorizes impacts of a major runway expansion that would allow more than 5,000 overflights per month at less than 2,000 feet above the surface of the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge.
The Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge, in serving as an urban-oriented wildlife refuge, is a sanctuary in the midst of the urban and industrial sprawl of Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota.
Any agreement to allow scores of jumbo jets each day to fly any closer to the one place of sanctuary for wildlife in that region violates the very concept of providing places of refuge for wildlife.
A disparity exists in the treatment of activities affecting various national wildlife refuges.
Although low altitude overflights would be allowed over the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge, activities that would have significantly fewer impacts have been prohibited on or near other national wildlife refuges located in rural areas.
Even emergency medical services necessary to save human lives have not been allowed access to some national wildlife refuges.
The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) requires that for every major Federal action an environmental impact statement must be prepared that describes and mitigates for the impacts of the action on the environment.
The environmental impact statement prepared with respect to expansion of the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport is totally inadequate, because it fails to adequately determine and describe the impacts of 5,000 overflights per month below an altitude of 2,000 feet on endangered species, threatened species, and other protected species of fish and wildlife in the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge.
MINNESOTA VALLEY NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE PROTECTION.
Moratorium on Implementation of Agreement.--The Secretary of the Interior and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall not implement any agreement entered into before the date of the enactment of this Act that would have the effect of allowing expansion of the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport beyond the capacity of that airport on that date of enactment.
Environmental Review.-- (1) Existing environmental impact statement not effective.--The environmental impact statement prepared by the Department of Transportation and the Minneapolis-St. Paul Airport Commission with respect to the expansion of the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport, dated May 1998, shall have no force or effect.
Preparation of new environmental impact statement required--A new environmental impact statement with respect to the expansion of the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport shall be prepared in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) before the date on which construction is begun to expand that airport, that-- (A) fully determines and describes the impacts, on each species of fish or wildlife that inhabits or uses the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge and is listed under section 4(c) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533(c)) or otherwise protected under Federal or Minnesota State law, of increases in overflights of the refuge resulting from the expansion; and (B) includes a determination of whether consultation is required under section 7(a)(2) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1536(a)(2)) with respect to that expansion.
Report.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall report to the Congress regarding whether the activities associated with expansion of the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport or additional overflights of the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge by air traffic using that airport may constitute a taking of an endangered species or threatened species of fish or wildlife prohibited by the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).