This Act may be cited as the ``United States Tourism Organization Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the travel and tourism industry is the second largest retail or service industry in the United States, and travel and tourism services ranked as the largest United States export in 1995, generating an $18.6 billion trade surplus for the United States; (2) domestic and international travel and tourism expenditures totaled $433 billion in 1995, $415 billion spent directly within the United States and an additional $18 billion spent by international travelers on United States flag carriers traveling to the United States; (3) direct travel and tourism receipts make up 6 percent of the United States gross domestic product; (4) in 1994 the travel and tourism industry was the nation's second largest employer, directly responsible for 6.3 million jobs and indirectly responsible for another 8 million jobs; (5) employment in major sectors of the travel industry is expected to increase 35 percent by the year 2005; (6) 99.7 percent of travel businesses are defined by the Federal Government as small businesses; and (7) the White House Conference on Travel and Tourism in 1995 brought together 1,700 travel and tourism industry executives from across the nation and called for the establishment, by federal charter, of a new national tourism organization to promote international tourism to all parts of the United States.
UNITED STATES TOURISM ORGANIZATION.
Establishment.--There is established with a Federal charter, the United States Tourism Organization (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Organization'').
The Organization shall be a not for profit organization.
The Organization shall maintain its principal offices and national headquarters in the greater metropolitan area of Washington, D.C., and may hold its annual and special meetings in such places as the Organization shall determine.
Organization not a Federal Agency.--Notwithstanding any other provision of the law, the Organization shall not be considered a Federal agency for the purposes of civil service laws or any other provision of Federal law governing the operation of Federal agencies, including personnel or budgetary matters relating to Federal agencies.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Organization or any entities within the Organization.
Duties.--The Organization shall-- (1) facilitate the development and use of public-private partnerships for travel and tourism policymaking; (2) seek to, and work for, an increase in the share of the United States in the global tourism market; (3) implement the national travel and tourism strategy developed by the National Tourism Board under section 4; (4) operate travel and tourism promotion programs outside the United States in partnership with the travel and tourism industry in the United States; (5) establish a travel-tourism data bank and, through that data bank collect and disseminate international market data: (6) conduct market research necessary for the effective promotion of the travel and tourism market; and (7) promote United States travel and tourism.
Powers.--The Organization-- (1) shall have perpetual succession; (2) shall represent the United States in its relations with international tourism agencies; (3) may sue and be sued; (4) may make contracts; (5) may acquire, hold, and dispose of real and personal property as may be necessary for its corporate purposes; (6) may accept gifts, legacies, and devices in furtherance of its corporate purposes; (7) may provide financial assistance to any organization or association, other than a corporation organized for profit, in furtherance of the purpose of the corporation; (8) may adopt and alter a corporate seal; (9) may establish and maintain offices for the conduct of the affairs of the Organization; (10) may publish a newspaper, magazine, or other publication consistent with its corporate purposes; (11) may do any and all acts and things necessary and proper to carry out the purposes of the Organization; and (12) may adopt and amend a constitution and bylaws not inconsistent with the laws of the United States or of any State, except that the Organization may amend its constitution only if it-- (A) publishes in its principal publication a general notice of the proposed alteration of the constitution, including the substantive terms of the alteration, the time and place of the Organization's regular meeting at which the alteration is to be decided, and a provision informing interested persons that they may submit materials as authorized in subparagraph (B); and (B) gives to all interested persons, prior to the adoption of any amendment, an opportunity to submit written data, views, or arguments concerning the proposed amendment for a period of at least 60 days after the date of publication of the notice.
Nonpolitical Nature of the Organization.--The Organization shall be nonpolitical and shall not promote the candidacy of any person seeking public office.
Prohibition Against Issuance of Stock or Business Activities.-- The Organization shall have no power to issue capital stock or to engage in business for pecuniary profit or gain.
Establishment.--The Organization shall be governed by a Board of Directors known as the National Tourism Board (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Board'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Board shall be composed of 48 members, and shall be self-perpetuating.
Initial members shall be appointed as provided in paragraph (2).
The Board shall elect a chair from among its members.
Founding members.--The founding members of the Board shall be appointed, or elected, as follows: (A) The Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade Administration shall serve as a member ex officio.
5 State Travel Directors elected by the National Council of State Travel Directors.
5 members elected by the International Association of Convention and Visitor Bureaus.
3 members elected by the Air Transport Association.
1 member elected by the National Association of Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds; 1 member elected by the Recreation Vehicle Industry Association.
2 members elected by the International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions.
3 members appointed by major companies in the travel payments industry.
5 members elected by the American Hotel and Motel Association.
2 members elected by the American Car Rental Association; 1 member elected by the American Automobile Association; 1 member elected by the American Bus Association; 1 member elected by Amtrak.
1 member elected by the National Tour Association; 1 member elected by the United States Tour Operators Association.
1 member elected by the Cruise Lines International Association; 1 member elected by the National Restaurant Association; one member elected by the National Park Hospitality Association; 1 member elected by the Airports Council International; 1 member elected by the Meeting Planners International; 1 member elected by the American Sightseeing International; 4 members elected by the Travel Industry Association of America; 1 member elected by the Association of Retail Travel Agents; 1 member elected by the American Society of Travel Agents; and 1 member elected by the Rural Tourism Development Foundation.
1 member elected by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
1 member elected by the American Association of Museums.
Terms.--Terms of Board members and of the Chair shall be determined by the Board and made part of the Organization bylaws.
Duties of the Board.--The Board shall-- (1) develop a national travel and tourism strategy for increasing tourism to and within the United States; and (2) advise the President, the Congress, and members of the travel and tourism industry concerning the implementation of the national strategy referred to in paragraph (1) and other matters that affect travel and tourism.
Authority.--The Board is hereby authorized to meet to complete the organization of the Organization by the adoption of a constitution and bylaws, and by doing all things necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Act.
Initial Meetings.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Board have been appointed, the Board shall have its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Board shall meet at the call of the Chair, but not less frequently than semiannually.
Compensation and Expenses.--The chairman and members of the Board shall serve without compensation but may be compensated for expenses incurred in carrying out the duties of the Board.
Testimony, Reports, and Support.--The Board may present testimony to the President, to the Congress, and to the legislatures of the States and issue reports on its findings and recommendations.
Immunity.--Members of the Board shall not be personally liable for any action taken by the Board.
SYMBOLS, EMBLEMS, TRADEMARKS, AND NAMES.
In General.--The Organization shall provide for the design of such symbols, emblems, trademarks, and names as may be appropriate and shall take all action necessary to protect and regulate the use of such symbols, emblems, trademarks, and names under law.
Unauthorized Use; Civil Action.--Any person who, without the consent of the Organization, uses-- (1) the symbol of the Organization; (2) the emblem of the Organization; (3) any trademark, trade name, sign, symbol, or insignia falsely representing association with, or authorization by, the Organization; or (4) the words ``United States Tourism Organization'', or any combination or simulation thereof tending to cause confusion, to cause mistake, to deceive, or to falsely suggest a connection with the Organization or any Organization activity; for the purpose of trade, to induce the sale of any goods or services, or to promote any exhibition shall be subject to suit in a civil action brought in the appropriate court by the Organization for the remedies provided in the Act of July 5, 1946 (60 United States Statutes at Large 427; 15 United States Code 1501 et seq.
), popularly known as the Trademark Act of 1946.
Paragraph (4) of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit any person who, before the date of enactment of this Act, actually used the words ``United States Tourism Organization'' for any lawful purpose from continuing such lawful use for the same purpose and for the same goods and services.
Contributors and Suppliers.--The Organization may authorize contributors and suppliers of goods and services to use the trade name of the Organization as well as any trademark, symbol, insignia, or emblem of the Organization in advertising that the contributions, goods, or services were donated, supplied, or furnished to or for the use of, approved, selected, or used by the Organization.
Exclusive Right of the Organization.--The Organization shall have exclusive right to use the name ``United States Tourism Organization'', the symbol described in subsection (b)(1), the emblem described in subsection (b)(2), and the words ``United States Tourism Organization'', or any combination thereof, subject to the use reserved by the second sentence of subsection (b).
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT COOPERATION.
Secretary of State.--The Secretary of State shall-- (1) place a high priority on implementing recommendations by the Organization; and (2) cooperate with the Organization in carrying out its duties.
Director of the United States Information Agency.--The Director of the United States Information Agency shall-- (1) place a high priority on implementing recommendations by the Organization; and (2) cooperate with the Organization in carrying out its duties.
Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee.-- Section 2312 of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727) is amended-- (1) by striking out ``and'' at the end of subsection (c)(4); (2) by striking the period at the end of subsection (c)(5) and inserting a semicolon and the word ``and''; (3) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(6) reflect recommendations by the National Tourism Board established under the United States Tourism Organization Act.''
and (2) in paragraph (d)(1) by striking ``and'' in subparagraph (L), by redesignating subparagraph (M) as subparagraph (N), and by inserting the following: ``(M) the Chairman of the Board of the United States Tourism Organization, as established under the United States Tourism Organization Act; and''.
If, by the date that is 2 years after the date of incorporation of the Organization, a plan for the long-term financing of the Organization has not been implemented, the Organization and the Board shall terminate.
Passed the Senate August 2, 1996.
Attest: KELLY D. JOHNSTON, Secretary.