This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Technology Transfer Act''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Cooperative extension.--The term ``Cooperative Extension'' means the extension services established at the land-grant colleges and universities under the Smith-Lever Act of May 8, 1914.
Department.--The term ``Department'' means the Department of Energy.
Energy supply research and development programs.--The term ``energy supply research and development programs'' means the research, development, demonstration, and commercial application programs in the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, and the Office of Fossil Energy.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given that term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)).
Land-grant colleges and universities.--The term ``land- grant colleges and universities'' means-- (A) 1862 Institutions (as defined in section 2 of the Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998 (7 United States Code 7601)); (B) 1890 Institutions (as defined in section 2 of that Act); and (C) 1994 Institutions (as defined in section 2 of that Act).
National laboratory.--The term ``National Laboratory'' has the meaning given the term ``nonmilitary energy laboratory'' in section 903(3) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 16182(3)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
In General.-- (1) Grants.--The Secretary, through the energy supply research and development programs of the Department, shall carry out a program to award competitive, merit-reviewed grants to Cooperative Extension services or offices, States, local governments, institutions of higher education, and nonprofit institutions with expertise in energy research or extension, or consortia thereof, to conduct activities to transfer knowledge and information about advanced energy technologies that increase efficiency of energy use, especially those developed at the National Laboratories and by the Department, to individuals, businesses, nonprofit entities, and public entities, including local governments and school districts.
Requirement.--To receive funding under this Act, a grant applicant must already operate an outreach program capable of transferring knowledge and information about advanced energy technologies that increase efficiency of energy use, or must partner with an entity that has such an outreach program.
Uses of Funds.--Funds awarded under this Act may be used for the following activities: (1) Developing and distributing informational materials on technologies that could use energy more efficiently.
Carrying out small-scale projects to demonstrate technologies that could use energy more efficiently.
Developing and conducting seminars, workshops, long- distance learning sessions, and other activities to aid in the dissemination of knowledge and information on technologies that could use energy more efficiently.
Providing or coordinating onsite energy evaluations for a wide range of energy end-users.
Examining the energy efficiency needs of energy end- users to develop recommended research projects for the Department.
Hiring experts in energy efficient technologies to carry out activities described in paragraphs (1) through (5).
Carrying out any other activities the Secretary believes will accomplish the purposes described in subsection (a)(1).
Selection Process Application.--An applicant seeking funding under this Act shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
The application shall include, at a minimum-- (1) a description of the applicant's current outreach program and of why it would be capable of transferring knowledge and information about advanced energy technologies that increase efficiency of energy use; (2) a description of the activities the applicant would carry out, of the technologies that would be transferred, and of who would be carrying out those activities; (3) a description of how the proposed activities would be appropriate to the specific energy needs of the area to be served; (4) an estimate of the number and types of energy end-users expected to be reached through such activities; and (5) a description of how the applicant will assess the success of the program.
Review of Applications.--In evaluating the applications submitted under this Act, the Secretary shall consider, at a minimum-- (1) the ability of the applicant to effectively carry out the proposed program; (2) the appropriateness of the applicant's outreach program for carrying out the program described in this Act; and (3) the likelihood that proposed activities could be expanded or used as a model for other areas.
Awards.-- (1) Distribution.--In making awards under this Act, the Secretary shall ensure that, to the extent practicable, the program enables the transfer of knowledge and information about a variety of technologies and enables the transfer of knowledge and information in a variety of geographic areas.
Focus.--In making awards under this Act, the Secretary shall give priority to applicants that would significantly expand on or fill a gap in existing programs in a geographical region.
Cost Sharing.--The Secretary shall require cost-sharing in accordance with the requirements of section 988 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 16352) for commercial application activities.
Duration.-- (1) Initial grant period.--A grant awarded under this Act shall be for a period of 5 years.
Initial evaluation.--Each grantee under this Act shall be evaluated during its third year of operation under procedures established by the Secretary to determine if the grantee is accomplishing the purposes of this Act described in subsection (a)(1).
The Secretary shall terminate any grant that does not receive a positive evaluation.
If an evaluation is positive, the Secretary may extend the grant for 3 additional years beyond the original term of the grant.
Additional extension.--If a grantee receives an extension under paragraph (2), the grantee shall be evaluated again during the second year of the extension.
The Secretary shall terminate any grant that does not receive a positive evaluation.
If an evaluation is positive, the Secretary may extend the grant for a final additional period of 3 additional years beyond the original extension.
Limitation.--No grantee may receive more than 11 years of support under this Act without reapplying for support and competing against all other applicants seeking a grant at that time.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary and the National Laboratories may provide technical assistance on advanced energy technologies and methods to grantees.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for carrying out this section-- (1) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2008; (2) $27,375,000 for fiscal year 2009; (3) $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2010; (4) $32,900,000 for fiscal year 2011; and (5) $36,000,000 for fiscal year 2012.