This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on the Future of Disability Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the Nation's proper goals regarding individuals with disabilities are to ensure equality of opportunity, full participation, independent living, and economic self- sufficiency for such individuals; (2) the vast changes underway in the workplace, information technologies, and other aspects of society have been insufficiently studied for the opportunities and hazards such changes present for individuals with disabilities; (3) the Federal Government has created many programs to serve the needs of individuals with disabilities, including programs that provide financial assistance, medical care, education, vocational rehabilitation, housing, transportation, legal assistance, and rehabilitation research and training, but many of these programs operate in a manner that is inconsistent with the Nation's goals, work at cross-purposes with each other, are outdated, or could otherwise be improved, and new programs to serve individuals with disabilities may need to be established; (4) there are Federal programs that are not viewed as disability programs, yet serve significant numbers of individuals with disabilities, and the impact and value of such programs for individuals with disabilities have received insufficient attention; (5) the Nation is not well informed about the increasing number of Americans with disabilities, and disability is a health and social welfare issue of growing proportions, for which the Nation is ill prepared; and (6) it is incumbent upon the Federal Government to examine its programs that serve individuals with disabilities to ensure they are consistent with the Nation's goals, reflect the best use of its resources, and properly anticipate societal and technological change.
There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on the Future of Disability (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall develop and carry out a comprehensive study of all matters related to the nature, purpose, and adequacy of all Federal programs serving individuals with disabilities, in particular, programs authorized under the Social Security Act, in terms of both current performance and future value.
Matters Studied.--The Commission shall prepare an inventory of Federal programs serving individuals with disabilities, and shall examine-- (1) trends and projections regarding the size and characteristics of the population of individuals with disabilities, and the implications of such analyses for program planning; (2) the feasibility and design of performance standards for the Nation's disability programs; (3) the adequacy of Federal efforts in rehabilitation research and training, and opportunities to improve the lives of individuals with disabilities through all manners of scientific and engineering research; and (4) the adequacy of policy research available to the Federal Government, and what actions might be undertaken to improve the quality and scope of such research.
Recommendations.--The Commission shall submit to the appropriate committees of the Congress and to the President recommendations and, as appropriate, proposals for legislation regarding-- (1) which (if any) Federal disability programs should be eliminated or augmented; (2) what new Federal disability programs (if any) should be established; (3) the suitability of the organization and location of disability programs within the Federal Government; (4) other actions the Federal Government should take to prevent disabilities and disadvantages associated with disabilities; and (5) such other matters as the Commission considers appropriate.
Number and Appointment.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members, of whom-- (A) four shall be appointed by the President, of whom not more than 2 shall be of the same major political party; (B) two shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate; (C) two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate; (D) two shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; and (E) two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Representation.--The Commission members shall be chosen based on their education, training, or experience.
In appointing individuals as members of the Commission, the President and the Majority and Minority Leaders of the Senate and the Speaker and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives shall seek to ensure that the membership of the Commission reflects the diversity of individuals with disabilities in the United States.
Comptroller General.--The Comptroller General shall serve on the Commission as an ex officio member of the Commission to advise and oversee the methodology and approach of the study of the Commission.
Prohibition Against Officer or Employee.--Each individual appointed under subsection (a) shall not be an officer or employee of any government.
Deadline for Appointment; Term of Appointment.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
The members shall serve on the Commission for the life of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall locate its headquarters in the District of Columbia, and shall meet at the call of the Chairperson, but not less than four times each year during the life of the Commission.
Quorum.--Ten members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--Not later than 15 days after the members of the Commission are appointed, such members shall designate a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
Continuation of Membership.--If a member of the Commission becomes an officer or employee of any government after appointment to the Commission, the individual may continue as a member until a successor member is appointed.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made not later than 30 days after the Commission is given notice of the vacancy.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Director.-- (1) Appointment.--Upon consultation with the members of the Commission, the Chairperson shall appoint a Director of the Commission.
Compensation.--The Director shall be paid the rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the Director may appoint such personnel as the Director considers appropriate.
Applicability of Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and Consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist in carrying out the duties of the Commission under this Act.
Other Resources.--The Commission shall have reasonable access to materials, resources, statistical data, and other information from the Library of Congress and agencies and elected representatives of the executive and legislative branches of the Federal Government.
The Chairperson of the Commission shall make requests for such access in writing when necessary.
Physical Facilities.--The Administrator of the General Services Administration shall locate suitable office space for the operation of the Commission.
The facilities shall serve as the headquarters of the Commission and shall include all necessary equipment and incidentals required for proper functioning of the Commission.
Hearings.--The Commission may conduct public hearings or forums at the discretion of the Commission, at any time and place the Commission is able to secure facilities and witnesses, for the purpose of carrying out the duties of the Commission under this Act.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall furnish the information to the Commission to the extent permitted by law.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devices of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devices shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Interim Report.--Not later than 1 year prior to the date on which the Commission terminates pursuant to section 9, the Commission shall submit an interim report to the President and to the Congress.
The interim report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with the Commission's recommendations for legislative and administrative action, based on the activities of the Commission.
Final Report.--Not later than the date on which the Commission terminates, the Commission shall submit to the Congress and to the President a final report containing-- (1) a detailed statement of final findings, conclusions, and recommendations; and (2) an assessment of the extent to which recommendations of the Commission included in the interim report under subsection (a) have been implemented.
Printing and Public Distribution.--Upon receipt of each report of the Commission under this section, the President shall-- (1) order the report to be printed; and (2) make the report available to the public upon request.
The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 2 years after the date on which the members of the Commission have met and designated a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.