This Act may be cited as the ``Ice Age Floods National Geologic Route Designation Act of 2006''.
The purpose of this Act is to designate the Ice Age Floods National Geologic Route in the States of Montana, Idaho, Washington, and Oregon, enabling the public to view, experience, and learn about the Ice Age Floods' features and story through the collaborative efforts of public and private entities.
As used in this Act: (1) Route.--The term ``Route'' means the Ice Age Floods National Geologic Route designated in section 4.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Floods.--The term ``Ice Age Floods'' or ``floods'' means the cataclysmic floods that occurred in what is now the northwestern United States during the last Ice Age primarily from massive, rapid and recurring drainage of Glacial Lake Missoula.
DESIGNATION OF THE ICE AGE FLOODS NATIONAL NATIONAL GEOLOGIC ROUTE.
Designation.--In order to provide for the public appreciation, education, understanding, and enjoyment, through a coordinated interpretive program of certain nationally significant natural and cultural sites associated with Ice Age Floods that are accessible generally by public roads, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, with the concurrence of the agency having jurisdiction over such roads, is authorized to designate, by publication of a map or other description thereof in the Federal Register, a vehicular tour route along existing public roads linking such natural and cultural sites.
Such route shall be known as the ``Ice Age Floods National Geologic Route''.
Location.--The location of the Route shall generally follow public roads and highways from the vicinity of Missoula in western Montana, across northern Idaho, through eastern and southern sections of Washington, and across northern Oregon in the vicinity of the Willamette Valley and the Columbia River to the Pacific Ocean, as generally depicted on the map titled ``Ice Age Floods National Geologic Trial'', numbered P43/80,000, and dated June 2004.
Maps.-- (1) Revisions.--The Secretary may revise the map by publication in the Federal Register of a notice of availability of a new map, as needed, in cooperation with Federal, State, local, or tribal governments, and other public or private entities.
Availability.--Any map referred to in paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
Description of Sites; Plan; Interpretive Program.-- (1) Description of sites; plan.--Not later than 3 years after the date that funds become available for this Act, the Secretary shall prepare a description of sites along the Route and general plan which shall include the location and description of each of the following: (A) Unique geographic or geologic features and significant landforms.
Interpretive program.--The general plan shall include proposals for a comprehensive interpretive program of the Route.
Transmission to congress.--The Secretary shall transmit the description of sites and general plan to the Committee on Resources of the United States House of Representative and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate.
Consultation.--The description of sites and plan shall be prepared in consultation with other Federal agencies, the State of Montana, the State Idaho, the State of Washington, and the State of Oregon, units of local governments, tribal governments, interested private citizens, and nonprofit organizations, and the Ice Age Floods Institute.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall administer a program to interpret the Route in accordance with this Act.
Public Education.--With respect to sites linked by segments of the Route which are administered by other Federal, State, tribal, and local nonprofit or private entities, the Secretary is authorized to provide technical assistance in the development of interpretive devices and materials pursuant to cooperative agreements with such entities.
The Secretary, in cooperation with Federal, State, tribal, or local governments or nonprofit or private entities, shall prepare and distribute information for the public appreciation of sites along the Route.
Markers.--The Secretary shall ensure that the Route is marked with appropriate markers to guide the public.
With the concurrence and assistance of the State, tribal, or local entity having jurisdiction over the roads designated as part of the Route, the Secretary may erect thereon signs and other informational devices displaying the Ice Age Floods National Geologic Route marker.
The Secretary is authorized to accept the donation of suitable signs and other informational devices for placement at appropriate locations.
Private Property Rights.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require any private property owner to allow public access (including Federal, State or local government access) to such private property or to modify any provision of Federal, State or local law with regard to public access to or use of private lands.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $250,000 for each fiscal year to carry out this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives September 25, 2006.
Attest: KAREN L. HAAS, Clerk.