This Act may be cited as the ``Humanitarian Exports Leading to Peace Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Iraqi people suffered under a decade of war and continue to suffer under a repressive regime and the most comprehensive economic sanctions ever imposed on any country.
The economic sanctions have caused extraordinary hardship on the people of Iraq and failed to weaken the leadership of Iraq, and have undermined the institutions of civil society which are necessary for democratic political life.
The investigative panel established by the United Nations Security Council and other independent bodies have confirmed that the United Nations Oil-for-Food program has failed to adequately meet the needs of the Iraqi people.
According to the United States Department of Agriculture, Iraq represents a potential market for nearly $1,000,000,000 in agricultural products from the United States.
The sanctions regime continues to harm the Iraqi population for the crimes of its leaders and has not served either the goal of the United States of punishing Iraq's leaders or disarming weapons of mass destruction.
Rigorous weapons inspections and adequate provision for civilian needs in Iraq are not mutually exclusive.
The devastating effect of the economic sanctions on Iraq has been reported by numerous international and independent bodies, including the following: (A) The Center for Economic and Social Rights of the United Nations documented dramatic increases in malnutrition and disease, leading to the deaths of hundreds of thousands of children under the age of 5 since 1991.
UNICEF reported in 1995 that ``no significant movement towards food security can be achieved so long as the embargo remains in place''.
Further, despite the Oil-for-Food Program, UNICEF reported in July 1999 survey findings that ``Both the infant mortality rate and the under-five mortality rate consistently show a major increase in mortality over the 10 years preceding the survey.
More specifically, the results show that the infant mortality rate has increased from 47 deaths per 1,000 live births for the period 1984-89, to 108 deaths per 1,000 live births for the period 1994-99.''.
A report authorized by the United National Security Council on March 30, 1999, found that ``the gravity of the humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people is indisputable and cannot be overstated.''.
Further, it emphasized that ``Even if not all suffering in Iraq can be imputed to external factors, especially sanctions, the Iraqi people would not be undergoing such deprivations in the absence of the prolonged measures imposed by the Security Council and the effects of the war''.
UNICEF and the World Food Program found in 1997 that ``One out of every 4 young Iraqi children is malnourished.
More than 750,000 children are suffering from malnutrition''.
LIMITATION ON PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS ON TRADE WITH IRAQ TO ALLOW FOR THE EXPORT OF FOOD, MEDICINES, AND CERTAIN OTHER PRODUCTS.
The sanctions applied with respect to Iraq under the Iraq Sanctions Act of 1990 (sections 586-586J of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1991 (Public Law 101-513)) or any other provision of law shall not apply with respect to the export of any food or other agricultural products (including fertilizer), medicines, medical supplies, medical instruments, or medical equipment, or with respect to travel incident to the sale or delivery of food or other agricultural products (including fertilizer), medicines, medical supplies, medical instruments, or medical equipment, to Iraq.
Section 3 shall not apply-- (1) to restrictions imposed under section 5 or 6 of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (as in effect pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act) on goods by virtue of the technology incorporated in such goods; and (2) to restrictions imposed under section 203 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act on the export of medical instruments or medical equipment to deal with a threat to the national security of the United States by virtue of the technology incorporated in such medical instruments or equipment.
ADMINISTRATION BY SECRETARY OF COMMERCE.
Administration by Secretary of Commerce.--The Secretary of Commerce shall exercise the authorities of the Export Administration Act of 1979, as in effect pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, to carry out sections 3 and 4, except that-- (1) the Secretary may not require a license for the export of any of the items to which section 3 applies; but (2) the Secretary shall require persons exporting such items to notify the Secretary of such exports.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Commerce shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out sections 3 and 4.
It is the sense of the Congress that the United States Government should take all necessary steps to end the suffering of innocent populations, primarily children and the elderly, by allowing the free flow of humanitarian aid to Iraq without threat of prosecution.
Such steps should include, but not be limited to, using its position as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council to pass all such measures as may be required for the implementation of section 3 of this Act.
Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall transmit to the Congress a report that sets forth-- (1) the extent (expressed in volume and dollar amounts) of sales to Iraq of food and other agricultural products (including fertilizer), medicines, medical supplies, medical instruments, and medical equipment, since the enactment of this Act; (2) the impact the exports have had on food security in Iraq; (3) a description of the types and end users of the goods so exported; (4) whether there has been any indication that any medicines, medical supplies, medical instruments, or medical equipment exported to Iraq since the enactment of this Act-- (A) have been diverted by the Government of Iraq or any other third party from the intended recipients; or (B) have been used for any unintended nonhumanitarian or dual-use purposes; and (5) what steps the United States has taken through the United Nations, with the cooperation of Security Council members, to-- (A) lift nonmilitary sanctions on Iraq, including actions described in section 6; or (B) impose a strict regional arms control regime pursuant to Article 14 of Security Council Resolution 687, which calls for ``establishing in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of mass destruction''.