This Act may be cited as the ``Former Civilian Prisoners of War Benefits Act of 1996''.
MEDICAL CARE AND DISABILITY BENEFITS.
Eligibility.--A former civilian prisoner of war is entitled to receive necessary medical care and is entitled to receive disability benefits under this Act for any injury or disability resulting from the period of internment or hiding.
Presumptive Medical Conditions.--Any presumptive medical or dental condition related to a period of internment that is provided for former military prisoners of war under section 1112(b) of title 38, United States Code, shall be applicable under this Act to former civilian prisoners of war and shall be considered for such purposes to have been incurred in or aggravated by such period of internment or hiding, without regard to the absence of any record of such injury.
Payment of Medical Benefits.--(1) The Secretary of Labor shall facilitate the prompt payment or reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenditures for all medical treatment, including rehabilitation, mental health services, and dental care, provided under this section for which a claim and any documentation determined necessary by the Secretary is filed with the Secretary.
The rate of payment for such medical treatment shall be as provided in the schedule of payments in effect at the time of such treatment for payments made under workers' compensation programs administered by the Secretary of Labor.
To the extent a particular treatment is not covered by such schedule, or as otherwise determined necessary by the Secretary, the Secretary may establish a schedule of payments for purposes of this subsection.
Any such schedule shall be established in consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Waiver of Limitations.--There shall be no limitation on the total medical or disability benefits that a former civilian prisoner of war may receive under this Act for any injury or disability resulting from a period of internment or hiding.
Rate of Compensation.--Compensation for a disability referred to in subsection (a) shall be at the rate equal to the minimum monthly rate of compensation payable for a total disability covered by chapter 81 of title 5, United States Code, as computed under section 8112(a) of that title.
Crediting Benefits Under the Social Security Act.--The benefits provided by this section to any person shall be reduced to the extent such benefits are provided under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, or any private insurance, for the same medical condition or disability.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Labor shall establish an advisory committee to be known as the Former Civilian Prisoner of War Advisory Committee.
The Secretary shall consult with and seek the advice of the advisory committee with respect to the administration of benefits under this Act.
Members.--The members of the advisory committee shall be appointed by the Secretary from the general public and shall include appropriate representatives of former civilian prisoners of war and individuals who are recognized authorities in fields pertinent to the injuries and disabilities prevalent among former civilian prisoners of war.
The Secretary shall determine the number, terms of service, and pay and allowances of members of the advisory committee.
Not later than March 1 of each year, the Secretary of Labor shall submit to Congress a report on the programs and activities of the Department of Labor that pertain to former civilian prisoners of war.
The Secretary shall include in the report-- (1) an assessment of the needs of such civilian prisoners of war with respect to health and disability benefits; (2) a review of the programs and activities of the Office of Workers' Compensation Program designed to meet such needs; and (3) a summary of recommendations made by the advisory committee under section 3 and a description of actions taken by the Secretary arising from those recommendations.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and at appropriate times thereafter, the Secretary of Labor shall seek out former civilian prisoners of war and provide them with information regarding applicable changes in law, regulations, and services to which they are entitled under this Act.
The Secretary of Labor shall prescribe regulations to ensure that benefits provided to former civilian prisoners of war under this Act are coordinated with, and do not duplicate any benefits provided to such persons under, the War Claims Act of 1948 (50 United States Code App.
For purposes of this Act: (1)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term ``former civilian prisoner of war'' means a person determined by the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, as being someone who, before the date of enactment of this Act and being then a citizen of the United States, was forcibly interned by an enemy government or its agents, or a hostile force, or went into hiding in order to avoid capture by such government, its agents, or hostile force, during a period of war, or other period for at least 30 days, including those interned or who went into hiding-- (i) in the Asian-Pacific Theater or the European Theater of World War II during the period beginning on September 1, 1939, and ending on December 31, 1946; (ii) in Korea during the period beginning on June 25, 1950, and ending on July 1, 1955; or (iii) in Vietnam during the period beginning on February 28, 1961, and ending on May 7, 1975.
Such term does not apply to-- (i) a person who at any time voluntarily gave aid to, collaborated with, or in any manner served such government, or (ii) a person who at the time of capture or entrance into hiding was-- (I) a person within the purview of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide compensation for employees of the United States suffering injuries while in the performance of their duties, and for other purposes'', approved September 7, 1916; (II) a person within the purview of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide benefits for the injury, disability, death, or enemy detention of employees of contractors with the United States, and for other purposes'', approved December 2, 1942; or (III) a regularly appointed, enrolled, enlisted, or inducted member of any military or naval force.
The term ``hostile force'' means any nation, or any national thereof, or any other person serving a foreign nation-- (A) engaged in war against the United States or any of its allies; or (B) engaged in armed conflict, whether or not war has been declared, against the United States or any of its allies.
Medical Care.--This Act shall apply only with respect to medical care provided on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Disability Benefits.--No disability benefits may be paid under this Act with respect to any period before the date of the enactment of this Act.