This Act may be cited as the ``Native American Health and Wellness Foundation Act of 2003''.
NATIVE AMERICAN HEALTH AND WELLNESS FOUNDATION.
In General.--The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE VIII--NATIVE AMERICAN HEALTH AND WELLNESS FOUNDATION ``SEC.
``In this title: ``(1) Board.--The term `Board' means the Board of Directors of the Foundation.
Committee.--The term `Committee' means the Committee for the Establishment of Native American Health and Wellness Foundation established under section 802(f).
Foundation.--The term `Foundation' means the Native American Health and Wellness Foundation established under section 802.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Service.--The term `Service' means the Indian Health Service of the Department of Health and Human Services.
NATIVE AMERICAN HEALTH AND WELLNESS FOUNDATION.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this title, the Secretary shall establish, under the laws of the District of Columbia and in accordance with this title, the Native American Health and Wellness Foundation.
Perpetual Existence.--The Foundation shall have perpetual existence.
Nature of Corporation.--The Foundation-- ``(1) shall be a charitable and nonprofit federally chartered corporation; and ``(2) shall not be an agency or instrumentality of the United States.
Place of Incorporation and Domicile.--The Foundation shall be incorporated and domiciled in the District of Columbia.
Duties.--The Foundation shall-- ``(1) encourage, accept, and administer private gifts of real and personal property, and any income from or interest in such gifts, for the benefit of, or in support of, the mission of the Service; ``(2) undertake and conduct such other activities as will further the health and wellness activities and opportunities of Native Americans; and ``(3) participate with and assist Federal, State, and tribal governments, agencies, entities, and individuals in undertaking and conducting activities that will further the health and wellness activities and opportunities of Native Americans.
Committee for the Establishment of Native American Health and Wellness Foundation.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish the Committee for the Establishment of Native American Health and Wellness Foundation to assist the Secretary in establishing the Foundation.
Duties.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Committee shall-- ``(A) carry out such activities as are necessary to incorporate the Foundation under the laws of the District of Columbia, including acting as incorporators of the Foundation; ``(B) ensure that the Foundation qualifies for and maintains the status required to carry out this section, until the Board is established; ``(C) establish the constitution and initial bylaws of the Foundation; ``(D) provide for the initial operation of the Foundation, including providing for temporary or interim quarters, equipment, and staff; and ``(E) appoint the initial members of the Board in accordance with the constitution and initial bylaws of the Foundation.
Board of Directors.-- ``(1) In general.--The Board of Directors shall be the governing body of the Foundation.
Powers.--The Board may exercise, or provide for the exercise of, the powers of the Foundation.
Selection.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the number of members of the Board, the manner of selection of the members (including the filling of vacancies), and the terms of office of the members shall be as provided in the constitution and bylaws of the Foundation.
Requirements.-- ``(i) Number of members.--The Board shall have at least 11 members, who shall have staggered terms.
Initial voting members.--The initial voting members of the Board-- ``(I) shall be appointed by the Committee not later than 180 days after the date on which the Foundation is established; and ``(II) shall have staggered terms.
Qualification.--The members of the Board shall be United States citizens who are knowledgeable or experienced in Native American health care and related matters.
Compensation.--A member of the Board shall not receive compensation for service as a member, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses incurred in the performance of the duties of the Foundation.
Officers.-- ``(1) In general.--The officers of the Foundation shall be-- ``(A) a secretary, elected from among the members of the Board; and ``(B) any other officers provided for in the constitution and bylaws of the Foundation.
Secretary.--The secretary of the Foundation shall serve, at the direction of the Board, as the chief operating officer of the Foundation.
Election.--The manner of election, term of office, and duties of the officers of the Foundation shall be as provided in the constitution and bylaws of the Foundation.
Powers.--The Foundation-- ``(1) shall adopt a constitution and bylaws for the management of the property of the Foundation and the regulation of the affairs of the Foundation; ``(2) may adopt and alter a corporate seal; ``(3) may enter into contracts; ``(4) may acquire (through a gift or otherwise), own, lease, encumber, and transfer real or personal property as necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of the Foundation; ``(5) may sue and be sued; and ``(6) may perform any other act necessary and proper to carry out the purposes of the Foundation.
Principal Office.-- ``(1) In General.--The principal office of the Foundation shall be in the District of Columbia.
Activities; offices.--The activities of the Foundation may be conducted, and offices may be maintained, throughout the United States in accordance with the constitution and bylaws of the Foundation.
Service of Process.--The Foundation shall comply with the law on service of process of each State in which the Foundation is incorporated and of each State in which the Foundation carries on activities.
Liability of Officers, Employees, and Agents.-- ``(1) In general.--The Foundation shall be liable for the acts of the officers, employees, and agents of the Foundation acting within the scope of their authority.
Personal liability.--A member of the Board shall be personally liable only for gross negligence in the performance of the duties of the member.
Restrictions.-- ``(1) Limitation on spending.--Beginning with the fiscal year following the first full fiscal year during which the Foundation is in operation, the administrative costs of the Foundation shall not exceed 10 percent of the sum of-- ``(A) the amounts transferred to the Foundation under subsection (o) during the preceding fiscal year; and ``(B) donations received from private sources during the preceding fiscal year.
Appointment and hiring.--The appointment of officers and employees of the Foundation shall be subject to the availability of funds.
Status.--A member of the Board or officer, employee, or agent of the Foundation shall not by reason of association with the Foundation be considered to be an officer, employee, or agent of the United States.
Audits.--The Foundation shall comply with section 10101 of title 36, United States Code, as if the Foundation were a corporation under part B of subtitle II of that title.
Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out subsection (e)(1) $500,000 for each fiscal year, as adjusted to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index for all-urban consumers published by the Department of Labor.
Transfer of donated funds.--The Secretary shall transfer to the Foundation funds held by the Department of Health and Human Services under the Act of August 5, 1954 (42 United States Code 2001 et sequentes), if the transfer or use of the funds is not prohibited by any term under which the funds were donated.
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES AND SUPPORT.
Provision of Support by Secretary.--Subject to subsection (b), during the 5-year period beginning on the date on which the Foundation is established, the Secretary-- ``(1) may provide personnel, facilities, and other administrative support services to the Foundation; ``(2) may provide funds to reimburse the travel expenses of the members of the Board; and ``(3) shall require and accept reimbursements from the Foundation for-- ``(A) services provided under paragraph (1); and ``(B) funds provided under paragraph (2).
Reimbursement.--Reimbursements accepted under subsection (a)(3)-- ``(1) shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of the applicable appropriations account; and ``(2) shall be chargeable for the cost of providing services described in subsection (a)(1) and travel expenses described in subsection (a)(2).
Continuation of Certain Services.--The Secretary may continue to provide facilities and necessary support services to the Foundation after the termination of the 5-year period specified in subsection (a) if the facilities and services-- ``(1) are available; and ``(2) are provided on reimbursable cost basis.''.
Technical Amendments.--The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act is amended-- (1) by redesignating title V (as added by section 1302 of the American Indian Education Foundation Act of 2000) (25 United States Code 458bbb et sequentes)) as title VII; (2) by redesignating sections 501, 502, and 503 (as added by section 1302 of the American Indian Education Foundation Act of 2000) as sections 701, 702, and 703, respectively; and (3) in subsection (a)(2) of section 702 and paragraph (2) of section 703 (as redesignated by paragraph (2)), by striking ``section 501'' and inserting ``section 701''.
Passed the Senate July 16, 2003.
Attest: EMILY J. REYNOLDS, Secretary.