This Act may be cited as the ``Theatrical Motion Picture Authorship Act of 1995''.
THEATRICAL MOTION PICTURE DEFINED.
Section 101 of title 17, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the paragraph defining ``State'' the following: ``A `theatrical motion picture' is a motion picture of 60 minutes duration or greater intended for public exhibition, public performance, public sale, or lease, and includes made for television motion pictures, but does not include episodic television programs of less than 60 minutes duration (exclusive of commercials), motion pictures prepared for private commercial or industrial purposes, or program-length commercials.''.
NONECONOMIC INTERESTS OF THEATRICAL MOTION PICTURE ARTISTS.
In General.--Chapter 1 of title 17, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 106A the following: ``Sec.
Noneconomic interests of certain theatrical motion picture artists ``(a) Noneconomic Interests.--Subject to section 107 and independent of the exclusive rights provided in section 106, the principal director, screenwriter, and cinematographer of a theatrical motion picture have the noneconomic interests in that motion picture.
The noneconomic interests in a theatrical motion picture that are referred to in the preceding sentence are of the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer-- ``(1) the right of the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer (as the case may be) of that motion picture to claim that he or she was the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer (as the case may be) of that motion picture; ``(2) the right of the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer (as the case may be) of that motion picture to prevent the use of his or her name as the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer (as the case may be) of a theatrical motion picture of which he or she was not the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer (as the case may be); and ``(3) the right of the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer (as the case may be) of that motion picture to prevent any intentional distortion, mutilation, or other modification of that motion picture which would be prejudicial to his or her honor or reputation.
Scope and Exercise of Rights.--Only a physical person may exercise the rights conferred by subsection (a) in a theatrical motion picture, but such rights may be exercised whether or not that person is the copyright owner.
Duration of Rights.--The duration of the noneconomic interests in a theatrical motion picture shall be coextensive with, and shall expire at the same time as, the rights conferred by section 106 in that motion picture.
Transfer and Waiver.--The noneconomic interests in a theatrical motion picture may not be transferred, but they may be exercised by the heir of the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer, as the case may be.
Those rights may be waived if the principal director, screenwriter, or cinematographer, as the case may be, expressly agrees to such waiver in a written instrument signed by such person, except that-- ``(1) such written instrument may not be executed before the first public performance of the motion picture (after previews and trial runs); and ``(2) no consideration in excess of one dollar may be given for the grant of the waiver.
Such instrument shall specifically identify the theatrical motion picture and the uses of that motion picture to which the waiver applies, and the waiver shall apply only to the motion picture and uses so identified.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term `heir' means the person to whom the noneconomic interests conferred by this section are bequeathed by will or pass by the applicable laws of intestate succession.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 1 of title 17, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 106A the following: ``106B.
Noneconomic interests of certain theatrical motion picture artists''.
Section 201(b) of title 17, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``In the case of a work made for hire,'' and inserting ``In the case of a work made for hire, except in the case of theatrical motion pictures with respect to the noneconomic interests in the work,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) In the case of theatrical motion pictures with respect to ownership of noneconomic interests in the work, the author shall be the principal director, principal screenwriter, and principal cinematographer.''.
Section 501(a) of title 17, United States Code, is amended in the first sentence by inserting ``or in section 106B(a)'' after ``of the author as provided in section 106A(a)''.