This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Competition in Foreign Commerce Act of 1999''.
FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The United States makes substantial contributions and provides significant funding for major international development projects through international financial institutions and bilateral nonhumanitarian assistance.
These international development projects are often plagued with fraud, corruption, waste, inefficiency, and misuse of funding.
Fraud, corruption, waste, inefficiency, misuse, and abuse are major impediments to competition in foreign commerce throughout the world.
Identifying these impediments after they occur is inadequate and meaningless.
Detection of impediments before they occur helps to ensure that valuable United States resources contributed to important international development projects are used appropriately.
Independent third-party procurement monitoring is an important tool for detecting and preventing such impediments.
Third-party procurement monitoring includes evaluations of each stage of the procurement process and assures the openness and transparency of the process.
Improving transparency and openness in the procurement process helps to minimize fraud, corruption, waste, inefficiency, and other misuse of funding, and promotes competition, thereby strengthening international trade and foreign commerce.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to build on the excellent progress associated with the Organization on Economic Development and Cooperation Agreement on Bribery and Corruption by promoting the use of independent third-party procurement monitoring as part of United States participation in the international financial institutions and in the disbursement by the United States of bilateral nonhumanitarian foreign assistance funds, so as to ensure open, efficient, and transparent government procurement practices.
In this Act: (1) Appropriate committees.--The term ``appropriate committees'' means the Committees on Finance and on Commerce, Science, and Technology of the Senate and the Committees on Ways and Means and on Commerce of the House of Representatives.
Independent third-party procurement monitoring.--The term ``independent third-party procurement monitoring'' means a program to-- (A) eliminate bias, (B) promote transparency and open competition, and (C) minimize fraud, corruption, waste, inefficiency, and other misuse of funds, in international procurement through independent evaluation of the technical, financial, economic, and legal aspects of the procurement process.
Independent.--The term ``independent'' means that monitoring the procurement process does not pose a conflict of interest for the person doing so.
Each stage of procurement.--The term ``each stage of procurement'' means the development and issuance of technical specifications, bidding documents, evaluation reports, contract preparation, and the delivery of goods and services.
International financial institution.--The term ``international financial institution'' has the meaning given in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act.
REQUIREMENTS FOR FAIR COMPETITION IN FOREIGN COMMERCE.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transmit to the President and to the appropriate committees a plan for promoting international government procurement reforms relating to the United States participation in international financial institutions, including the use of third party procurement monitoring where appropriate.
Plan.--The plan shall include an instruction by the Secretary of the Treasury to the United States Executive Director of each international financial institution to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose the use of funds appropriated or made available by the United States for any non-humanitarian assistance, until-- (1) the institution has adopted an anticorruption plan that requires the use of independent third-party procurement monitoring services in any case in which the country receiving such assistance lacks the necessary organization, resources, and expertise to ensure openness, efficiency, and transparency in government procurement; and (2) each country receiving such assistance institutes specific strategies for minimizing corruption and maximizing transparency in each stage of the procurement process.
Annual Reports.--Not later than June 29 of each year, the Secretary of the Treasury shall report to the appropriate committees on the progress in implementing procurement reforms made by each international financial institution and each country that received non- humanitarian assistance from such an institution during the preceding year.
Restrictions on Assistance.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no funds appropriated or made available for non- humanitarian foreign assistance programs, including the activities of the Agency for International Development, may be expended for a government procurement program unless each country eligible to receive assistance under such programs and each international financial institution involved has demonstrated that significant progess is being made toward institutionalizing-- (1) procurement practices which are open, transparent, and free of corruption, fraud, inefficiency, and other misuse; and (2) independent third-party monitoring of government procurement, in the case of such countries that lack necessary organization, resources, and expertise.
National Security.--Section 4 shall not apply with respect to a country if the President determines with respect to such country that making funds available is in the national security interests of the United States.
Any such determination shall cease to be effective 6 months after being made unless the President determines that its continuation is in the national security interests of the United States.
Other Exceptions.--Section 4 shall not apply with respect to assistance to-- (1) meet urgent humanitarian needs (including providing food, medicine, disaster, and refugee relief); (2) facilitate democratic political reform and rule of law activities; (3) create private sector and nongovernmental organizations that are independent of government control; or (4) facilitate development of a free market economic system.