This Act may be cited as the ``Taxpayer Protection and Contractor Integrity Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to end support by the taxpayers of the United States of Federal Government contractors that violate the trust of such taxpayers through repeated civil judgments or criminal convictions for certain offenses.
Congress finds the following: (1) Taxpayer dollars should not be used to support individuals or entities who repeatedly violate laws regarding Federal contracting and the trust of taxpayers, thus putting the integrity of future contracts at risk.
The Federal Acquisition Regulation already requires bidders on Federal contracts to disclose honestly the existence of indictments, charges, convictions, or civil judgments against such bidders.
The Federal Acquisition Regulation also requires contracting officers to make a determination regarding the responsibility of a potential contractor prior to awarding a contract to ensure that the potential contractor has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics and a satisfactory performance record.
Regardless of the number or seriousness of convictions or civil judgments against a potential contractor, however, the Federal Acquisition Regulation provides Federal agencies wide discretion in determining whether to initiate suspension or debarment procedures.
There is currently no maximum number of convictions above which an entity or individual becomes ineligible for future contract awards.
EXPANDED DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR BIDDERS ON FEDERAL CONTRACTS.
A contracting officer for a Federal contract shall require any potential contractor who has disclosed the existence of an indictment, charge, conviction, or civil judgment under section 94.409(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation (or any successor provision) to submit information regarding the number of convictions or civil judgments entered against the potential contractor, the nature of the offenses, and whether any fines, penalties, or damages were assessed.
LIMITATION ON AWARD OF FUTURE CONTRACTS.
In General.--No Federal contract for the procurement of property or services may be awarded to any individual or entity against whom a total of three or more convictions or civil judgments have been entered after the date of the enactment of this Act for any of the following: (1) Commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a Federal, State, or local government contract or subcontract.--- (2) Violation of a Federal or State antitrust statute relating to the submission of offers for Federal contracts.
Commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, making false statements, or receiving stolen property in connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a Federal, State or local government contract or subcontract.
Applicability.--This section shall apply with respect to a contract awarded on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Length of Prohibition; Report.--The prohibition on the award of a contract under this section shall terminate after a period of three years beginning on the date that the most recent conviction or civil judgment has been entered against the potential contractor if-- (1) during such three-year period, the potential contractor demonstrates a satisfactory record of ethics and integrity by avoiding additional criminal convictions or civil judgments regarding the offenses described in subsection (a); (2) the potential contractor submits to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget a report on the steps that have been taken by the potential contractor (such as changes in company policy, personnel, or procedures) to prevent future violations; and (3) the Director certifies that the steps taken are satisfactory.
Additional Offenses.--If an individual or entity who has been prohibited from being awarded a Federal contract under subsection (a) has a conviction or civil judgment for an offense described in subsection (a) entered against the individual or entity after the termination of the three-year period described in subsection (c), such individual or entity shall be prohibited from being awarded a Federal contract for an additional three years.
Authority.--The President may waive the application of section 5 if the President determines that-- (1) such a waiver is in the interests of national security; or (2) the need for the property or services to be acquired under the contract is of such an unusual and compelling urgency that the Federal Government would be seriously injured if the application of such section is not waived.
Waiting Period.--The President may not exercise the waiver authority of this section until 45 days after the date that the President submits to Congress in writing a justification for such waiver.
PAYMENT OF LEGAL COSTS.
In any case in which the United States brings an action against an individual or entity for an offense described in section 5(a) and a verdict of guilty is rendered, the United States shall not be responsible for payment of legal costs of the individual or entity in connection with the action.
In this Act, the term ``contractor'' has the meaning given such term in section 9.403 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as superseding the authority of a Federal contracting officer to make a determination of nonresponsibility regarding a potential contractor, or to initiate suspension and debarment procedures against an entity or individual against whom three or more convictions or civil judgments for the offenses described in section 5(a) have not been entered.