This Act may be cited as the ``Preventive Medicine and Public Health Training Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The American Board of Preventive medicine defines preventive medicine as ``that specialty of medical practice which focuses on the health of individuals and defined populations in order to protect, promote and maintain health and well-being and prevent disease, disability and premature death''.
Specialists in preventive medicines are uniquely trained in both clinical medicine and public health.
They have the skills needed to understand and reduce the risks of disease, disability and death in individuals and in population groups.
Preventive medicine includes both clinical and non- clinical aspects.
Clinicians see patients on a daily basis and provide services in screening, health counseling, and immunization to diabetics, cardiac patients, and others who can benefit from prevention and lifestyle modification.
Non- clinical preventive medicine includes health policy, social and behavioral aspects of health and disease, epidemiology, or other areas in which populations, not individual patients, are the primary focus.
Many preventive medicine physicians practice both clinical and non-clinical medicine.
Of the 24 medical specialities recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties, preventive medicine is the only specialty that requires training in both clinical medicine and public health.
While preventive medicine doctors are employed in all health sectors, they often serve in lead roles within the public health force, working in State and local health departments, as well as Federal Government agencies, such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health.
In the workplace, preventive medicine doctors in occupational medicine parallel the general public health system in dealing with illnesses and injuries in workplace populations through worker protection, personal health promotion, hazard control, business continuity and effective medical management.
There is an extreme shortage of doctors in the public health field.
For example, only 23 percent of local health agencies are directed by physicians and 8 percent are directed by physicians who have masters of public health degrees or are fellows in the American College of Preventive Medicine.
Many of these physicians are nearing retirement, and the average age of public health doctors today is 58 years.
The Health Resources and Services Administration reports that the demand for public health professionals will grow at twice the rate of all occupations between 2000 and 2010.
In addition, as the body of evidence supporting the effectiveness of clinical and population-based interventions to prevent and control diseases continues to expand, so does the need for specialists trained in preventive medicine.
The Health Resources and Services Administration reported that in 2000, there were 7,011 preventive medicine specialists.
This was a decrease from 7,734 in 1970.
The number of preventive medicine residency programs has decreased from 90 in 1998-1999 to 76 programs today.
Over this same period, the number of preventive medicine residents declined from 420 to 364.
In 2000, less than 3 percent of all medical school faculty also held masters degrees in public health.
An even smaller number had completed preventive medicine training or were board certified in preventive medicine.
Preventive medicine trained physicians are an essential part of the public health workforce and are critical to the Nation's ability to protect its citizens from biological threats, including avian influenza and emerging threats from bioterrorism.
PREVENTIVE MEDICINE AND PUBLIC HEALTH TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.
Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254b et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subpart XI--Preventive Medicine Training ``SEC.
PREVENTIVE MEDICINE AND PUBLIC HEALTH TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.
Grants.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may award grants to, or enter into contracts with, eligible entities to provide training to graduate medical residents in preventive medicine specialties.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant or contract under subsection (a), an entity shall-- ``(1) be a school of public health, public health department, school of medicine or osteopathic medicine, public or private hospital, or public or private nonprofit entity; ``(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require; and ``(3) maintain and adhere to a letter of agreement with a local community health center (if available in the local area involved) that supports practicum training of preventive medicine residents, if practicable.
Use of Funds.--Amounts received under a grant or contract under this section shall be used to-- ``(1) plan, develop, and operate residency programs for preventive medicine or public health; ``(2) provide financial assistance, including tuition and stipends, to resident physicians (MD or DO) who plan to specialize in preventive medicine or public health; ``(3) defray the costs associated with the planning, development, and operation of preventive medicine or public health programs, including the development of curriculum to be used in such programs, and the costs of practicum experiences; and ``(4) provide for the improvement of academic administrative units.
Duration of Award.--A grant or contract under this section shall be for a term of not to exceed 5 years.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $43,000,000 for fiscal year 2010, and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal year.