Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Foreign and Armed Services Tax Fairness Act of 2002''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Restoration of full exclusion from gross income of death gratuity payment.
Special rule for members of uniformed services and Foreign Service in determining exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence.
Qualified military base realignment and closure fringe benefit.
Extension of tax filing delay provisions to military personnel serving in contingency operations.
Deduction of certain expenses of members of the reserve component.
Modification of membership requirement for exemption from tax for veterans' organizations.
Clarification of the treatment of dependent care assistance programs sponsored by the Department of Defense for members of the Armed Forces of the United States.
RESTORATION OF FULL EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME OF DEATH GRATUITY PAYMENT.
In General.--Subsection (b)(3) of section 134 (relating to certain military benefits) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Exception for death gratuity adjustments made by law.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any adjustment to the amount of death gratuity payable under chapter 75 of title 10, United States Code, which is pursuant to a provision of law enacted after September 9, 1986.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Subparagraph (A) of section 134(b)(3) is amended by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs (B) and (C)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to deaths occurring after September 10, 2001.
SPECIAL RULE FOR MEMBERS OF UNIFORMED SERVICES AND FOREIGN SERVICE IN DETERMINING EXCLUSION OF GAIN FROM SALE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.
In General.--Subsection (d) of section 121 (relating to exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Members of uniformed services and foreign service.-- ``(A) In general.--At the election of an individual with respect to a property, the running of the 5-year period described in subsection (a) with respect to such property shall be suspended during any period that such individual or such individual's spouse is serving on qualified official extended duty as a member of the uniformed services or of the Foreign Service.
Maximum period of suspension.--The 5-year period described in subsection (a) shall not be extended more than 5 years by reason of subparagraph (A).
Qualified official extended duty.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) In general.--The term `qualified official extended duty' means any extended duty while serving at a duty station which is at least 50 miles from such property or while residing under Government orders in Government quarters.
Uniformed services.--The term `uniformed services' has the meaning given such term by section 101(a)(5) of title 10, United States Code, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this paragraph.
Foreign service of the united states.--The term `member of the Foreign Service' has the meaning given the term `member of the Service' by paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of section 103 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980.
Extended duty.--The term `extended duty' means any period of duty pursuant to a call or order to such duty for a period in excess of 90 days or for an indefinite period.
Special rules relating to election.-- ``(i) Election limited to 1 property at a time.--An election under subparagraph (A) with respect to any property may not be made if such an election is in effect with respect to any other property.
Revocation of election.--An election under subparagraph (A) may be revoked at any time.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to elections made after the date of the enactment of this Act for suspended periods under section 121(d)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this section) beginning after such date.
QUALIFIED MILITARY BASE REALIGNMENT AND CLOSURE FRINGE BENEFIT.
In General.--Section 132(a) (relating to the exclusion from gross income of certain fringe benefits) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``, or'' and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) qualified military base realignment and closure fringe.''.
Qualified Military Base Realignment and Closure Fringe.-- Section 132 is amended by redesignating subsection (n) as subsection (o) and by inserting after subsection (m) the following new subsection: ``(n) Qualified Military Base Realignment and Closure Fringe.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified military base realignment and closure fringe' means 1 or more payments under the authority of section 1013 of the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Development Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 3374) to offset the adverse effects on housing values as a result of a military base realignment or closure.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payments made after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION OF TAX FILING DELAY PROVISIONS TO MILITARY PERSONNEL SERVING IN CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS.
In General.--Section 7508(a) (relating to time for performing certain acts postponed by reason of service in combat zone) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or when deployed outside the United States away from the individual's permanent duty station while participating in an operation designated by the Secretary of Defense as a contingency operation (as defined in section 101(a)(13) of title 10, United States Code) or which became such a contingency operation by operation of law'' after ``section 112'', (2) by inserting in the first sentence ``or at any time during the period of such contingency operation'' after ``for purposes of such section'', (3) by inserting ``or operation'' after ``such an area'', and (4) by inserting ``or operation'' after ``such area''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 7508(d) is amended by inserting ``or contingency operation'' after ``area''.
The heading for section 7508 is amended by inserting ``or contingency operation'' after ``combat zone''.
The item relating to section 7508 in the table of sections for chapter 77 is amended by inserting ``or contingency operation'' after ``combat zone''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to any period for performing an act which has not expired before the date of the enactment of this Act.
DEDUCTION OF CERTAIN EXPENSES OF MEMBERS OF THE RESERVE COMPONENT.
Deduction Allowed.--Section 162 (relating to certain trade or business expenses) is amended by redesignating subsection (p) as subsection (q) and inserting after subsection (o) the following new subsection: ``(p) Treatment of Expenses of Members of Reserve Component of Armed Forces of the United States.--For purposes of subsection (a), in the case of an individual who performs services as a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States at any time during the taxable year, such individual shall be deemed to be away from home in the pursuit of a trade or business during any period for which such individual is away from home in connection with such service.''.
Deduction Allowed Whether or Not Taxpayer Elects To Itemize.-- Section 62(a)(2) (relating to certain trade and business deductions of employees) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Certain expenses of members of reserve components of the armed forces of the united states.-- The deductions allowed by section 162 which consist of expenses, in amounts not in excess of the rates for travel expenses (including per diem in lieu of subsistence) authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, paid or incurred by the taxpayer in connection with the performance of services by such taxpayer as a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
MODIFICATION OF MEMBERSHIP REQUIREMENT FOR EXEMPTION FROM TAX FOR VETERANS' ORGANIZATIONS.
In General.--Subparagraph (B) of section 501(c)(19) (relating to list of exempt organizations) is amended by striking ``or widowers'' and inserting ``, widowers, or ancestors or lineal descendants''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
CLARIFICATION OF THE TREATMENT OF DEPENDENT CARE ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS SPONSORED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--Section 134(b) (defining qualified military benefit) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Clarification of certain benefits.--For purposes of paragraph (1), such term includes any dependent care assistance program sponsored by the Department of Defense for members of the Armed Forces of the United States.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 3121(a)(18) is amended by striking ``or 129'' and inserting ``, 129, or 134(b)(4)''.
Section 3306(b)(13) is amended by striking ``or 129'' and inserting ``, 129, or 134(b)(4)''.
Section 3401(a)(18) is amended by striking ``or 129'' and inserting ``, 129, or 134(b)(4)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
No Inference.--No inference may be drawn from the amendments made by this section with respect to the tax treatment of any amounts under the program described in section 134(b)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this section) for any taxable year beginning before January 1, 2002.