This Act may be cited as the ``National Youth Summer Jobs Act of 2011''.
GRANTS FOR SUMMER JOBS FOR OUT-OF-SCHOOL YOUTH PROGRAMS.
In General.--The Secretary of Labor, subject to the availability of appropriations, shall award competitive grants to eligible entities for the purpose of providing job placement during the summer for out-of-school youths.
Eligible Entity.--For purposes of this section, an eligible entity shall-- (1) be a unit of general local government; and (2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Amounts received as a grant under this section shall be used for providing summer employment for out- of-school youths that includes employment and job readiness activities, as determined by the Secretary, including work experiences and job placement.
Use of existing programs.--An eligible entity that operates an existing youth summer jobs program may use a grant received under this section to expand such program, in lieu of establishing a new program to provide job placement for youths, by providing under such program job training and support services, including health and nutrition referral, housing referral, financial literacy, and instruction on basic daily living skills.
Preference.-- (1) In general.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give preference to an eligible entity in a community where, for the period between 2002 and 2007, at least one of the following rates was higher than the national average: (A) High school dropout rate.
Additional preference.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give additional preference to an eligible entity that operates in a community where, for the period between 2002 and 2007, each rate listed under paragraph (1) was higher than the national average of each such rate.
Grant Terms.-- (1) Duration.--A grant awarded under this section shall be for a term of not less than 5 years.
Grant amount.--The Secretary shall determine the amount of funds in a grant under this section.
Limitation on number of grants.--A grant recipient under this section shall not have more than 1 grant under this section at anytime.
Once a grant term ends, the recipient of such grant may re-apply for a grant under this section.
Return of unobligated grant funds.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which a grant term ends, the eligible entity who received such grant shall return any unspent grant funds to the Secretary.
Reports.-- (1) Eligible entity.--Not later than September 30 of each fiscal year for which an eligible entity receives a grant under this section, such entity shall submit to the Secretary a report describing the grant-funded program conducted by such entity.
The report shall include an assessment of how such program improved the employability skills of out-of-school youths.
Secretary.--Not later than August 1 of each fiscal year for which a grant is awarded under this section, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on the effectiveness of each grant-funded program.
Such report shall include an assessment of the effectiveness of such program to improve General Education Development attainment and job placement of out-of- school youths participating in such program.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Eligible youth.--The term ``eligible youth'' means an individual who has attained age 14 but not age 22.
Out-of-school youth.--The term ``out-of-school youth'' means-- (A) an eligible youth who is enrolled in a public or private secondary school; or (B) an eligible youth who has received a secondary school diploma or its equivalent but is basic-skills deficient, unemployed, or underemployed.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Labor.
Unit of general local government.--The term ``unit of general local government'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2801).
Authorization of Appropriations.--For grants under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary the following amounts: (1) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2012.
$30,000,000 for fiscal year 2013.
$40,000,000 for fiscal year 2014.
$50,000,000 for fiscal year 2015.
$60,000,000 for fiscal year 2016.
$60,000,000 for fiscal year 2017.