This Act may be cited as the ``Child Abuse Reporting Grant Option (CARGO) Act''.
Authorization of Grants.--From amounts made available for grants under this section, the Attorney General may make grants to eligible States for use by the State for the following purposes: (1) Hiring and training of law enforcement personnel for child abuse cases.
Programs to help children who have been subject to child abuse cope with such abuse.
Eligibility.--For a State to be eligible to receive a grant under this section, the State must have in effect one or more laws providing the following: (1) A requirement that a mandatory reporter must report to law enforcement authorities each instance in which the mandatory reporter suspects or has reason to suspect that child abuse has occurred, except when the information forming the basis of such suspicion or reason to suspect is protected by attorney-client or clergy-penitent privilege.
Appropriate punishments for violations of such requirement.
A statute of limitations for the prosecution of criminal offenses relating to child abuse of not less than five years from the later of the following dates: (A) The date of the offense.
The date on which the alleged victim became 18 years old.
Mandatory Reporter Defined.--In this section, the term ``mandatory reporter'' means any of the following: (1) A health care provider, including a physician, nurse, resident, intern, or dentist, or a hospital officer, employee, or volunteer.
A mental health professional or social worker.
An officer, employee, or volunteer of a public or private school.
A child care provider.
A law enforcement officer.
An officer, employee, or volunteer of a religious organization.
Commercial film and photographic print processors.
Application.--For a State to be eligible to receive a grant under this section, the chief executive officer of the State shall submit to the Attorney General an application in such form and containing such information as the Attorney General may require.
Restrictions on Use of Funds.-- (1) Nonsupplanting.--Funds made available pursuant to this section shall not be used to supplant State funds, but shall be used to increase the amount of funds that would, in the absence of Federal funds, be made available from State sources for the purposes of this Act.
Administrative costs.--A State may not use more than three percent of the funds it receives from this section for administrative expenses.
Allocation of Grant Amounts.--Grants under this section shall be allocated among eligible States that have submitted applications under this section as follows: (1) $50,000 to each such State.
Any remaining amounts to each such State in an amount that bears the same ratio to such remaining amounts as the population of individuals who have not yet attained the age of 18 in such State bears to the population of such individuals in all such States.
Reports to the Attorney General.--Each State which receives a grant under this section shall submit to the Attorney General, for each year in which funds from a grant received under this section is expended, a report at such time and in such manner as the Attorney General may reasonably require, which contains-- (1) a summary of the activities carried out under the grant and an assessment of whether such activities are meeting the needs identified in the application; and (2) such other information as the Attorney General may require.
Reports to Congress.--Not later than 90 days after the end of each fiscal year for which grants are made under this section, the Attorney General shall submit to the Congress a report that includes-- (1) the aggregate amount of grants made under this section to each State for such fiscal year; and (2) a summary of the information provided by States receiving grants under this section.
Expenditure Records.-- (1) In general.--Each State which receives a grant under this section shall keep records as the Attorney General may require to facilitate an effective audit of the receipt and use of grant funds received under this section.
Access.--Each State which receives a grant under this section shall make available, for the purpose of audit and examination, such records as are related to the receipt or use of any such grant.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the United States Virgin Islands.
Funding.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Attorney General for grants under subsection (a), $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.
No fiscal year limitation on grantees.--The Attorney General shall ensure that a recipient of grant amounts under this section is authorized to use such amounts without fiscal year limitation.