This Act may be cited as the ``Center for American Cultural Heritage Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The history of the United States is in large measure the history of how the United States was populated.
The evolution of the American population is broadly termed the ``peopling of America'' and is characterized by the movement of groups of people across external and internal boundaries of the United States as well as by the interactions of such groups with each other.
Each of these groups has made unique, important contributions to American history, culture, art, and life.
The spiritual, intellectual, cultural, political, and economic vitality of the United States is a result of the pluralism and diversity of the population.
The Smithsonian Institution operates 16 museums and galleries, a zoological park, and 5 major research facilities.
None of these public entities is a national institution dedicated to presenting the history of the peopling of the United States as described in paragraph (2).
The respective missions of the National Museum of American History of the Smithsonian Institution and the Ellis Island Immigration Museum of the National Park Service limit the ability of such museums to present fully and adequately the history of the diverse population and rich cultures of the United States.
The absence of a national facility dedicated solely to presenting the history of the peopling of the United States restricts the ability of the citizens of the United States to fully understand the rich and varied heritage of the United States derived from the unique histories of many peoples from many lands.
The establishment of a Center for American Cultural Heritage to conduct educational and interpretive programs on the history of the United States' multiethnic, multiracial character will help to inspire and better inform the citizens of the United States about the rich and diverse cultural heritage of the citizens of the United States.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CENTER FOR AMERICAN CULTURAL HERITAGE.
Establishment.--There is established within the National Museum of American History of the Smithsonian Institution a facility that shall be known as the ``Center for American Cultural Heritage''.
Purposes of the Center.--The purposes of the Center are to-- (1) promote knowledge of the life, art, culture, and history of the many groups of people who comprise the United States; (2) illustrate how such groups cooperated, competed, or otherwise interacted with each other; and (3) explain how the diverse, individual experiences of each group collectively helped forge a unified national experience.
Components of the Center.--The Center shall include-- (1) a location for permanent and temporary exhibits depicting the historical process by which the United States was populated; (2) a center for research and scholarship relating to the life, art, culture, and history of the groups of people of the United States; (3) a repository for the collection, study, and preservation of artifacts, artworks, and documents relating to the diverse population of the United States; (4) a venue for public education programs designed to explicate the multicultural past and present of the United States; (5) a location for the development of a standardized index of documents, artifacts, and artworks in collections that are held by the Smithsonian Institution and classified in a manner consistent with the purposes of the Center; (6) a clearinghouse for information on documents, artifacts, and artworks on the groups of people of the United States that may be available to researchers, scholars, or the general public through non-Smithsonian collections, such as documents, artifacts, and artworks of such groups held by other Federal agencies, museums, universities, individuals, and foreign institutions; (7) a folklife center committed to highlighting the cultural expressions of various peoples within the United States; (8) a center to promote mutual understanding and tolerance among the groups of people of the United States through exhibits, films, brochures, and other appropriate means; (9) an oral history library developed through interviews with volunteers, including visitors; (10) a location for a visitor center that shall provide individually tailored orientation guides for visitors to all Smithsonian Institution facilities; (11) a location for the training of museum professionals and others in the arts, humanities, and sciences with respect to museum practices relating to the life, art, history, and culture of the various groups of people of the United States; and (12) a location for developing, testing, demonstrating, evaluating, and implementing new museum-related technologies that assist to fulfill the purposes of the Center, enhance the operation of the Center, and improve accessibility of the Center.
Location.--The Center shall be located in new or existing Smithsonian Institution facilities on or near the National Mall located in the District of Columbia.
Construction.--The Board of Regents is authorized to plan, design, reconstruct, or construct appropriate facilities to house the Center.
In General.--The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution shall appoint and fix the compensation and duties of a Director, Assistant Director, Secretary, and Chief Curator of the Center and any other officers and employees necessary for the operation of the Center.
The Director of the Center shall report to the Director of the National Museum of American History.
The Director, Assistant Director, Secretary, and Chief Curator shall be qualified through experience and training to perform the duties of their offices.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution may-- (1) appoint the Director and 5 employees under subsection (a), without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service; and (2) fix the pay of the Director and such 5 employees, without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON AMERICAN CULTURAL HERITAGE.
Establishment of Advisory Committee.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established an advisory committee to be known as the ``Advisory Committee on American Cultural Heritage''.
Membership.-- (A) Composition.--The Committee shall be composed of 15 members who shall-- (i) be appointed by the Secretary; (ii) have expertise in immigration history, ethnic studies, museum science, or any other academic or professional field that involves matters relating to the cultural heritage of the citizens of the United States; and (iii) reflect the diversity of the citizens of the United States.
Initial appointments.--The initial appointments of the members of the Committee shall be made not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Period of appointment; vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Committee.
Any vacancy in the Committee shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Committee have been appointed, the Committee shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairperson, but shall meet not less than 2 times each fiscal year.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The Committee shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
Duties of the Committee.--The Committee shall advise the Secretary, the Director of the National Museum of American History, and the Director of the Center on policies and programs affecting the Center.
Committee Personnel Matters.-- (1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Committee who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Committee.
All members of the Committee who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Committee.
Staff.-- (A) In general.--The Chairperson of the Committee may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Committee to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Committee.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Committee may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Committee without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Chairperson of the Committee may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
As used in this Act: (1) Board of regents.--The term ``Board of Regents'' means the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution.
Center.--The term ``Center'' means the Center for American Cultural Heritage established under section 3(a).
Committee.--The term ``Committee'' means the advisory Committee on American Cultural Heritage established under section 8(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year.