This Act may be cited as the ``Nurturing Special Kids Act of 2002''.
Congress finds the following: (1) In 2000, there were 70,400,000 children under age 18 in the United States, and children made up 26 percent of the United States population.
The percentage of the population that consists of children is expected to be stable.
Children are expected to comprise 24 percent of the population by 2020.
There are 11,400,000 infants and toddlers and 12,000,000 preschool-age children in the United States.
Nationwide, at least 200,000 infants and toddlers, 600,000 preschool-age children, 2,700,000 children age 6 through 11, and 2,300,000 children age 12 through 17 are served under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
(A) Child health often varies by family income.
Children in families with incomes below the poverty line (referred to in this Act as ``low-income families'') are less likely than children in other families (referred to in this Act as ``higher-income families'') to be in very good or excellent health.
Children from low-income families are more likely to have disabilities or other special needs.
They are twice as likely to have a significant disability, nearly twice as likely have serious mental or physical disabilities, and 1.3 times as likely to have learning disabilities, as children from higher- income families.
(A) Children (including youth) in low-income families have significantly higher rates of activity limitation than children in higher-income families.
In 1998, 11 percent of children age 5 through 17 in low-income families had activity limitations due to chronic conditions.
By comparison, 7 percent of such children in higher-income families had such limitations.
Children under age 5 in low-income families had a higher rate of activity limitation than such children in higher-income families.
Child care can easily cost more than $4,000 a year per child, and high quality child care typically costs much more.
The cost of child care is a significant part of a working family's budget, and can force a family to compromise on the quality of care.
The expense of child care, relative to income, often keeps family members from being able to afford to work.
Forty-five percent of mothers with an infant who is a child with a disability or other special needs do not work outside the home because they cannot find child care.
Those mothers are less likely to reenter the labor force by the time their children reach age 1, and those mothers work fewer hours, than mothers with typically developing children.
The vast majority of working families who are struggling to afford the high cost of child care are not getting any help in covering that cost.
Only 1 out of 10 children who are eligible for child care assistance through the program carried out under the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 are receiving any help through that program.
A survey found that parents who were using paid child care and whose children had emotional or behavioral disabilities had great difficulty making child care arrangements.
Those parents were 20 times more likely than other parents to report that their caregivers had quit or otherwise stopped serving their children, because of those disabilities.
The General Accounting Office, the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences, and the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences have all documented the national shortage of child care options for children with disabilities or other special needs.
(A) In a national survey of families who have children with disabilities, \1/5\ of the respondents indicated that a family member had to quit working or work fewer hours because of a child's health.
In a Florida survey of a similar group of families, 40 percent of the respondents reported that a family member does not work, 33 percent reported that a family member turned down a job, and 20 percent reported that a family member works fewer hours, because of the need to care for a child's special needs.
The shortage of specialized child care is 1 major factor that makes it difficult for parents of children with disabilities to work.
In a survey by the General Accounting Office, 6 out of 7 States surveyed indicated a shortage of child care suitable for children with disabilities or other special needs.
Research shows that providing support to children with disabilities or other special needs in their early years reduces their need for special education and support later in life.
CHILD CARE QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS FOR CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES OR OTHER SPECIAL NEEDS.
The Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 is amended by inserting after section 658G (42 United States Code 9858e) the following: ``SEC.
ACTIVITIES TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF CHILD CARE FOR CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES OR OTHER SPECIAL NEEDS.
Definition.--In this section: ``(1) Child with a disability or other special needs.--The term `child with a disability or other special needs' means a child who is-- ``(A) eligible for early intervention services under part C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1431 et sequentes); ``(B) eligible for services under part B of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1411 et sequentes); or ``(C) a child with special health care needs, within the meaning of title V of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 701 et sequentes), who is an individual with a disability, as defined in section 7(20)(B) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 705(20)(B)).
Covered amount.--The term `covered amount', used with respect to a State and a fiscal year, means an amount equal to the total of-- ``(A) 5 percent of the allotment received by that State under section 658O for that fiscal year; and ``(B) 96 percent of the allotment received by that State under section 658O for fiscal year 2002.
Activities.--For any fiscal year in which a State receives an allotment under section 658O that exceeds the covered amount, the State shall reserve and use the excess-- ``(1)(A) to support child care programs that accept children with disabilities or other special needs; ``(B) to provide higher reimbursement rates to eligible child care providers who serve children with disabilities or other special needs through higher subsidies that reflect the real costs of caring for a child with a disability or other special needs; and ``(C) to support training for eligible child care providers in the care of children with disabilities or other special needs; ``(2) to fund consultations for eligible child care providers by competent, licensed professionals-- ``(A) to improve the eligible child care providers' ability to identify children with disabilities or other special needs, including mental and emotional disorders; and ``(B) to strengthen their ability to care for such children; and ``(3) to provide-- ``(A) a comprehensive system of ongoing training and technical assistance, consisting of-- ``(i) training for eligible child care providers, State licensing and regulatory agencies responsible for licensing and regulating child care providers, special education and related services personnel, and parents and other family members on how to collaborate with each other to help ensure appropriate implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12101 et sequentes), the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1400 et sequentes), and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794); ``(ii) technical assistance to assist eligible child care providers who are center- based child care providers, group home child care providers, or family child care providers, to enable the eligible child care providers to include appropriately children with disabilities or other special needs with other children in child care settings; ``(iii) training for child care facility directors and staff on the use of assistive technology for children with disabilities or other special needs; ``(iv) training to develop leadership skills for directors of child care facilities to operate inclusive child care programs, including training concerning leadership skills in financial development, program development, parent education, and community development; and ``(v) assistance to State and local child care resource and referral agencies on compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794); and ``(B) grants for recruitment and retention of qualified staff, consisting of-- ``(i) grants for scholarships, for eligible child care providers who work with children with disabilities or other special needs, and other children, to obtain-- ``(I) associate's, bachelor's, or master's degrees in child development or special education; or ``(II) training in child development; ``(ii) grants to increase salaries of eligible child care providers who obtain-- ``(I) associate's, bachelor's, or master's degrees in child development; or ``(II) training in child development or special education; and ``(iii) grants to promote retention of eligible child care providers in the child care field.''.
Section 658E(c)(2) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858c(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs: ``(I) Reimbursement for special needs care.-- Certify that the State is taking the cost of specialized care for children with disabilities or other special needs (as defined in section 658H) into account when determining reimbursement rates for child care for which assistance is provided under this subchapter.
Compliance with disability laws.--Certify that the State will ensure that all eligible child care providers within the State are informed about the requirements associated with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12101 et sequentes), the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1400 et sequentes), and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794), and describe how the State will assist eligible child care providers by providing the training, technical assistance, and resources necessary to assist the providers in complying with those Acts.
Coordination with other applicable activities.--Certify and describe the State's efforts to coordinate-- ``(i) training, services, and other assistance provided under section 658H with respect to children with disabilities or other special needs; and ``(ii) similar activities supported under section 619, part C, or part D of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1419, 1431 et sequentes, or 1451 et sequentes), or title V of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 701 et sequentes).''.
GRANTS AND LOANS FOR CERTAIN CHILD CARE PROGRAMS.
In General.--The Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858) is amended-- (1)(A) by redesignating section 658P as section 658T; and (B) by inserting section 658T (as so redesignated) after section 658S; and (2) by inserting after section 658O the following: ``SEC.
GRANTS AND LOANS FOR CERTAIN CHILD CARE PROGRAMS.
Definition.--In this section: ``(1) Child with a disability or other special needs.--The term `child with a disability or other special needs' has the meaning given the term in section 658H.
Inclusive child care program.--The term `inclusive child care program' means a child care program-- ``(A) that serves children with disabilities or other special needs, and other children, together in a setting; and ``(B) in which not more than 50 percent of the children enrolled are children with disabilities or other special needs.
Grants and Loans.--Subject to appropriations, the Secretary shall make grants and low-interest loans to public agencies and nonprofit organizations (including States, local governments, and community-based organizations) for projects that increase the availability of inclusive child care programs.
Such projects may support inclusive child care programs that target low-income populations.
Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant or loan under this section, an agency or organization shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Relationship to Other Law.--In this subchapter, other than this section, a provision that refers to this subchapter shall not be considered to refer to this section.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Sections 658B and 658G of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858, 9858e) are amended by striking ``this subchapter'' and inserting ``this subchapter (other than section 658P)''.
Section 658O(a)(1) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858m(a)(1)) is amended by striking ``this subchapter'' and inserting ``section 658B''.
APPROPRIATE OR UNSUITABLE CHILD CARE.
Section 407(e) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 607(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Appropriate or unsuitable child care.--In determining whether child care is appropriate or unsuitable for purposes of paragraph (2), a State shall not consider child care to be appropriate, and shall consider the child care to be unsuitable, for a child unless the State determines that the child care meets the physical, developmental, emotional, behavioral, and cultural needs of the child.