This Act may be cited as the ``Nurse of Tomorrow Act of 2001''.
AMENDMENTS TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
Nurse Retention and Recruitment.-- (1) In general.--Title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296 et sequentes) is amended by inserting at the end the following: ``PART H--NURSE RETENTION AND RECRUITMENT ``SEC.
NURSE RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION GRANTS.
In General.--The Secretary may award grants to hospitals, nursing facilities, home health agencies, and hospices that are experiencing shortages in nursing personnel to meet the costs of--3.
providing skills training and career development of nurses to encourage them to work in clinical specialty areas experiencing shortages; ``(2) providing grants to encourage nurses to upgrade their skills to enable them to work in clinical specialty areas experiencing shortages; ``(3) providing tuition reimbursement for nurses who pursue study towards a bachelors degree, masters degree, or PHD in nursing or for other health care workers who pursue associate degrees in nursing; ``(4) providing grants to support externships and internships for student nurses; ``(5) providing grants to train nurses who have not been practicing nursing for a period of at least five years and who make a commitment to work for a multiyear period; and ``(6) creating other nurse retention and recruitment strategies the Secretary deems appropriate.
Preference.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give preference to applicants in financial need as demonstrated by low or negative operating margins.''.
Authorization of appropriations.--Section 841 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 297q) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Part H.--For the purposes of carrying out part H, there are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.''.
Strengthening Capacity for Basic Nurse Education and Practice.-- (1) In general.--Part D of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296p et sequentes) is amended by inserting at the end the following sections: ``SEC.
BASIC NURSE EDUCATION EXPANSION GRANTS.
In General.--The Secretary may award grants to and enter into contracts with schools of nursing, including single-purpose degree or certificate granting institutions for nursing affiliated with hospitals for the purpose of expanding the number of students provided basic nurse education at such schools.
Preference.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give preference to applicants that-- ``(1) have demonstrated the ability to recruit and create a diverse student body; ``(2) provide remedial education to help students with diverse needs and backgrounds to master the language, reading, math, and computer skills necessary to attain a license; ``(3) provide the Secretary with a plan to recruit nurse aides, licensed practical nurses, and other health care workers; ``(4) provide the Secretary with a plan to build technologically modern classrooms and laboratories to enable students to learn the latest technologies, including medical error reduction technologies; and ``(5) provide the Secretary with a detailed plan to substantially expand the number of students enrolled in the school over a four-year period.
NURSE EDUCATION ENCOURAGEMENT GRANTS.
``The Secretary may award grants to State departments of health, State departments of education, collegiate schools of nursing, associate degree schools of nursing, diploma schools of nursing, hospital, home health, hospice, or nursing facility or other professional associations, hospitals, or nursing facilities to enable such entities to work with local school districts to develop programs to encourage secondary school students to choose nursing as a profession.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 841 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 297q), as amended by subsection (a)(2) of this section, is amended-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``parts B, C, and D'' and inserting the following: ``parts B and C and section 831 of part D''; and (B) by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(g) Certain Programs Under Part D.--For the purpose of carrying out sections 832 and 833 of part D, there are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.''.
Loan Repayment Program.--Section 846(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 297n(g)) is amended by striking ``there are authorized'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``there is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.
AMENDMENT TO INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.
Refundable Credit for Certain Nurses.-- (1) In general.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--In the case of an individual who is an eligible nurse at any time during the taxable year, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle the amount determined under subsection (b).
Amount of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of credit determined under this subsection for a taxable year is $2,000.
Partial years.--In the case of an individual who is an eligible nurse for less than an entire taxable year, the amount of credit determined under this subsection is the amount which bears the same ratio to $2,000 as the number of days during the taxable year that the individual is such a nurse bears to 365.
Eligible Nurse.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible nurse' means any individual who is employed as a nurse at-- ``(1) a hospital; ``(2) a skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 1819(a) of the Social Security Act); ``(3) a nursing facility (as defined in section 1919(a) of the Social Security Act); ``(4) a home health agency (as defined in section 1861 of the Social Security Act); or ``(5) a hospice program (as defined in section 1861 of the Social Security Act).''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``, or from section 35 of such Code''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
Exclusion From Gross Income of Amounts Received Under Nurse Loan Repayment Program.-- (1) In general.--Section 117 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Certain nurse loan payments under public health service act.--Gross income shall not include any amount received under section 846 of the Public Health Service Act.''
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to amounts received by an individual in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.