This Act may be cited as the ``Small Governments Regulatory Improvement and Innovation Act of 1993''.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) better determine the cost and other impacts of regulation on small governments; (2) encourage the use of more flexible regulatory approaches that lessen compliance burdens on small governments; and (3) test innovative methods of regulation.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``small government'' means a small governmental jurisdiction as defined under section 601(5) of title 5, United States Code; (2) the term ``agency'' means any agency as defined under section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code; (3) the term ``Director'' means the Director of the Office of Management and Budget; (4) the term ``Council'' means the Council on Small Governments established under section 8; (5) the term ``small entity'' means a small entity as defined under section 601(6) of title 5, United States Code; and (6) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Small Business Administration.
Guidelines.--The head of each agency shall, after opportunity for public comment, issue guidelines consistent with section 6(b) of this Act to ensure implementation of chapter 6 of title 5, United States Code, by the agency.
Plans.--The head of each agency shall develop a plan to inform, educate, and advise small entities on compliance with any rule that has a significant impact on small entities.
Such plan shall be published in the Federal Register in the notice of proposed rulemaking and the final rulemaking notice for any such rule, and shall include a listing of-- (1) local and regional workshops for the purpose of providing and receiving information about the impact of the rule; (2) written guidance and other applicable publications and their availability; and (3) relevant Federal, State, and local technical assistance programs.
Reports.--The head of each agency shall report annually to the Administrator and to the Director on the agency's implementation of this Act and compliance with the provisions of chapter 6 of title 5, United States Code.
Establishment.--There is established in each agency the position of Small Government Coordinator who shall report directly to the head of the agency.
The Small Government Coordinator shall-- (1) communicate the small government perspective on agency rules and policies during the development of such rules and policies; (2) oversee and report to the agency head on agency efforts to comply with chapter 6 of title 5, United States Code, as such chapter applies to small governmental jurisdictions, including-- (A) participation in the development of agency guidelines for the full implementation of chapter 6 of title 5, United States Code, as such chapter applies to small governmental jurisdictions; and (B) the development of alternative regulatory proposals that accomplish the stated objectives of applicable statutes and which minimize the impact of regulations on small governments by working with-- (i) agency regulatory policy personnel; (ii) national organizations representing small governments; (iii) local elected officials; (iv) public policy experts; (v) the Administrator; (vi) the Director; and (vii) the Council; (3) advising the agency head on establishing electronic or other means of information collection to gather data on small governments; (4) advising the agency head and the Director on the development and implementation of the pilot program established under section 6; and (5) providing technical assistance to small governments on compliance with agency regulations.
Personnel.--To the greatest extent practicable, the head of each agency shall designate existing personnel to perform the duties described under this section.
Waiver.--(1) The head of an agency may waive the requirements of this section if such agency head-- (A) in consultation with the Council and in concurrence with the Director, certifies that the agency does not issue a significant number of rules affecting small governments; and (B) publishes such certification in the Federal Register.
Such waiver shall be reviewed annually and such certification shall be made annually, if appropriate.
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs.--The Director shall delegate responsibility for the implementation of all duties of the Director under this Act to the Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs.
Guidelines.--The Director, in consultation with the Administrator of Small Business, shall issue guidelines to agencies on the identification of rules having a significant impact on small entities.
In issuing the guidelines, the Director shall consider-- (1) the number of small entities that may be impacted by a rule; (2) the economic cost or benefit to small entities from compliance with a rule; (3) the effect a rule may have on regional economies; and (4) the reporting and paperwork requirements imposed on small entities by a rule.
Compliance.--The Director, to the extent permitted by law and in consultation with the Administrator, shall be responsible for monitoring and coordinating agency compliance with the requirements of this Act.
REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY PILOT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Director, in consultation with agencies and the Council, shall establish pilot programs in at least 2 agencies to test innovative, and more flexible regulatory approaches that-- (1) reduce reporting and compliance burdens on small entities; and (2) meet overall statutory goals and objectives.
Program Contents.--The pilot programs shall focus on rules in effect or proposed rules, or a combination thereof, that have a significant impact on small entities, with equal emphasis given to rules that impact small governments, small business, and small organizations.
THE SMALL GOVERNMENTS ADVISORY COUNCIL.
Establishment.--(1) There is established a Small Governments Advisory Council composed of 9 representatives from small governments appointed by the President, of whom no more than 5 shall be from any one political party.
No later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall make the original appointments to the Council.
Membership.--No less than 6 members of the Council shall be acting small governmental officials.
Members of the Council shall-- (1) have an extensive understanding of and experience with the operations of small governments; and (2) represent a balance with respect to the regions, the sizes of small governments, and the occupations represented on the Council.
Duties.--The duties of the Small Governments Advisory Council shall be to-- (1) serve as a focal point for the receipt of comments concerning the regulatory policies and activities of agencies that affect small governments; (2) advise the Small Government Coordinators as to the performance of their duties under section 5; (3)(A) develop proposals for changes in the regulatory policies and activities of any agency which shall carry out the purposes of this Act; and (B) communicate such proposals to the Director and appropriate agencies; (4)(A) monitor the costs and other burdens of Federal regulation on small governments, including the cumulative effect of such regulation; and (B) make legislative and nonlegislative proposals for eliminating excessive or unnecessary regulatory burdens placed on small governments; (5) advise the Director on the implementation of section 6 as such section relates to small governments; and (6) report annually to the Administrator and the Director on the actions of the Council under this Act, including-- (A) a summary of all proposals offered under subsection (c)(3); (B) a detailed assessment, prepared in consultation with the Small Government Coordinators established under section 5, of the costs and other burdens of government regulation on small governments, including the cumulative effects of such regulation; and (C) an assessment of the effectiveness of the pilot programs established under section 7.
Chairman.--The Council shall elect a chairman and meet at the call of the chairman but no less often than every 6 months.
Meetings.--The Director shall meet with the Council on a regular basis, but no less often than every 6 months.
Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Council shall be subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
ASSISTANCE OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES.
Consistent with applicable law, each department, agency, and instrumentality of the Federal Government shall furnish to the Council such reports and other information as the Council determines necessary to carry out its duties under this Act.
Chapter 6 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in section 601(5) by inserting ``Indian tribes,'' after ``school districts,''; (2) in section 602(b) by inserting ``the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and'' after ``transmitted to''; and (3) in section 605(b)-- (A) in the first sentence by striking out ``sections 603 and 604 of this title'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``sections 603(c) and 604 of this title''; and (B) in the second sentence-- (i) by striking out ``or at the time of publication of the final rule''; and (ii) by inserting ``the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and'' after ``such certification and statement to''.