Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the New Bedford National Historic Landmark District and associated historic sites, including the Schooner Ernestina, are National Historic Landmarks and are listed on the National Register of Historic Places as historic sites associated with the history of whaling in the United States; (2) the city of New Bedford was the 19th century capital of the world's whaling industry and retains significant architectural features, archival materials, and museum collections illustrative of this period; (3) New Bedford's historic resources provide opportunities for illustrating and interpreting the whaling industry's contribution to the economic, social, and environmental history of the United States and provide opportunities for public use and enjoyment; and (4) the National Park System presently contains no sites commemorating whaling and its contribution to American history.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to preserve, protect, and interpret the resources that comprise the New Bedford Whaling National Historical Park, including its architecture, setting, and associated archival and museum collections; (2) to collaborate with the city of New Bedford and with local historical, cultural, and preservation organizations to further the purposes of the park; and (3) to provide opportunities for the inspirational benefit and education of the American people.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``park'' means the New Bedford Whaling National Historical Park established by section 3.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
NEW BEDFORD WHALING NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Establishment.--In order to preserve for the benefit and inspiration of the people of the United States as a national historical park certain districts, structures, and relics located in New Bedford, Massachusetts, and associated with the history of whaling and related social and economic themes in America, there is established the New Bedford Whaling National Historical Park.
Boundaries.--(1) The boundaries of the park shall be those generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed Park Boundaries (Map 4)'', in the document published by the National Park Service entitled ``Special Resource Study, New Bedford, Massachusetts'', dated November 1993.
Such map will be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
The boundaries shall include the following: (A) The area included within the New Bedford National Historic Landmark District, known as the Bedford Landing Waterfront Historic District, as listed within the National Register of Historic Places and in the Massachusetts State Register of Historic Places.
The National Historic Landmark Schooner Ernestina, with its home port in New Bedford.
The land along the eastern boundary of the New Bedford National Historic Landmark District over to the east side of MacArthur Drive from the Route 6 overpass on the north to an extension of School Street on the south.
The land north of Elm Street in New Bedford, bounded by Acushnet Avenue on the west, Route 6 (ramps) on the north, MacArthur Drive on the east, and Elm Street on the south.
In addition to these sites, areas and relics, the Secretary may assist in the interpretation and preservation of the following: (A) The southwest corner of the State Pier.
Waterfront Park, immediately south of land adjacent to the State Pier.
The Rotch-Jones-Duff House and Garden Museum, located at 396 County Street.
The Wharfinger Building, located on Piers 3 and 4.
The Bourne Counting House, located on Merrill's Wharf.
In General.--The park shall also be administered by the Secretary in accordance with this Act and in accordance with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the national park system, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1, 2, 3, and 4) and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461-467).
Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary may consult and enter into cooperative agreements with the New Bedford National Park Citizens' Partnership and other interested entities and individuals to provide for appropriate activities related to the preservation, development, interpretation, and use of the park.
Acquisition of Real and Personal Property and Services.--The Secretary may acquire by donation, exchange, lease or purchase with donated or appropriated funds personal property and lands and improvements in New Bedford, Massachusetts, for the purposes of the park.
Other Property, Funds, and Services.--The Secretary may accept and use donated funds, property, and services to carry out this Act.
Not later than the end of the second fiscal year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives a general management plan for the park, and shall implement such plan.
The plan shall be prepared in accordance with section 12(b) of the Act of August 18, 1970 (16 United States Code 1a-7(b)), and other applicable law.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.