This Act may be cited as the ``Grant's Tomb National Monument Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) Ulysses S. Grant has been heralded as a national hero by his contemporaries and by generations thereafter; (2) Ulysses S. Grant led the Union army to victory, bringing to an end the Civil War in 1865, assuring the preservation of the United States of America, and resulting in the emancipation of American slaves; (3) Ulysses S. Grant served as the 18th President of the United States from 1869 through 1877; (4) Ulysses S. Grant demonstrated his commitment to maintaining the rights of freed slaves by executing his authority as Commander in Chief to command Federal troops to protect the rights and freedoms of former slaves; and (5) Ulysses S. Grant demonstrated his commitment to rebuilding the Nation and restoring unity among the American people.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to recognize and pay tribute to Ulysses S. Grant, both as a general and as the President of the United States; (2) to restore, complete, and preserve in perpetuity the Grant's Tomb National Monument and surrounding areas which are of National historical significance in a manner consistent with the existing architectural, historical, and educational value of the monument's original design and purpose; and (3) to educate present and future generations about the life of Ulysses S. Grant and his contributions to the United States.
REDESIGNATION OF MEMORIAL AND ADMINISTRATION OF GRANT'S TOMB NATIONAL MONUMENT.
Redesignation.--General Grant National Memorial, located at Riverside Drive and West One Hundred and Twenty-Second Street in New York, New York, is hereby redesignated as Grant's Tomb National Monument (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``monument'').
Area Included.--The monument shall consist of the tomb of Ulysses S. Grant and the surrounding plaza area, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Grant's Tomb National Monument'' and dated April 27, 1994.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
Administration.--The Secretary of the Interior (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall administer, repair, restore, preserve, maintain, and promote the monument in accordance with this Act and with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1, 2, 3, and 4).
Visitors Center.--(1) The Secretary shall design and construct a visitors center (including public restrooms) at the monument to aid in the interpretation and maintain the historical significance of the monument.
The visitors center shall-- (A) be established in consultation with the study commission established under section 5; and (B) be designed in a manner which is consistent with the existing architectural and historical intent of the site and which does not detract from the historical interpretation and the scenic views of the monument and the existing park area.
LAND ACQUISITION; LEASE OR COOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT.
Acquisition.--The Secretary shall acquire from the city of New York non-Federal lands located within the boundaries of the monument as depicted on the map referred to in section 3(b) by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange.
Lease or Cooperative Management Agreement.--The Secretary may lease non-Federal lands located within the boundary of the monument or enter into a cooperative agreement for the management of such lands to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Establishment.--(1) The Secretary shall establish a study commission of seven persons within 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act which shall be composed of the president and at least three members of the executive committee of the Grant Monument Association, representatives of the community surrounding the monument, and citizens with a unique knowledge or expertise relating to the monument.
No officer or employee of the Federal, State, or local government is eligible for membership on the study commission.
Members of the study commission shall serve without pay.
The members of the study commission shall designate a chair of the study commission.
Upon request of the study commission, the Secretary shall furnish on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services (including staff, supplies, and facilities) as necessary for the study commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Duties.--The study commission shall review security and maintenance at the monument, as well as plan for interpretive programs and for the complete restoration of the monument, and within 180 days after the date of their first meeting, submit a written report regarding their study to the Secretary.
The report shall include proposed measures to improve security, maintenance, and interpretive programs, including such improvements as may be required to be carried out by April 27, 1999, which shall be based on the original plans of the architect of the tomb, John H. Duncan, and the plans of architect John Russell Pope, approved in 1928 by the Grant Monument Association.
The report shall also include an estimate of the capital costs and general operating costs of implementing these proposed measures.
Following the submission of the report to the Secretary, the study commission shall monitor the progress of the repairs being made to the Tomb, and shall, until the study commission's termination as provided herein, submit reports to the Secretary and the Congress on the progress of such repairs as the commission deems necessary.
Final Plan.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the report is submitted to the Secretary under subsection (b), the Secretary shall review and evaluate the report and submit to the Congress a final plan for the projects at the monument to be fully completed by April 27, 1999.
Unless the Secretary reports to the Congress that specific aspects of the study commission's report are unreasonable; inconsistent with the existing architectural, historical, and educational intent of the site; detract from, distort, or otherwise compromise the historical interpretation or scenic views of the monument; or conflict with the purpose of this Act as described in section 2(b), such final plan shall be entirely consistent with the study commission's report.
The final plan shall contain designs for the site which are consistent with the existing architectural and historical intent of the site and do not detract from or distort the historical interpretation or scenic views of the monument and the existing park area.
Meetings.--All meetings of the study commission shall be open to the public.
Interested persons may attend such meetings, appear before the study commissions, or file statements related to the purposes of this Act with the study commission.
Termination; FACA.--(1) The study commission shall terminate no later than three years after the date that it is established.
The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code Appendix; 86 United States Statutes at Large 776), shall not apply to the study commission.
The Secretary of the Interior in coordination with the Secretary of Defense, acting through the Secretary of the Army, shall provide no less than three military guards who shall protect the monument and the site on a twenty-four hour basis every day in perpetuity, beginning no later than the start of implementation of the final plan referred to in section 5(c).
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.