This Act may be cited as the ``Student Veteran Academic Counseling Enhancement Act'' or the ``Student Veteran ACE Act''.
EDUCATIONAL COUNSELING FOR VETERANS.
In General.--Chapter 36 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Educational counseling ``(a) Provision of Counseling.--(1) The Secretary shall make available educational counseling under this section to covered students in accordance with paragraph (4).
An institution offering a program of education may only be approved for purposes of this chapter if such institution transmits to the Secretary information necessary for the Secretary to provide educational counseling under this section, including information relating to matriculation requirements, degree information, and enrollment requirements and deadlines.
In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall-- ``(A) assign one educational counselor per each 100 covered students in a geographical area as determined by the Secretary; and ``(B) provide covered students who are located in remote areas that are not within a geographical area determined under subparagraph (A) with adequate opportunities to receive counseling under this section.
(A) A covered student who is a veteran shall automatically receive educational counseling under this section unless the student declines to receive such counseling pursuant to subparagraph (C).
A covered student who is not a veteran may elect to receive educational counseling under this section.
The Secretary shall ensure that a covered student may decline or elect to receive educational counseling under this section pursuant to subparagraph (A) or (B), as the case may be, through a streamlined process on the Internet Web site of the Department.
Scope of Counseling.--In providing educational counseling under this section to covered students enrolled in an institution, an educational counselor shall-- ``(1) answer inquiries by such students regarding educational assistance provided by the Department; ``(2) coordinate with the institution to resolve inquiries described by paragraph (1), including inquiries regarding the payment of such assistance; ``(3) assist such students with applications for such assistance; ``(4) act as a liaison between the Department and the institution; ``(5) provide academic counseling and transition assistance, including-- ``(A) discussing course work, academic goals, degree progress, workload, and other relevant topics; and ``(B) providing guidance on-- ``(i) selecting courses; ``(ii) seeking-- ``(I) additional financial resources; ``(II) student support services; ``(III) tutoring; and ``(IV) job placement counseling; and ``(iii) understanding benefits provided by the Department and the requirements for receiving educational assistance provided by the Department; and ``(6) carry out relevant outreach activities.
Location of Counselors.--(1) An educational counselor may be located-- ``(A) on the campus or facility of an institution that elects to allow such counselor to be located at the institution; or ``(B) at a facility of the Department, including a Vet Center established under section 1712A of this title or a mobile Vet Center.
The Secretary shall ensure that an educational counselor is able to provide counseling to covered students through the use of interactive technology, including video conferencing using common Internet applications.
Preference.--In hiring educational counselors under this section, the Secretary shall apply the principles of preference for the hiring of veterans established in subchapter I of chapter 33 of title 5.
Periodic Counseling Sessions.--(1) Except as provided by paragraph (3), each covered student assigned an educational counselor under this section shall attend at least one counseling session per quarter, semester, or term, as the case may be, with such counselor.
Except as provided by paragraph (3), an educational counselor shall notify the Secretary and the relevant institution of any covered student who does not attend a counseling session under paragraph (1).
(A) The Secretary may waive the periodic counseling sessions under paragraph (1) for a covered student if the Secretary determines that such sessions would place an undue hardship on the student.
Paragraph (1) and (2) shall not apply to a covered student who declines to receive educational counseling under this section pursuant to subsection (a)(4)(A).
Annual Report.--The Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives an annual report on the educational counseling provided under this section, including the following information listed by each institution: ``(1) The number of covered students who received such counseling during the year covered by the report.
The number of covered students who declined such counseling under subsection (a)(4) during such year.
The number of covered students issued a waiver under subsection (e)(3) during such year.
For each quarter, semester, or term of the institution covered by the report, the number of failing grades earned by covered students receiving such counseling.
The graduation rate of covered students who received such counseling as compared to the overall graduation rate of students during such year.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `covered student' means an individual pursuing an approved program of education using educational assistance under chapter 30, 32, 33, or 35 of this title or chapter 1606 or 1607 of title 10.
The term `educational counselor' means an employee of the Department who provides educational counseling under this section.
The term `institution' means an institution that offers an approved program of education.
The term `approved program of education' means a program of education that may be pursued using educational assistance under chapter 30, 32, 33, or 35 of this title or chapter 1606 or 1607 of title 10.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding after the item relating to section 3697A the following new item: ``3698.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date that is 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Use of Current Programs.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may-- (1) use a current program of the Department of Veterans Affairs as of the date of the enactment of this Act, including the VetSuccess on Campus program, to carry out section 3698 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), if the Secretary determines such program meets the requirements of such section; or (2) expand such a current program to carry out such section 3698.
Cooperation and Consultation.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall consult and cooperate with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Education, and any other appropriate head of a Federal department or agency in carrying out the amendments made by this Act.
TRAINING AND COUNSELING SO VETERANS AND MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES CAN MAKE INFORMED DECISIONS ABOUT EDUCATION.
In General.--Chapter 36 of title 38, United States Code, is further amended by adding after section 3698, as added by section 2(a), the following new section: ``Sec.
Required one-on-one educational counseling ``(a) Provision of Counseling Required.--(1) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall provide individualized, one-on-one educational counseling to an individual considering pursuing a program of education with assistance furnished under this chapter or any of chapters 30 through 35 of this title unless the individual declines to receive such counseling.
The Secretary shall ensure that an individual may decline to receive such counseling through a streamlined process on the Internet Web site of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The Secretary of Defense shall provide individualized, one- on-one educational counseling to an individual considering pursuing a program of education with assistance furnished under chapter 106A or 1606 of title 10 unless the individual declines to receive such counseling.
The Secretary shall ensure that an individual may decline to receive such counseling through a streamlined process on the Internet Web site of the Department of Defense.
Time and Manner of Counseling.--(1) Counseling provided under subsection (a) to an individual described in such subsection considering a program of education shall be provided at or before the individual enrolls in such program as follows: ``(A) To such individuals who have received fewer than \1/ 3\ of the credits necessary to complete the program of education, a complete version of such counseling.
To such individuals who have received \1/3\ or more of the credits necessary to complete the program of education, a condensed version of such counseling as the Secretary of Veterans Affairs or the Secretary of Defense, as the case may be, considers appropriate.
To the extent practicable, counseling provided under subsection (a) to an individual described in paragraph (1)(A) of this subsection shall be provided in person.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall each establish, by regulation, procedures by which individuals may receive counseling provided under subsection (a) when receipt of such counseling in person is not practicable.
Elements.--A complete version of counseling provided under subsection (b)(1) for an individual shall include the following: ``(1) An overview of educational assistance available to the individual under this chapter and chapters 30 through 35 of this title or under chapters 106A and 1606 of title 10, as the case may be.
Development of a personalized academic and career plan.
An overview of the information disclosed and made readily available under section 3672(f)(1) of this title relevant to the academic and career plan developed under paragraph (2).
A discussion of how enrollment in the program of education at the educational institution will affect the individual's academic and career plan and the financial implications for such individual of such enrollment.
An introduction to the College Navigator Internet Web site of the Department of Education.
Qualified Counselors.--Counseling provided under subsection (a) may only be provided by properly trained counselors, as determined by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense.
Use of Information Disclosed by Educational Institutions.--In providing educational assistance under this section, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall, to the degree practicable, use the information disclosed and made readily available under section 3672(f)(1) of this title.
Links to College Navigator Internet Web Site of Department of Education.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall provide links on the Internet Web sites of the Department of Veterans Affairs of the Department of Defense, respectively, to the College Navigator Internet Web site of the Department of Education in such a manner as the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense consider appropriate to inform veterans and members of the Armed Forces of the availability of and the benefits of using the College Navigator Internet Web site.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 36 of such title, as amended by section 2(b), is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``3699.
Required one-on-one educational counseling.''.
Clarification.-- (1) Heading of section 3697a of title 38.--Section 3697A of such title is amended, in the heading, by adding ``by election'' at the end.
Table of sections.--The table of sections for chapter 36 of such title is amended by amending the item relating to section 3697A to read as follows: ``3697A.
Educational and vocational counseling by election.''.
Effective Date.--Section 3697B of such title, as added by paragraph (1), shall take effect on August 1, 2013, and shall apply with respect to individuals considering pursuing programs of education as described in subsection (a) of such section after such date.
REPEAL OF LIMITATION ON PAYMENTS FOR CONTRACT EDUCATIONAL AND VOCATIONAL COUNSELING PROVIDED BY SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.
Section 3697 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (b); (2) in subsection (a), by striking ``(a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, educational'' and inserting ``Educational''; and (3) by striking ``section 3697A'' and inserting ``sections 3697A, 3698, or 3699''.
VETERANS' EDUCATION CONSUMER COMPLAINT TRACKING SYSTEM.
In General.--Chapter 36 of title 38, United States Code, is further amended by inserting after section 3693 the following new section: ``Sec.
Complaint tracking system ``(a) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish a system to collect, process, and track complaints submitted to the Secretary by individuals who are enrolled in programs of education at educational institutions to report instances of fraud, waste, and abuse by such institutions with respect to the benefits and services provided by such institutions to such individuals.
Requirements.--This system established under subsection (a) shall meet the following requirements: ``(1) The system shall create an individual case number for each complaint processed and tracked in the system.
The system shall allow for the reporting of complaints, disaggregated by educational institution.
The system shall allow for the reporting of complaints, disaggregated by topic or subject matter.
The system shall allow for the submittal of complaints by-- ``(A) Internet Web site; and ``(B) telephone via a toll-free number that is available every day at all hours.
The system shall allow for the sharing of complaints with the following: ``(A) The educational institutions that are the subjects of the complaints.
The Secretary of Education.
The Secretary of Defense.
Nationally or regionally recognized accrediting agencies and associations.
Such other Federal agencies as the Secretary of Veterans Affairs considers appropriate.
Outreach.--The Secretary shall conduct such outreach as may be necessary to inform individuals described in subsection (a) of the system and process established under such subsection.
Consideration by State Approving Agencies.--Whenever a State approving agency considers whether to approve a course of education of an educational institution under this chapter, the State approving agency shall review and take into consideration the complaints processed and tracked by the system established under subsection (a) regarding the educational institution.
Privacy.--(1) Whenever a complaint is shared under subsection (b)(5), the complaint shall be anonymized, unless the complainant gives permission to the Secretary to share the complainant's identity.
The Secretary may not share a complaint under subsection (b)(5) with an educational institution if the complainant requests that such complaint not be shared with an educational institution.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 36 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3693 the following new item: ``3693A.