This Act may be cited as the ``FEHBP-Medical Savings Account Promotion Act of 1995''.
PERMITTING CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS MEDICAL SAVINGS ACCOUNT THROUGH FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM (FEHBP).
Government Contribution to Medical Savings Account.-- (1) In general.--Section 8906 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j)(1) In the case of an employee or annuitant who is enrolled in a catastrophic plan described by section 8903(5), there shall be a Government contribution under this subsection to a medical savings account established or maintained for the benefit of the individual.
The contribution under this subsection shall be in addition to the Government contribution under subsection (b).
The amount of the Government contribution under this subsection with respect to an individual is equal to the amount by which-- ``(A) the maximum contribution allowed under subsection (b)(1) with respect to any employee or annuitant, exceeds ``(B) the amount of the Government contribution actually made with respect to the individual under subsection (b) for coverage under the catastrophic plan.
The Government contributions under this subsection shall be paid into a medical savings account (designated by the individual involved) in a manner that is specified by the Office and consistent with the timing of contributions under subsection (b).
Subsections (f) and (g) shall apply to contributions under this section in the same manner as they apply to contributions under subsection (b).
For the purpose of this subsection, the term `medical savings account' has the meaning given such term by section 220(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as inserted by section 2(a) of the Family Medical Savings and Investment Act of 1995 (H.R.
Allowing payment of full amount of charge for catastrophic plan.--Section 8906(b)(2) of such title is amended by inserting ``(or 100 percent of the subscription charge in the case of a catastrophic plan)'' after ``75 percent of the subscription charge''.
Offering of Catastrophic Plans.-- (1) In general.--Section 8903 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Catastrophic plans.--One or more plans described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3), but which provide benefits of the types referred to by paragraph (5) of section 8904(a), instead of the types referred to in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of such section.''.
Types of benefits.--Section 8904(a) of such title is amended by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph: ``(5) Catastrophic plans.--Benefits of the types named under paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection or both, to the extent expenses covered by the plan exceed $3,000.''.
Disregarding catastrophic plans in determining level of government contributions.--Section 8906(a)(3) of such title is amended by inserting ``described by section 8903(3)'' after ``plans''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contract terms beginning on or after January 1, 1997.
Medical Savings Account.--For purposes of this section: (1) Medical savings account.--The term ``medical savings account'' means a trust created or organized in the United States exclusively for the purpose of paying the qualified medical expenses of the account holder, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: (A) Except in the case of a rollover contribution described in subsection (f)(3), no contribution will be accepted unless it is in cash.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)), an insurance (as defined in section 816), or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which such person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
The interest of an individual in the balance in his account is nonforfeitable.
Qualified medical expenses.-- (A) In general.--The term ``qualified medical expenses'' means, with respect to an account holder, amounts paid by such holder-- (i) for medical care (as defined in section 213(d)) for such individual, the spouse of such individual, and any dependent (as defined in section 152) of such individual, but only to the extent such amounts are not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, or (ii) for long-term care insurance for such individual, spouse, or dependent.
Health plan coverage may not be purchased from account.-- (i) In general.--Such term shall not include any amount paid for coverage under a health plan unless such plan is a catastrophic health plan.
Exception.--Clause (i) shall not apply to any amount paid for long-term care insurance.
Account holder.--The term ``account holder'' means the individual on whose behalf the medical savings account was established.
Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the following rules shall apply for purposes of this section: (A) Section 219(d)(2) (relating to no deduction for rollovers).
Section 219(f)(3) (relating to time when contributions deemed made).
Except as provided in section 106(b), section 219(f)(5) (relating to employer payments).
Section 408(h) (relating to custodial accounts).