This Act may be cited as the ``Enhancement of Veterans Mental Health Services Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) A study published in the New England Journal of Medicine reported that about one in six soldiers of the Iraq war displays symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder.
Clinical experts are anticipating an increase in the number of post-traumatic stress disorder cases in light of the increasing duration of military deployment.
86 of 163 Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Centers have post-traumatic stress disorder treatment programs.
Section 1706 of title 38, United States Code, requires that the Secretary of Veterans Affairs ensure, in accordance with that section, that the Department of Veterans Affairs maintains its capacity to provide for the specialized treatment and rehabilitative needs of disabled veterans within distinct programs or facilities of the Deparment.
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER TREATMENT FOR VETERANS OF SERVICE IN AFGHANISTAN AND IRAQ AND THE WAR ON TERROR.
Enhanced Capacity for Department of Veterans Affairs.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for ``Medical Care'' the amount of $100,000,000 for the employment of additional psychiatrists and other mental health services specialists at Department of Veterans Affairs medical centers and outpatient facilities specializing in the diagnosis and treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder.
Allocation of funds.--Funds made available pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in paragraph (1) shall, to the extent funds are available for such purpose, be used to employ at least one psychiatrist and a complementary clinical team at each medical center of the Department of Veterans Affairs in order to conduct a specialized program for the diagnosis and treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder and to employ additional mental health services specialists at the medical center.
Outreach at the Community Level.-- (1) Program.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, within the authorities of the Secretary under title 38, United States Code, carry out a program to provide outreach at the community level to veterans who participated in Operation Iraqi Freedom or Operation Enduring Freedom who are or may be suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder.
Program sites.--The program shall be carried out on a nation-wide basis through facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Program content.--The program shall provide for individualized case management to be conducted on a one-on-one basis, counseling, education, and group therapy to help participants cope with post-traumatic stress disorder.
The program-- (A) shall emphasize early identification of veterans who may be experiencing symptoms of post- traumatic stress disorder; and (B) shall include group-oriented, peer-to-peer settings for treatment.
Program model.--The Secretary shall establish and carry out the program under this subsection using as a model the program for the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder conducted at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Memphis, Tennessee.
ARMED FORCES REVIEW OF MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMS.
Review of Mental Health Programs.--The Secretary of each military department shall conduct a comprehensive review of the mental health care programs of the Armed Forces under the jurisdiction of that Secretary in order to determine ways to improve the efficacy of such care, including a review of joint Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs clinical guidelines to ensure a seamless delivery of care during transitions from active duty or reserve status to civilian life.
Report to Congress.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report setting forth the results of such review not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TRANSITION TO VETERANS HEALTH CARE.
The Secretary of each military department shall take special care in providing for as seamless a transition as possible from Department of Defense health care services to Department of Veterans Affairs health care services in the case of members of the Armed Forces who are being discharged or separated from active duty and who have been identified by the Secretary as having been exposed to combat or otherwise as being at particular risk for post-traumatic stress disorder.
The Secretary of each military department and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall assess privacy and patient confidentiality standards and practices of their respective departments to ensure that those standards and practices are adequate to protect the privacy of patients, particularly in the case of patients seeking treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder.
Each of those Secretaries shall also assess and identify other factors that may deter members of the Armed Forces and veterans from seeking treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder.