This Act may be cited as the ``Morris K. Udall Parkinson's Research, Assistance, and Education Act of 1995''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Parkinson's disease and related disorders (hereafter referred to in this Act as ``Parkinson's'') is a neurological disorder affecting as many as 1,500,000 Americans.
Approximately 40 percent of persons with Parkinson's are under the age of 60.
While science has yet to determine what causes the disease, research has found that cells that produce a neurochemical called dopamine inexplicably degenerate, causing uncontrollable tremors, muscle stiffness, and loss of motor function.
Eventually, Parkinson's renders the afflicted individuals incapable of caring for themselves.
In addition to causing disability and suffering for the afflicted individuals, Parkinson's places tremendous and prolonged physical, emotional, and financial strain on family and loved ones.
It is estimated that the disease costs society nearly $6,000,000,000 annually.
To date, the federally funded research effort has been grossly underfunded.
Only $26,000,000 is allocated specifically for research on Parkinson's, or only about one dollar for every $200 in annual societal costs.
In order to take full advantage of the tremendous potential for finding a cure or effective treatment, the Federal investment in Parkinson's must be expanded, as well as the coordination strengthened among the National Institutes of Health research institutes.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide for the expansion and coordination of research concerning Parkinson's, and to improve care and assistance for afflicted individuals and their family caregivers.
BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH ON PARKINSON'S DISEASE.
Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 284 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``parkinson's disease ``Sec.
In General.--The Director of NIH shall establish a program for the conduct and support of research and training, the dissemination of health information, and other programs with respect to Parkinson's disease.
Interagency Coordinating Committee.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of NIH shall establish a committee to be known as the Interagency Coordinating Committee on Parkinson's Disease (in this subsection referred to as the `Coordinating Committee').
Duties.--With respect to Parkinson's, the Coordinating Committee shall-- ``(A) provide for the coordination of the activities of the national research institutes; and ``(B) coordinate the aspects of all Federal health programs and activities relating to Parkinson's in order to assure the adequacy, effectiveness, and technical soundness of such programs and activities and in order to provide for the full communication and exchange of information necessary to maintain adequate coordination of such programs and activities.
Composition.--The Coordinating Committee shall be composed of-- ``(A) the directors of each of the national research institutes and other agencies involved in research with respect to Parkinson's; ``(B) one representative of the relevant Federal departments and agencies whose programs involve health functions or responsibilities relevant to such disease; ``(C) individuals with the disease and individuals who have a family history with the disease; and ``(D) health professionals or allied health professionals.
Chair.--The Coordinating Committee shall be chaired by the Director of NIH (or the designee of the Director).
The Committee shall meet at the call of the chair, but not less often than once each year.
Annual report.--Not later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Coordinating Committee shall prepare and submit to the Secretary, the Director of NIH, and the directors specified in paragraph (3)(A) a report detailing the activities of the Committee in such fiscal year in carrying out paragraph (2).
Morris K. Udall Research Centers.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of NIH shall award Core Center Grants to encourage the development of innovative multidisciplinary research and provide training concerning Parkinson's.
The Director shall award not more than 10 Core Center Grants and designate each center funded under such grants as a Morris K. Udall Center for Research on Parkinson's Disease.
Requirements.-- ``(A) In general.--With respect to Parkinson's, each center assisted under this subsection shall-- ``(i) use the facilities of a single institution or a consortium of cooperating institutions, and meet such qualifications as may be prescribed by the Director of the NIH; and ``(ii) conduct basic and clinical research and provide patient care services.
Discretionary requirements.--With respect to Parkinson's, each center assisted under this subsection may-- ``(i) conduct training programs for scientists and health professionals; ``(ii) conduct programs to provide information and continuing education to health professionals; ``(iii) conduct programs for the dissemination of information to the public; and ``(iv) develop and maintain, where appropriate, a brain bank to collect specimens related to the research and treatment of Parkinson's.
Stipends regarding training programs.--A center may use funds provided under paragraph (1) to provide stipends for scientists and health professionals enrolled in training programs under paragraph (2)(C).
Duration of support.--Support of a center under this subsection may be for a period not exceeding five years.
Such period may be extended by the Director of NIH for one or more additional periods of not more than five years if the operations of such center have been reviewed by an appropriate technical and scientific peer review group established by the Director and if such group has recommended to the Director that such period should be extended.
Data System; Information Clearinghouse.-- ``(1) Data system.--The Director of NIH shall establish the National Parkinson's Disease Data System for the collection, storage, analysis, retrieval, and dissemination of data derived from patient populations with such disease, including, where possible, data involving general populations for the purpose of detection of individuals with a risk of developing the disease.
Information clearinghouse.--The Director of NIH shall establish the National Parkinson's Disease Information Clearinghouse to facilitate and enhance knowledge and understanding of such disease on the part of health professionals, patients, and the public through the effective dissemination of information.
Morris K. Udall Leadership and Excellence Awards.--The Director of NIH shall establish a grant program to support scientists who have distinguished themselves in the field of Parkinson's research.
Grants under this subsection shall be utilized to enable established investigators to devote greater time and resources in laboratories to conduct research on Parkinson's and to encourage the development of a new generation of investigators, with the support and guidance of the most productive and innovative senior researchers.
National Parkinson's Disease Education Program.--The Director of NIH shall establish a national education program that is designed to foster a national focus on Parkinson's and the care of those with Parkinson's.
Activities under such program shall include-- ``(1) the bringing together of public and private organizations to develop better ways to provide care to individuals with Parkinson's, and assist the families of such individuals; and ``(2) the provision of technical assistance to public and private organizations that offer support and aid to individuals with Parkinson's and their families.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 2000.
Availability.--Of the amount appropriated under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall make available not to exceed $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 2000, to establish Morris K. Udall Centers under subsection (c).