This Act may be cited as the ``National Historic Barn Preservation Act of 2001''.
Congress finds that-- (1) historic barns are-- (A) viable elements of food production in the United States; and (B) a vital component of the cultural heritage of the United States; (2) historic barns shed light on the earliest agricultural achievements of the United States; (3) historic barns are endangered by deterioration and demolition; and (4) the United States must-- (A) protect historic barns for continued agricultural use so that future generations can understand how the United States was built; (B) keep records on the number, condition, and variety of historic barns; (C) develop better techniques to preserve and protect historic barns; and (D) take every step necessary to avoid further loss of those national treasures.
In this Act: (1) Barn.--The term ``barn'' means a building (other than a dwelling) on a farm, ranch, or other agricultural operation for-- (A) housing animals; (B) storing or processing crops; (C) storing and maintaining agricultural equipment; or (D) serving an essential or useful purpose related to agriculture on the adjacent land.
Historic barn.--The term ``historic barn'' means a barn that-- (A) is at least 50 years old; (B) retains sufficient integrity of design, materials, and construction to clearly identify the barn as an agricultural building; and (C) meets the criteria for listing on National, State, or local registers or inventories of historic structures.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Undersecretary of Rural Development.
Eligible applicant.--The term ``eligible applicant'' means-- (A) a State department of agriculture (or a designee); (B) a national or State nonprofit organization that-- (i) is exempt from tax under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and (ii) has experience or expertise, as determined by the Secretary, in the identification, evaluation, rehabilitation, preservation, or protection of historic barns; and (C) a State historic preservation office.
HISTORIC BARN PRESERVATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a historic barn preservation program-- (1) to assist States in developing a listing of historic barns; (2) to collect and disseminate information on historic barns; (3) to foster educational programs relating to the history, construction techniques, rehabilitation, and contribution to society of historic barns; and (4) to sponsor and conduct research on-- (A) the history of barns; and (B) best practices to protect and rehabilitate historic barns from the effects of decay, fire, arson, and natural disasters.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants to, or enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with, eligible applicants to carry out an eligible project under paragraph (2).
Eligible projects.--A grant under this subsection may be made to an eligible entity for a project-- (A) to rehabilitate or repair a historic barn; (B) to preserve a historic barn through-- (i) the installation of a fire protection system, including fireproofing or fire detection system and sprinklers; and (ii) the installation of a system to prevent vandalism; and (C) to identify, document, and conduct research on a historic barn to develop and evaluate appropriate techniques or best practices for protecting historic barns.
Requirements.--An eligible applicant that receives a grant for a project under this subsection shall comply with any standards established by the Secretary of the Interior for historic preservation projects.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $25,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2002 through 2006, to remain available until expended.