This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Independence Act of 2007''.
The purpose of this Act is to provide support for projects and activities to facilitate the energy independence of the United States so as to ensure that-- (1) all but 10 percent of the energy needs of the United States are supplied by domestic energy sources by calendar year 2017; and (2) all but 20 percent of the energy needs of the United States are supplied by non-fossil fuel sources by calendar year 2037.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is established a commission, to be known as the ``National Commission on Energy Independence'' (referred to in this section as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members, of whom-- (A) 3 shall be appointed by the President; (B) 3 shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; (C) 3 shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate; (D) 3 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; and (E) 3 shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Co-chairpersons.-- (A) In general.--The President shall designate 2 co-chairpersons from among the members of the Commission appointed.
Political affiliation.--The co-chairpersons designated under subparagraph (A) shall not both be affiliated with the same political party.
Deadline for appointment.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Term; vacancies.-- (A) Term.--A member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission-- (i) shall not affect the powers of the Commission; and (ii) shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Purpose.--The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive review of the energy policy of the United States by-- (1) reviewing relevant analyses of the current and long- term energy policy of, and conditions in, the United States; (2) identifying problems that may threaten the achievement by the United States of long-term energy policy goals, including energy independence; (3) analyzing potential solutions to problems that threaten the long-term ability of the United States to achieve those energy policy goals; and (4) providing recommendations that will ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that the energy policy goals of the United States are achieved.
Report and Recommendations.-- (1) In general.--Not later than December 31 of each of calendar years 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2015, the Commission shall submit to Congress and the President a report on the progress of United States in meeting the long-term energy policy goal of energy independence, including a detailed statement of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Commission.
Legislative language.--If a recommendation submitted under paragraph (1) involves legislative action, the report shall include proposed legislative language to carry out the action.
Commission Personnel Matters.-- (1) Staff and director.--The Commission shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director.
Staff appointment.--The Executive Director may appoint such personnel as the Executive Director and the Commission determine to be appropriate.
Experts and consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the Executive Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Federal agencies.-- (A) Detail of government employees.-- (i) In general.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of the Federal agency to the Commission to assist in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Nature of detail.--Any detail of a Federal employee under clause (i) shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of the Federal employee.
Technical assistance.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
Resources.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall have reasonable access to materials, resources, statistical data, and such other information from Executive agencies as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
Form of requests.--The co-chairpersons of the Commission shall make requests for access described in paragraph (1) in writing, as necessary.