This Act may be cited as the ``Tuberculosis Prevention and Control Amendments of 1993''.
PROGRAMS OF CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL.
Provision of Services for Prevention, Control, and Elimination.-- (1) In general.--Section 317(j)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247b(j)(2)) is amended in the first sentence-- (A) by striking ``and'' after ``1991,''; (B) by striking ``through 1995'' and inserting ``and 1992''; and (C) by inserting before the period the following: ``, $300,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998''.
Emergency grants.-- (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), in addition to the authorization of appropriations established in section 317(j)(2) of the Public Health Service Act for grants for the prevention, control, and elimination of tuberculosis, there are authorized to be appropriated for such grants $85,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998.
Grants made pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be made by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The Secretary may make such a grant only if the geographic area in which activities under the grant are to be carried out has, relative to other areas, a substantial incidence of cases of tuberculosis or a substantial rate of increase in such cases.
Bulk purchases.-- (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), in addition to the authorization of appropriations established in section 317(j)(2) of the Public Health Service Act for grants for the prevention, control, and elimination of tuberculosis, there are authorized to be appropriated for such grants $80,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998.
Amounts appropriated under subparagraph (A) shall be administered by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
For purposes of the program of grants referred to in such subparagraph, such amounts are available for making bulk purchases of medications and other supplies with respect to tuberculosis.
Other purposes.--Section 317(j)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247b(j)(2)) is amended by inserting after the first sentence the following sentence: ``The purposes for which such grants under subsection (a) for such programs may be expended include services with respect to incarceration.''.
Research, Demonstration Projects, Education, and Training.-- Section 317(k)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247b(k)(2)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (D) as clauses (i) through (iv), respectively; (2) by inserting ``(A)'' after the paragraph designation; and (3) by adding at the end the following subparagraph: ``(B) For the purpose of carrying out subparagraph (A), there are authorized to be appropriated $80,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998.
The authorization of appropriations established in the preceding sentence is in addition to the authorization of appropriations established in subsection (j)(2) for carrying out this paragraph.''.
Training Centers Regarding Health Professionals.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for the establishment and operation of not more than 5 centers to train health professionals with respect to the prevention and control of tuberculosis, including training in identifying multi-drug resistant forms of such disease.
Screenings; other health services.--The purposes for which the Secretary may authorize an entity to expend a grant under paragraph (1) include screening individuals for tuberculosis, providing treatment for such disease, and referring individuals for services.
Facilities and equipment.--The purposes for which the Secretary may authorize an entity to expend a grant under paragraph (1) include providing for facilities and equipment for the center under such paragraph.
Quality of laboratories.--The Secretary may make a grant under paragraph (1) only if the entity involved provides assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the laboratories of the center under such paragraph will have the facilities and equipment to provide sophisticated training to health professionals with respect to tuberculosis.
Application for grant.--The Secretary may make a grant under paragraph (1) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this subsection.
Amount and duration of grant.-- (A) The Secretary may not make a grant under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year in an amount exceeding $5,000,000.
The period during which payments are made to an entity from a grant under paragraph (1) may not exceed 3 years.
The provision of such payments shall be subject to annual approval by the Secretary of the payments and subject to the availability of appropriations for the fiscal year involved to make the payments.
Evaluations; dissemination of information.--The Secretary shall, directly or through contracts with public or private entities, provide for evaluations of centers operated pursuant to paragraph (1) and for the dissemination of information developed as a result of the centers.
Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998.
RESEARCH THROUGH NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
Certain Duties.-- (1) In general.--Subpart 6 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285f) is amended by inserting after section 446 the following section: ``research and research training regarding tuberculosis ``Sec.
In carrying out section 446, the Director of the Institute shall conduct or support research and research training regarding the cause, diagnosis, early detection, prevention, control, and treatment of tuberculosis.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 446 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285f) is amended by inserting after ``Diseases'' the following: ``(hereafter in this subpart referred to as the `Institute')''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 408(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 284c(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) For the purpose of carrying out section 447 (relating to research on tuberculosis through the National Institute on Allergy and Infectious Diseases), there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998.
The authorization of appropriations established in the preceding sentence may not be construed as terminating the availability for such purpose of any other authorization of appropriations.''.
CONSTRUCTION OR MODERNIZATION OF HEALTH FACILITIES.
Section 1610 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300r) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(c)(1) With respect to services for the prevention, control, and elimination of tuberculosis, the Secretary may make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for projects for (A) construction or modernization of outpatient medical facilities which are located apart from hospitals and which will provide such services for medically underserved populations, (B) conversion of existing facilities into outpatient medical facilities or facilities for long-term care to provide such services for such populations, (C) renovation of inpatient facilities, (D) construction or renovation of facilities to provide such services with respect to incarceration.
The amount of any grant under paragraph (1) may not exceed 80 percent of the cost of the project for which the grant is made unless the project is located in an area determined by the Secretary to be an urban or rural poverty area, in which case the grant may cover up to 100 percent of such costs.
There are authorized to be appropriated for grants under paragraph (1) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, $250,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998.''.
OPTIONAL MEDICAID COVERAGE OF TB-RELATED SERVICES FOR CERTAIN TB-INFECTED INDIVIDUALS.
Coverage as Optional, Categorically Needy Group.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause (X), (2) by adding ``or'' at the end of subclause (XI), and (3) by adding at the end the following new subclause: ``(XII) who are described in subsection (z)(1) (relating to certain TB-infected individuals);''.
Group and Benefit Described.--Section 1902 of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(z)(1) Individuals described in this paragraph are individuals not described in subsection (a)(10)(A)(i)-- ``(A) who have tested positively to be infected with tuberculosis; ``(B) whose income (as determined under the State plan under this title with respect to disabled individuals) does not exceed the maximum amount of income a disabled individual described in subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) may have and obtain medical assistance under the plan; and ``(C) whose resources (as determined under the State plan under this title with respect to disabled individuals) do not exceed the maximum amount of resources a disabled individual described in subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) may have and obtain medical assistance under the plan.
For purposes of subsection (a)(10), the term `TB-related services' means each of the following services-- ``(A) prescribed drugs, ``(B) physicians' services and services described in section 1905(a)(2), ``(C) laboratory and X-ray services, ``(D) clinic services and Federally-qualified health center services, and ``(E) case management services (as defined in section 1915(g)(2)), relating to treatment of infection with tuberculosis.''.
Limitation on Benefits.--Section 1902(a)(10) of such Act is amended, in the matter following subparagraph (F)-- (1) by striking ``; and (XI)'' and inserting ``, (XI)'', (2) by striking ``, and (XI)'' and inserting ``, (XII)'', and (3) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, and (XIII) the medical assistance made available to an individual described in subsection (z)(1) who is eligible for medical assistance only because of subparagraph (A)(ii)(XII) shall be limited to medical assistance for TB- related services (described in subsection (z)(2))''.
Conforming Expansion of Case Management Services Option.-- Section 1915(g)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396n(g)(1)) is amended by inserting ``or to individuals described in section 1902(z)(1)(A)'' after ``or with either,''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1905(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396d(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (ix), (2) by adding ``or'' at the end of clause (x), and (3) by inserting after clause (x) the following new clause: ``(xi) individuals described in section 1902(z)(1),''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to medical assistance furnished on or after January 1, 1994, without regard to whether or not final regulations to carry out such amendments have been promulgated by such date.