SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS OPERATING FAMILY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.
General Rule.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR FAMILY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 100 percent of the qualified family development contributions made by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Qualified Family Development Contribution.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified family development contribution' means any contribution to a qualified organization if-- ``(1) such contribution is in cash, ``(2) such contribution is to be used by the qualified organization exclusively in its family development program activities, and ``(3) the taxpayer receives from the qualified organization a written statement representing that its use of such contribution will be in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (2).
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Qualified organization.--The term `qualified organization' means any organization described in paragraph (2) of section 170(c) if-- ``(A) such organization is operated primarily for purposes of engaging in family development program activities, and ``(B) during the calendar year in which the taxpayer's taxable year begins, such organization did not receive any funds from the Federal Government or under any State or local program funded in whole or in part by the Federal Government.
Family development program activities.--The term `family development program activities' means community-based activities to foster positive growth of at-risk youth age 18 and under.
Such term includes child care services, health care services, tutorial programs, pre-school and after-school services, mentoring programs, job-training services, juvenile and adolescent recreational programs, family counseling and crisis intervention services, and substance abuse services.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction shall be allowed under section 170 for any qualified family development contribution taken into account under this section.''
Reporting Requirements.-- (1) In general.--Subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
RETURNS RELATING TO QUALIFIED FAMILY DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTIONS.
In General.--Every organization which during any calendar year receives qualified family development contributions shall make a return according to the forms or regulations prescribed by the Secretary setting forth-- ``(1) the name, address, and TIN of each person making such contributions, and ``(2) the amount of such contributions made by each such person.
Statements Furnished to Contributions.--Every organization required to make a return under subsection (a) shall furnish to each person whose name is required to be set forth in such return a written statement showing-- ``(1) the name and address of the organization making the return, and ``(2) the aggregate amount of the qualified family development contributions made by such person.
The written statement required under the preceding sentence shall be furnished to the person on or before January 31 of the year following the calendar year for which the return under subsection (a) was made.
Qualified Family Development Contribution.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified family development contribution' has the meaning given such term by section 23(b).''
Penalties.-- (A) Subparagraph (B) of section 6724(d)(1) of such Code is amended by inserting after clause (viii) the following new clause (and by redesignating the following clauses accordingly): ``(ix) section 6050Q (relating to returns relating to qualified family development contributions),'' (B) Paragraph (2) of section 6724(d) of such Code is amended by inserting after subparagraph (P) the following new subparagraph (and by redesignating the following subparagraphs accordingly): ``(Q) section 6050Q(b) (relating to returns relating to qualified family development contributions),'' (c) Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new section: ``Sec.
Contributions for family development programs.''
The table of sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Returns relating to qualified family development contributions.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made after the date of the enactment of this Act.