This Act may be cited as the ``Healthy Foods for Healthy Living Act''.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE GRANTS TO PROMOTE GREATER CONSUMPTION OF FRESH FRUITS, FRESH VEGETABLES, AND OTHER HEALTHY FOODS IN LOW-INCOME COMMUNITIES.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Agriculture may make grants for the purposes specified in subsection (b) to any of the following: (1) A community-based organization that operates in a low- income community and carries out one or both of the activities described in subsection (b), as determined by the Secretary.
A local redevelopment agency that is chartered, established, or otherwise sanctioned by a State or local government.
Use of Grant Amounts.--The recipient of a grant under this section shall use the grant amounts for one or both of the following activities: (1) To assist in purchasing appropriate equipment or in hiring and training personnel to expand the inventory of fresh fruits and vegetables or other healthy food alternatives, as defined by the Department of Agriculture, such as healthier dairy and non-dairy alternatives to whole milk, 100 percent pure fruit juices, and products with 0 grams of transfat, available for residents of a low-income community.
To carry out consumer education and outreach activities to encourage the purchase of products described in paragraph (1), such as by informing residents of a low-income community about the health risks associated with high-calorie, low- exercise lifestyles and the benefits of healthy living.
Maximum Grant.--A grant under this section may not exceed $100,000.
Community-Based Organization Defined.--In this section, the term ``community-based organization'' includes schools, day-care centers, senior centers, community health centers, food banks, or emergency feeding organizations.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2012.
COVERAGE OF ADDITIONAL PRIMARY CARE AND PREVENTIVE SERVICES UNDER THE MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAMS.
Medicare Program.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861(ddd) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ddd)) is amended-- (A) by adding at the end of paragraph (1) the following: ``Such term also includes the primary care and preventive services described in paragraph (4).
''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) The primary care and preventive services described in this paragraph are the following, insofar as they are not otherwise covered under this title, when provided by qualified providers: ``(A) Services for the prevention and treatment of obesity and obesity-related disease.
Exercise stress testing for the purpose of exercise prescriptions.
Lifestyle health improvement education.
Culinary arts education for the purpose of promoting proper nutrition.''.
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1862(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395y(a)(1)) is amended-- (i) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (O); (ii) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (P); and (iii) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(Q) in the case of additional primary care and preventive services described in section 1861(ddd)(4), which are performed more frequently than the Secretary may specify;''.
The first sentence of section 1833(b)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395l(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``for preventive services'' and all that follows through ``for the individual'' and inserting ``for additional preventive services (as defined in section 1861(ddd))''.
Medicaid Program.--Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (28); (2) by redesignating paragraph (29) as paragraph (30); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (28) the following new paragraph: ``(29) additional preventive services (as defined in section 1861(ddd)(1)) which are not otherwise covered under this subsection; and''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, regardless of whether regulations to implement the amendments are in effect as of such date.