This Act may be cited as the ``David `Davy' Crockett Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) The year 2005 marks the 175th anniversary of a courageous vote on the floors of Congress by David Crockett.
In 1830, during the 21st Congress, Representative David Crockett rose to speak out in opposition to a bill for the funding of the removal of Southeastern Native American tribes to the west of the Mississippi River.
He was the only Member of Congress from his State to oppose the bill, was fully aware that the majority of his constituents favored the bill, and understood that he was providing his political foes with an issue that they could--and did--use to attack him.
Undaunted by threats of political retaliation, he refused to support a bill designed to remove what he called ``the poor remnants of a once powerful people'' from their ancestral homes, claiming instead that he would ``sooner be honestly and politically damned, than hypocritically immortalized''.
The year 2005 also marks the 50th anniversary of the release of a feature-length motion picture that returned David Crockett to the position he had enjoyed 125 years earlier as the classic image of the American frontier and the best reflection of the frontier spirit.
As ``Davy'' Crockett, he was popularized in movies and television, and he became a cultural icon of the 1950s.
David Crockett first appeared on the national scene as the representative of a new, proud, and irreverent American character and culture, unique and apart from European customs and mores.
As a young man from the backwoods of East Tennessee, David Crockett mastered the skills necessary for life on the American frontier, including marksmanship and hunting.
The first rifle he owned, with which he developed those skills, is included in the collection at the East Tennessee Historical Society and will be featured prominently when the Historical Society opens its expanded museum exhibit in 2005.
His quick wit and natural leadership abilities allowed him to move from the humblest of settings to the halls of Congress.
David Crockett was a committed public servant serving 2 terms in the Tennessee General Assembly and 3 terms in the United States House of Representatives.
During the last 3 months of his life, he fought with others to secure independence for the Republic of Texas before he died a hero's death at the Alamo at the age of 49.
His life was chronicled during and immediately after his lifetime through theatrical productions, biographies, and in a series of almanacs from 1835-1856, galvanizing his persona as a true American folk hero.
He has been the subject of at least 17 motion pictures and 12 television programs during the 20th century.
David Crockett personified the spirit of independence, individualism, and justice in his opposition to the Indian removal bill, a position that was opposed by powerful political opponents, unpopular with a majority of his own constituents, but dedicated to principle.
He was guided in this, as he was throughout his life, by his best-known maxim: ``Be always sure you are right, then go ahead.''.
Denominations.--In commemoration of the achievements and legacy of David Crockett, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) $5 gold coins.--Not more than 100,000 $5 coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 8.359 grams; (B) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
$1 silver coins.--Not more than 500,000 $1 coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the legacy of David Crockett and his importance to Tennessee, Texas, and the history of the United States.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2005''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', ``E Pluribus Unum'', and ``David `Davy' Crockett 1786-1836''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts and the Board of the East Tennessee Historical Society; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act only during the period beginning on January 1, 2005, and ending on December 31, 2005.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in section 7(a) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
In General.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge as follows: (1) $35 per coin for the $5 coin.
$10 per coin for the $1 coin.
Distribution.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, all surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the East Tennessee Historical Society to be used-- (1) to fund capital improvements for The East Tennessee Historical Society and its museum; and (2) to establish an endowment to be a permanent source of support for The East Tennessee Historical Society and its vital mission of preserving, interpreting, and promoting the history of Tennessee, focusing on East Tennessee.
Audits.--The East Tennessee Historical Society shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code, with regard to the amounts received by the Foundation under subsection (b).