This Act may be cited as the ``Puerto Rico Karst Conservation Act of 2001''.
FINDINGS, PURPOSES, AND DEFINITIONS.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Karst Region of Puerto Rico is a unique geological formation that is critical to the maintenance of aquifers and watersheds which constitute a principal water supply for much of Puerto Rico.
The Karst Region is threatened by development, which, if unchecked, could permanently damage aquifers supplying fresh water and cause irreparable damage to natural and environmental assets that are unique to the United States and Puerto Rico.
Puerto Rico has one of the highest population densities in the United States, which further makes the protection of the Karst Region an imperative for the maintenance of the public health and welfare of the citizens of Puerto Rico.
The Karst Region possesses extraordinary ecological diversity, including the habitats of several endangered and threatened species and tropical migrants and is, therefore, an area of critical value to research in tropical forest management.
Coordinated efforts at land protection by the Federal Government and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico will be necessary to conserve the environmentally critical Karst Region.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture, in cooperation with the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, to undertake a program of land conservation, acquisition, and research to protect and manage the geological and ecological values of the Karst Region, with particular emphasis on the maintenance of biodiversity within a tropical forest ecosystem and protection of the aquifers which are vital to the health and well being of the citizens of Puerto Rico.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Karst region.--The term ``Karst Region'' means those areas in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico generally depicted on the map entitled ``Karst Region Conservation Area'' and dated March 2001.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Secretary, Puerto Rico Department of Natural and Environmental Resources, and the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
Land.--The term ``land'' includes lands, waters, and interests in lands and waters.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Puerto Rico Karst Conservation Fund'' established by section 4.
Forest legacy program.--The term ``Forest Legacy Program'' means the program established pursuant to section 7 of the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 2103c).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
KARST REGION CONSERVATION ACTIVITIES.
Land Acquisition.-- (1) Authorization.--In furtherance of the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may acquire land in the Karst Region or immediately adjacent to the Karst Region.
Willing sellers.--All acquisitions of land by the Secretary on behalf of the United States under paragraph (1) shall be for fair market value on a willing seller basis.
Funding Source.--The Secretary may carry out land acquisition activities under paragraph (1) using amounts in the Fund, amounts appropriated for the Forest Legacy Program, amounts in the Land and Water Conservation Fund, and any other moneys made available for such purpose.
Management.--The Secretary shall manage land acquired under subsection (a) pursuant to this Act, the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Research Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 620 et sequentes), and the laws and regulations applicable to the National Forest System.
Cooperative Approach.--The Secretary may make grants to and enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, other Federal agencies, organizations, and corporations for the acquisition, protection, and management of Federal and non- Federal land in the Karst Region.
Relation to Other Authorities.--Nothing in this Act shall diminish any other authority that the Secretary may have to acquire, protect, and manage natural resources in Puerto Rico.
PUERTO RICO KARST CONSERVATION FUND.
Establishment.--There is hereby established on the books of the Treasury an interest bearing account to be known as the ``Puerto Rico Karst Conservation Fund''.
Credits to Funds.--There shall be credited to the Fund the following: (1) Amounts authorized for and appropriated to the Fund.
All moneys generated from the Caribbean National Forest, except the following: (A) Amounts required to be paid to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico pursuant to the sixth paragraph under the heading ``FOREST SERVICE'' in the Act of May 23, 1908, or section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (16 United States Code 500).
Amounts required to be retained for the construction and maintenance of roads and trails pursuant to the fourteenth paragraph under the heading ``FOREST SERVICE'' in the Act of March 4, 1913 (16 United States Code 501).
Amounts collected under the Recreation Fee Demonstration Program authorized pursuant to section 315 of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (as contained in section 101(c) of Public Law 104-134; 16 United States Code 460l-6a note).
All moneys received by the Administrator of General Services from the disposal of surplus real property in Puerto Rico pursuant to the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 471 et sequentes).
Interest derived from amounts in the Fund and any other moneys donated for deposit in the Fund.
Use of Fund.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available to the Secretary until expended, without further appropriation, for the purchase of land in the Karst Region and related acquisition management expenses as authorized by section 3.
Donations.--The Secretary may accept for deposit in the Fund donations made by public and private agencies, corporations, organizations, and individuals in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
The Secretary may accept such donations even though the donor conducts business with or is regulated by the Department of Agriculture or any other department or agency of the United States.
Relation to Forest Legacy Program.-- (1) In general.--All lands in the Karst Region shall be eligible for inclusion in the Forest Legacy Program.
Cost sharing.--The Secretary may credit donations made under subsection (a) to satisfy any cost sharing requirements of the Forest Legacy Program.
There is authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 to be credited to the Fund.