This Act may be cited as the ``Paleontological Resources Preservation Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Paleontological resources are nonrenewable.
Such resources on Federal lands are an accessible and irreplaceable part of the heritage of the United States and offer significant educational opportunities to all citizens.
Existing Federal laws, statutes, and other provisions that manage paleontological resources are not articulated in a unified national policy for Federal land management agencies and the public.
Such a policy is needed to improve scientific understanding, to promote responsible stewardship, and to facilitate the enhancement of responsible paleontological collecting activities on Federal lands.
Consistent with the statutory provisions applicable to each Federal land management system, reasonable access to paleontological resources on Federal lands should be provided for scientific, educational, and recreational purposes.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a comprehensive national policy for preserving and managing paleontological resources on Federal lands.
As used in this Act: (1) Casual collecting.--The term ``casual collecting'' means the collecting of a reasonable amount of common invertebrate and plant paleontological resources for personal, scientific, educational or recreational use, either by surface collection or using non-powered hand tools resulting in only negligible disturbance to the Earth's surface and other resources.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior with respect to lands administered by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to National Forest System Lands administered by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Federal lands.--The term ``Federal lands'' means lands administered by the Secretary of the Interior, except Indian lands, or National Forest System Lands administered by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Indian lands.--The term ``Indian Lands'' means lands of Indian tribes, or Indian individuals, which are either held in trust by the United States or subject to a restriction against alienation imposed by the United States.
State.--The term ``State'' means the fifty States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
Paleontological resource.--The term ``paleontological resource'' means any fossilized remains, traces, or imprints of organisms, preserved in or on the earth's crust, that are of paleontological interest and that provide information about the history of life on earth, except that the term does not include-- (A) any materials associated with an archaeological resource (as defined in section 3(1) of the Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979 (16 United States Code 470bb(1))); or (B) any cultural item (as defined in section 2 of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (25 United States Code 3001)).
Common invertebrate and plant paleontological resources.--The term ``common invertebrate and plant paleontological resources'' means fossils that are not significant.
Significant.--The term ``significant'' is a fossil that meets scientific significance criteria as determined by the Secretary in the promulgation of uniform rules and regulations under this Act.
Qualified applicant.--The term ``qualified applicant'' is someone who possesses a graduate degree in paleontology or related topics; or the equivalent experience with one who meets that standard.
In General.--The Secretary shall manage and protect paleontological resources on Federal lands using scientific principles and expertise.
The Secretary shall develop appropriate plans for inventory, monitoring, and the scientific and educational use of paleontological resources, in accordance with applicable agency laws, regulations, and policies.
These plans shall emphasize interagency coordination and collaborative efforts where possible with non-Federal partners, the scientific community, and the general public.
Coordination of Implementation.--To the extent possible, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall coordinate in the implementation of this Act.
PUBLIC AWARENESS AND EDUCATION PROGRAM.
The Secretary shall establish a program to increase public awareness about the significance of paleontological resources.
COLLECTION OF PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES.
Permit Requirement.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in this Act, a paleontological resource may not be collected from Federal lands without a permit issued under this Act by the Secretary.
Casual collecting exception.--The Secretary may allow casual collecting without a permit on Federal lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Reclamation, and the United States Reports Forest Service, where such collection is not inconsistent with the laws governing the management of those Federal lands and this Act.
Previous permit exception.--Nothing in this section shall affect a valid permit issued prior to the date of enactment of this Act.
Criteria for Issuance of a Permit.--The Secretary may issue a permit for the collection of a paleontological resource pursuant to an application if the Secretary determines that-- (1) the permitted activity shall be carried out by a qualified applicant; (2) the permitted activity is undertaken for the purpose of furthering paleontological knowledge or for public education; (3) the permitted activity is consistent with any management plan applicable to the Federal lands concerned; and (4) the proposed methods of collecting will not threaten significant natural or cultural resources.
Permit Specifications.--A permit for the collection of a paleontological resource issued under this section shall contain such terms and conditions as the Secretary deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Every permit shall include requirements that-- (1) the paleontological resource that is collected from Federal lands under the permit will remain the property of the United States; (2) the paleontological resource and copies of associated records will be preserved for the public in an approved repository, to be made available for scientific research and public education; and (3) specific locality data will not be released by the permittee or repository without the written permission of the Secretary.
Modification, Suspension, and Revocation of Permits.-- (1) The Secretary may modify, suspend, or revoke a permit issued under this section-- (A) for resource, safety, or other management considerations; or (B) when there is a violation of term or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this section.
The permit shall be revoked if any person working under the authority of the permit is convicted under section 9 or is assessed a civil penalty under section 10.
Any paleontological resource, and any data and records associated with the resource, collected under a permit, shall be deposited in an approved repository.
The Secretary may enter into agreements with non- Federal repositories regarding the curation of these resources, data, and records.
In General.--A person may not-- (1) excavate, remove, damage, or otherwise alter or deface or attempt to excavate, remove, damage, or otherwise alter or deface any paleontological resources located on Federal lands unless such activity is conducted in accordance with this Act; (2) exchange, transport, export, receive, or offer to exchange, transport, export, or receive any paleontological resource if, in the exercise of due care, the person knew or should have known such resource to have been excavated, removed, exchanged, transported, or received from Federal lands in violation of any provisions, rule, regulation, law, ordinance, or permit in effect under Federal law, including this Act; or (3) sell or purchase or offer to sell or purchase any paleontological resource if, in the exercise of due care, the person knew or should have known such resource to have been excavated, removed, sold, purchased, exchanged, transported, or received from Federal lands.
False Labeling Offenses.--A person may not make or submit any false record, account, or label for, or any false identification of, any paleontological resource excavated or removed from Federal lands.
Penalties.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), a person who knowingly violates or counsels, procures, solicits, or employs another person to violate subsection (a) or (b) shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
Damage over $1,000.--If the sum of the scientific or fair market value of the paleontological resources involved and the cost of restoration and repair of such resources exceeds the sum of $1,000, such person shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class E felony.
Multiple offenses.--In the case of a second or subsequent such violation, such person shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class D felony.
General Exception.--Nothing in subsection (a) shall apply to any person with respect to any paleontological resource which was in the lawful possession of such person prior to the date of the enactment of this Act.
CIVIL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF REGULATIONS OR PERMIT CONDITIONS.
In General.-- (1) Hearing.--A person who violates any prohibition contained in an applicable regulation or permit issued under this Act may be assessed a penalty by the Secretary after the person is given notice and opportunity for a hearing with respect to the violation.
Each violation shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of this section.
Amount of penalty.--The amount of such penalty assessed under paragraph (1) shall be determined under regulations promulgated pursuant to this Act, taking into account the following factors: (A) The scientific or fair market value, whichever is greater, of the paleontological resource involved.
The cost of response, restoration, and repair of the resource and the paleontological site involved.
Any other factors considered relevant by the Secretary assessing the penalty.
Multiple offenses.--In the case of a second or subsequent violation by the same person, the amount of a penalty assessed under paragraph (2) may be doubled.
Limitation.--The amount of any penalty assessed under this subsection for any one violation shall not exceed an amount equal to double the cost of response, restoration, and repair of resources and paleontological site damage plus double the scientific or fair market value of resources destroyed or not recovered.
Petition for Judicial Review; Collection of Unpaid Assessments.--Any person against whom an order is issued assessing a penalty under subsection (a) may file a petition for judicial review of the order with an appropriate Federal district court within the 30-day period beginning on the date the order making the assessment was issued.
The court shall hear the action on the record made before the Secretary and shall sustain his action if it is supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole.
Hearings.--Hearings held during proceedings instituted under subsection (a) shall be conducted in accordance with section 554 of title 5, United States Code.
Use of Recovered Amounts.--Any penalties collected under this section shall be available to the Secretary and without further appropriation may be used only as follows: (1) To protect, restore, or repair the paleontological resources and sites which were the subject of the action, or to acquire sites with equivalent resources, and to protect, monitor, and study the resources and sites.
Any acquisition shall be subject to any limitations contained in the organic legislation for such Federal lands.
To provide educational materials to the public about paleontological resources and sites.
To provide for the payment of Rewards as provided in section 11.
Rewards.--The Secretary may pay from penalties collected under section 9 or 10 an amount equal to the lesser of one-half of the penalty or $500, to any person who furnishes information which leads to the finding of a civil violation, or the conviction of criminal violation, with respect to which the penalty was paid.
If several persons provided the information, the amount shall be divided among the persons.
No officer or employee of the United States or of any State or local government who furnishes information or renders service in the performance of his official duties shall be eligible for payment under this subsection.
Forfeiture.--All paleontological resources with respect to which a violation under section 9 or 10 occurred and which are in the possession of any person, and all vehicles and equipment of any person that were used in connection with the violation, may be subject to forfeiture to the United States upon-- (1) the person's conviction of the violation under section 9; (2) assessment of a civil penalty against any person under section 10 with respect to the violation; or (3) a determination by any court that the paleontological resources, vehicles, or equipment were involved in the violation.
Information concerning the nature and specific location of a paleontological resource the collection of which requires a permit under this Act or under any other provision of Federal law shall be withheld from the public under subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, or under any other provision of law unless the responsible Secretary determines that disclosure would-- (1) further the purposes of this Act; (2) not create risk of harm to or theft or destruction of the resource or the site containing the resource; and (3) be in accordance with other applicable laws.
As soon as practical after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue uniform regulations as are appropriate to carry out this Act, providing opportunities for public notice and comment.
ROCK COLLECTING ON NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LANDS.
Casual collecting of rocks and minerals for personal use is a valid use of National Forest System lands and requires no permit except as provided by other statutes and agency regulations.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to-- (1) invalidate, modify, or impose any additional restrictions or permitting requirements on any activities permitted at any time under the general mining laws, the mineral or geothermal leasing laws, laws providing for minerals materials disposal, or laws providing for the management or regulation of the activities authorized by the aforementioned laws including but not limited to the Federal Land Policy Management Act (43 United States Code 1701-1784), the Mining in the Parks Act, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 United States Code 1201-1358), and the Organic Administration Act (16 United States Code 478, 482, 551); (2) invalidate, modify, or impose any additional restrictions or permitting requirements on any activities permitted at any time existing laws and authorities relating to reclamation and multiple uses of the public lands; (3) apply to, or require a permit for, amateur collecting of a rock, mineral, or invertebrate or plant fossil that is not protected under this Act; (4) affect any lands other than Federal lands or affect the lawful recovery, collection, or sale of paleontological resources from lands other than Federal lands; (5) alter or diminish the authority of a Federal agency under any other law to provide protection for paleontological resources on Federal lands in addition to the protection provided under this Act; or (6) create any right, privilege, benefit, or entitlement for any person who is not an officer or employee of the United States acting in that capacity.
No person who is not an officer or employee of the United States acting in that capacity shall have standing to file any civil action in a court of the United States to enforce any provision or amendment made by this Act.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.