This Act may be cited as the ``Lower Rio Grande Valley Water Resources Conservation and Improvement Act of 1999''.
In this Act: (1) State.--The term ``State'' means the Texas Water Development Board and any other authorized entity of the State of Texas.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Commissioner.
Commissioner.--The term ``Commissioner'' means the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation.
Counties.--The term ``counties'' means the following counties in the State of Texas: Cameron, Hidalgo, Starr, Willacy, Jim Hogg, Zapata, Webb, Maverick, Val Verde, Kinney, Terrell, Brewster, Presidio, Jeff Davis, Hudspeth, and El Paso.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Drought conditions over the last decade have made citizens of the Lower Rio Grande Valley region of Texas aware of the significant impacts a dwindling water supply can have on a region.
As a result of the impacts, that region has devised an integrated water resource plan to meet the critical water needs of the Lower Rio Grande Valley through the end of the year 2050.
Implementation of an integrated water resource plan to meet the critical water needs of the Lower Rio Grande Valley is in the national interest.
The Congress should authorize and provide Federal, technical, and financial assistance to construct improved irrigation canal delivery systems, implement an aggressive water conservation program, and improve water management to help meet the critical water needs of the Lower Rio Grande Valley through the end of the year 2050.
LOWER RIO GRANDE WATER CONSERVATION AND IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall undertake a program to improve the supply of water for the counties through the following activities: (1) In cooperation with the State, water users in the counties, and other non-Federal entities, conduct feasibility studies, engineering work, and infrastructure construction and improvements for the purpose of transporting raw water, including the following: (A) Irrigation canals.
In cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, the State, water users in the counties, and other non-Federal entities, enhance water conservation in the counties through the installation of on-farm water application metering.
In cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, the State, and other non-Federal entities, enhance water conservation including on-farm installation of gated and poly- pipe.
In cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, the State, water users in the counties, and other non-Federal entities including institutions of higher education-- (A) develop educational programs and implement on- farm training in the use and application of state-of- the-art water application and conservation techniques; and (B) provide educational information regarding use and application of such techniques to the Commissioners of the International Boundary and Water Commission.
Project Eligibility Requirements.--A project shall not be eligible to be implemented under this section unless-- (1) the project plan shows an estimate of the amount of water that will be conserved as a result of the project; and (2) the design for the project includes a cost-of-project- to-water-developed ratio statement.
Determination of Project Eligibility.--The responsibility for determining project eligibility under subsection (b) shall be carried out by the State in consultation with the Commissioner.
The non-Federal share of the costs of any activity carried out under, or with assistance provided under, this Act shall be 40 percent of such costs.
Not more than 30 percent of the costs of such an activity may be paid by the State.
Provision of the remainder of the non-Federal share may include in-kind contributions of goods and services.
Alternative Water Supply Options.-- (1) Study and recommendations.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, counties, and other non-Federal entities, shall-- (A) assess alternative water supply options for the Counties of Maverick, Kinney, Edwards, Val Verde, Terrell, Brewster, Presidio, Jeff Davis, Hudspeth, and El Paso, Texas, for the purpose of alleviating water supply shortages and project water demands; and (B) submit recommendations to the Congress regarding such alternatives.
Emphasis on conservation measures.--Recommendations under subsection (a) shall emphasize water management actions that encourage the incorporation, by the counties referred to in paragraph (1)(A) and irrigation districts in those counties, of prudent and responsible water conservation measures to the extent such measures are shown to be economically feasible.
Wastewater Reuse.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, the counties referred to in paragraph (1)(A), the State, and other non-Federal entities, shall assess the feasibility of wastewater reuse for irrigation and groundwater recharge and other nonpotable purposes.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost of any activity under this section shall not exceed 50 percent.
Agreement.--The Secretary may not carry out any activity under this section except under an agreement with a non-Federal entity that has legal authority under the laws of the State to obligate funds or provide in-kind services for such activity, under which the non-Federal entity is obligated to provide the non-Federal share of the cost of the activity.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this Act $65,200,000.