This Act may be cited as the ``HIV Prevention Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) The States should recognize that the terms ``acquired immune deficiency syndrome'' and ``AIDS'' are obsolete.
In the case of individuals who are infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (commonly known as HIV), the more important medical fact for the individuals and for the protection of the public health is the fact of infection, and not just the later development of AIDS (the stage at which the infection causes symptoms).
The term ``HIV disease'', meaning infection with HIV regardless of whether the infection has progressed to AIDS, more correctly defines the medical condition.
The medical, public health, political, and community leadership must focus on the full course of HIV disease rather than concentrating on later stages of the disease.
Continual focus on AIDS rather than the entire spectrum of HIV disease has left our Nation unable to deal adequately with the epidemic.
Federal and State data collection efforts should focus on obtaining data as early as possible after infection occurs, while continuing to collect data on the symptomatic stage of the disease.
Recent medical breakthroughs may enable doctors to treat HIV disease as a chronic disease rather than as a terminal disease.
Early intervention in the progression of the infection is imperative to prolonging and improving the lives of individuals with the disease.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recommended partner notification as a primary prevention service.
The health needs of the general public, and the care and protection of those who do not have the disease, should be balanced with the needs of individuals with the disease in a manner that allows for the infected individuals to receive optimal medical care and for public health services to protect the uninfected.
Individuals with HIV disease have an obligation to protect others from being exposed to HIV by avoiding behaviors that place others at risk of becoming infected.
Each of the States should have in effect laws that provide that the intentional or reckless exposure of others to HIV is a felony, even if the infection is not transmitted.
ESTABLISHMENT OF HIV-RELATED REQUIREMENTS IN MEDICAID PROGRAM.
In General.--Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 1902(a)-- (A) in paragraph (61), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end; (B) in paragraph (62), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by inserting after paragraph (62) the following paragraph: ``(63) meet the requirements of section 1930A (relating to the prevention of the transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus, commonly known as HIV).
''; and (2) by inserting after section 1930 the following section: ``prevention of transmission of hiv ``Sec.
For purposes of section 1902(a)(63), a State plan meets the requirements of this subsection if the plan demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the law or regulations of the State are in accordance with the following: ``(1) The State requires that, in the case of a health professional or other entity that provides for the performance of a test for HIV on an individual, the entity confidentially report positive test results to the State public health officer, together with any additional necessary information, in order to carry out the following purposes: ``(A) The performance of statistical and epidemiological analyses of the incidence in the State of cases of such disease.
The performance of statistical and epidemiological analyses of the demographic characteristics of the population of individuals in the State who have the disease.
The assessment of the adequacy of preventive services in the State with respect to the disease.
(A) The State requires that the public health officer of the State carry out a program to inform individuals that the individuals may have been exposed to HIV (referred to in this paragraph as `partner notification').
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `partner' includes the sexual partners of individuals with HIV disease, and the partners of such individuals in the sharing of hypodermic needles for the intravenous injection of drugs.
The State requires that any information collected for purposes of partner notification be sufficient for the following purposes: ``(i) To provide the partners of the individual with HIV disease with an appropriate opportunity to learn that the partners have been exposed to HIV.
To provide the partners with counseling and testing for HIV disease.
To provide the individual who has the disease with information regarding therapeutic measures for preventing and treating the deterioration of the immune system and conditions arising from the disease, and to provide the individual with other preventive information.
With respect to an individual who undergoes testing for HIV disease but does not seek the results of the testing, to recall and provide the individual with counseling, therapeutic information, and other information regarding preventative health services appropriate for the individual.
The State cooperates with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in carrying out a national program of partner notification, including the sharing of information between the public health officers of the States.
With respect to a defendant against whom an information or indictment is presented for a crime in which by force or threat of force the perpetrator compels the victim to engage in sexual activity, the State requires as follows: ``(A) That the defendant be tested for HIV disease if-- ``(i) the nature of the alleged crime is such that the sexual activity would have placed the victim at risk of becoming infected with HIV; or ``(ii) the victim requests that the defendant be so tested.
That if the conditions specified in subparagraph (A) are met, the defendant undergo the test not later than 48 hours after the date on which the information or indictment is presented, and that as soon thereafter as is practicable the results of the test be made available to the victim; the defendant (or if the defendant is a minor, to the legal guardian of the defendant); the attorneys of the victim; the attorneys of the defendant; the prosecuting attorneys; the judge presiding at the trial, if any; and the principal public health official for the local governmental jurisdiction in which the crime is alleged to have occurred.
That, if the results of the test indicate that the defendant has HIV disease, such fact may, as relevant, be considered in the judicial proceedings conducted with respect to the alleged crime.
(A) With respect to a patient who is to undergo an invasive medical procedure that would place the health professionals involved at risk of becoming infected with HIV, the State-- ``(i) authorizes such health professionals to provide that the procedure will not be performed unless the patient undergoes a test for HIV disease and the health professionals are notified of the results of the test; and ``(ii) requires that, if such test is performed and the patient has positive test results, the patient be informed of the results.
The State authorizes funeral-services practitioners to provide that invasive procedures will not be performed unless the body involved undergoes a test for HIV disease and the practitioners are notified of the results of the test.
The State requires that, if a health care entity (including a hospital) transfers a body to a funeral-services practitioner and such entity knows that the body is infected with HIV, the entity notify the funeral-services practitioner of such fact.
The State requires that, if a health professional knows that the professional has HIV disease, the professional notify a patient of the professional before performing any invasive medical procedure on the patient.
For purposes of this section, the term `HIV' means the human immunodeficiency virus; and the term `HIV disease' means infection with HIV and includes any condition arising from such infection.''.
Sense of Congress Regarding Health Professionals With HIV Disease.--It is the sense of the Congress that, with respect to health professionals who have HIV disease and who perform invasive medical procedures on patients, the medical profession should develop guidelines to assist such professionals in complying with requirements established by the States pursuant to section 1930A(a)(6) of the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (a) of this section).
Applicability of Requirements.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendment made by subsection (a) applies upon the expiration of the 120-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Delayed applicability for certain states.--In the case of the State involved, if the Secretary determines that a requirement established by the amendment made by subsection (a) cannot be implemented in the State without the enactment of State legislation, then such requirement applies to the State on and after the first day of the first calendar quarter that begins after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session is deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.
Rule of Construction.--Part D of title XXVI of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300ff-71 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 2675 the following section: ``SEC.
``With respect to an entity that is an applicant for or a recipient of financial assistance under this title, compliance by the entity with any State law or regulation that is consistent with section 1930A of the Social Security Act may not be considered to constitute a violation of any condition under this title for the receipt of such assistance.''.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING INTENTIONAL TRANSMISSION OF HIV.
It is the sense of the Congress that the States should have in effect laws providing that, in the case of individuals who know they have HIV disease, it is a felony for the individuals to engage in any behaviors that the individuals know will place others at risk of infection with the disease, regardless of whether the behaviors actually transmit the infection.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING CONFIDENTIALITY.
It is the sense of the Congress that strict confidentiality should be maintained in carrying out the provisions of section 1930A of the Social Security Act (as added by section 3(a) of this Act).