This Act may be cited as the ``Satellite Radio Freedom Act''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Customer.--The term ``customer'' means-- (A) a person or entity that contracts with a provider of satellite digital audio radio service; or (B) if the end user of such satellite digital audio radio service is not such contracting party, the end user of such satellite digital audio radio service, but only for purposes of determining the place of primary use; but does not include a reseller of satellite digital audio radio services.
Local taxing jurisdiction.--The term ``local taxing jurisdiction'' means any municipality, city, county, township, parish, transportation district, or assessment jurisdiction, or any other local jurisdiction in the territorial jurisdiction of the United States with the authority to impose a tax or fee, but does not include a State.
Place of primary use.--The term ``place of primary use'' means the residential street address or the primary business street address representative of where the customer's use of the satellite digital audio radio service primarily occurs.
Provider of satellite digital audio radio service.--The term ``provider of satellite digital audio radio service'' means a person who transmits, broadcasts, sells, or distributes satellite digital audio radio service.
Satellite digital audio radio service.--The term ``satellite digital audio radio service'' means any radio communication service provided in the 2320-2345 MHz frequency band pursuant to a license from the Federal Communications Commission.
State.--The term ``State'' means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, or any territory or possession of the United States.
Supplemental terrestrial repeater.--The term ``supplemental terrestrial repeater'' means a complementary terrestrial transmitter used to retransmit signals received from one or more satellites used to provide satellite digital audio radio service.
Tax or fee.--The terms ``tax'' and ``fee'' mean any local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible tax, local income tax, business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, telecommunications tax, communications tax, or any other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing business, regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing jurisdiction, other than ad valorem property taxes.
PREEMPTION OF LOCAL TAXATION WITH RESPECT TO DIGITAL AUDIO RADIO SATELLITE SERVICE.
Preemption.-- (1) Exemption from local taxation.--No tax or fee shall be imposed by a local taxing jurisdiction on the provision, purchase, or use of satellite digital audio radio service, or on a provider of satellite digital audio radio service.
Exception.--Subsection (a)(1) shall not apply to any tax or fee imposed by any local taxing jurisdiction on satellite digital audio radio service to the extent that a provider of satellite digital audio radio service owns, leases, or otherwise uses a supplemental terrestrial transmitter that is physically located in such jurisdiction.
Preservation of State Authority.--This section shall not be construed to prevent taxation of a provider of satellite digital audio radio service by a State or to prevent a local taxing jurisdiction from receiving revenue derived from a tax or fee imposed and collected by a State.
STATE TAXATION OF SATELLITE DIGITAL AUDIO RADIO SERVICES.
Limitation.--This section does not provide the authority for a State to impose a tax or fee unless all of the following circumstances exist: (1) The place of primary use is physically located within the physical boundaries of the State.
The law of such State authorizes the imposition of such taxes or fees.
Charges.-- (1) Sourcing for purposes of state taxes and fees.--All charges for satellite digital audio radio services subject to imposition of taxes or fees by a State shall be sourced to the customer's place of primary use as defined in section 2, regardless of where the satellite digital audio radio service transmission services originate, terminate, or pass through.
Sourcing for other purposes.--Notwithstanding the law of any State, all charges for satellite digital audio radio service shall be sourced to the customer's applicable residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer.