This Act may be cited as the ``Bosnia Force Realignment Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) United States Armed Forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina have accomplished the military mission assigned to them as a component of the Implementation and Stabilization Forces.
The continuing and open-ended commitment of United States Reports ground forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is subject to the oversight authority of the Congress.
Congress may limit the use of appropriated funds to create the conditions for an orderly and honorable withdrawal of United States Reports troops from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On November 27, 1995, the President affirmed that United States participation in the multinational military Implementation Force in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina would terminate in about one year.
The President declared the expiration date of the mandate for the Implementation Force to be December 20, 1996.
The Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff expressed confidence that the Implementation Force would complete its mission in about one year.
The Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff expressed the critical importance of establishing a firm deadline, in the absence of which there is a potential for expansion of the mission of United States Reports forces.
On October 3, 1996, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff announced the intention of the United States Administration to delay the removal of United States Armed Forces personnel from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina until March 1997.
In November 1996 the President announced his intention to further extend the deployment of United States Armed Forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina until June 1998.
The President did not request authorization by the Congress of a policy that would result in the further deployment of United States Armed Forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina until June 1998.
Notwithstanding the passage of two previously established deadlines, the reaffirmation of those deadlines by senior national security officials, and the endorsement by those same national security officials of the importance of having a deadline as a hedge against an expanded mission, the President announced on December 17, 1997 that establishing a deadline had been a mistake and that United States Reports ground combat forces were committed to the NATO-led mission in Bosnia for the indefinite future.
NATO military forces have increased their participation in law enforcement, particularly police activities.
United States Reports Commanders of NATO have stated on several occasions that, in accordance with the Dayton Peace Accords, the principal responsibility for such law enforcement and police activities lies with the Bosnian parties themselves.
LIMITATIONS ON THE USE OF FUNDS.
Funds appropriated or otherwise made available for the Department of Defense for any fiscal year may not be obligated for the ground elements of the United States Armed Forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina except as conditioned below.
The President shall continue the ongoing withdrawal of American forces from the NATO Stabilization Force in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina such that United States Reports ground forces in that force or the planned multi-national successor force shall not exceed: (A) 6900, by June 30, 1998; (B) 5000, by February 2, 1999; (C) 3500, by June 30, 1999, and; (D) 2500, by February 2, 2000.
Exceptions.--The limitation in subsection (a) shall not apply-- (1) to the extent necessary for United States Reports ground forces to protect themselves as the drawdowns outlined in sub-paragraph (a)(1) proceeds; (2) to the extent necessary to support a limited number of United States military personnel sufficient only to protect United States diplomatic facilities in existence on the date of the enactment of this Act; or (3) to the extent necessary to support non-combat military personnel sufficient only to advise the commanders North Atlantic Treaty Organization peacekeeping operations in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina; and (4) to United States Reports ground forces that may be deployed as part of NATO containment operations in regions surrounding the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Construction of Section.--Nothing in this section shall be deemed to restrict the authority of the President under the Constitution to protect the lives of United States citizens.
Limitation on Support for Law Enforcement Activities in Bosnia.--None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense for any fiscal year may be obligated or expended after the date of the enactment of this Act for the-- (1) conduct of, or direct support for, law enforcement and police activities in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, except for the training of law enforcement personnel or to prevent imminent loss of life; (2) conduct of, or support for, any activity in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina that may have the effect of jeopardizing the primary mission of the NATO-led force in preventing armed conflict between the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska (``Bosnian Entities''); (3) transfer of refugees within the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina that, in the opinion of the commander of NATO Forces involved in such transfer-- (A) has as one of its purposes the acquisition of control by a Bosnian Entity of territory allocated to the other Bosnian Entity under the Dayton Peace Agreement; or (B) may expose United States Armed Forces to substantial risk to their personal safety; and (4) implementation of any decision to change the legal status of any territory within the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina unless expressly agreed to by all signatories to the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Not later than December 1, 1998, the President shall submit to Congress a report on the progress towards meeting the drawdown limit established in section 2(a).
The report under paragraph (a) shall include an identification of the specific steps taken by the United States Government to transfer the United States portion of the peacekeeping mission in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to European allied nations or organizations.