This Act may be cited as the ``Lechuguilla Cave Protection Act of 1993''.
Congress finds that Lechuguilla Cave and other significant cave resources of Carlsbad Caverns National Park and adjacent public lands in the cave protection area have internationally significant scientific, environmental, and other values, and should be retained in public ownership and protected against adverse effects of mineral exploration and development and other activities presenting threats to the areas.
DEFINITIONS As used in this Act (except as otherwise specified in this Act): (1) Cave protection area.--The term ``cave protection area'' means the lands within the area depicted on the map referred to in section 4(b).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Other terms.--All other terms, including the term ``public lands'', shall have the same meaning as the terms have in the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the approximately 6,280 acres of public lands within the boundaries of the cave protection area that are subject to or may become subject to the operation of the public land laws, are withdrawn from all forms of appropriation or disposal under the public land laws (including the mining and material disposal laws) and from the operation of the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws.
Land Description.--The lands referred to in subsection (a) are the lands generally depicted on the map entitled ``Lechuguilla Cave Protection Area'' dated April 1993 and filed in accordance with subsection (c).
Publication, Filing, Correction, and Inspection.-- (1) In general.--As soon as is practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a notice containing the legal description of the lands withdrawn under subsection (a) and shall file the legal description and a detailed map of the lands referred to in subsection (a) with the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Force and effect.--The map and legal description referred to in paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal description.
Inspection.--Copies of the map and legal description referred to in subsection (b) shall be available for public inspection in the offices of the Director and appropriate State Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
Management.--The public lands withdrawn under subsection (a) shall be managed by the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, pursuant to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) and other applicable laws, including this Act.
MANAGEMENT OF EXISTING LEASES.
Suspension of New Drilling.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Prohibition.--The Secretary shall not permit any new drilling on or involving any valid mineral or geothermal leases within the lands withdrawn under section 4.
Suspension.--The Secretary shall require the suspension of any activities with respect to mineral or geothermal leases if the Secretary determines that to do so is necessary to prevent an adverse impact on Lechuguilla Cave or other significant cave resources of Carlsbad Caverns National Park and the lands within the cave protection area.
Duration.-- (A) In general.--The prohibition on new drilling imposed by the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall remain in effect until the effective date of a record of decision regarding the proposal to drill is analyzed in the Dark Canyon Environmental Impact Statement, or for 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act, whichever occurs first.
After prohibition period.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the Secretary to permit or prohibit new drilling after the period specified in subparagraph (A).
Negotiations.-- (1) Agreements for termination of leases.--During the period specified in subsection (a)(2), the Secretary shall seek the agreement of the holder of a valid existing mineral or geothermal lease on the public lands withdrawn under section 4(a) for the termination of the lease or to such restrictions on activities on lands covered by the lease as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to protect Lechuguilla Cave and the other significant cave resources of Carlsbad Caverns National Park and the lands within the cave protection area.
The Secretary shall seek such agreement with due regard to the value of the oil and gas resources which the owners thereof will not be allowed to recover or produce.
No agreement.-- (A) In general.--With respect to any lease for which no agreement of the type described in paragraph (1) has been reached at the end of the period specified in subsection (a)(2), the Secretary shall take such steps as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to protect Lechuguilla Cave and the other significant cave resources of Carlsbad Caverns National Park and the lands within the cave protection area.
Options.--The steps referred to in subparagraph (A) may include acquisition of the lands covered by the lease or other interests.
In the event of an acquisition, any lands or interests therein acquired by the Secretary shall be managed pursuant to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) and other applicable laws, including this Act.
Cooperation of other parties.--To the extent the Secretary determines is desirable, the Secretary shall seek the cooperation of the State of New Mexico and any other parties owning lands within the cave protection area with respect to such restrictions on the use of relevant lands owned by the parties as the Secretary may suggest to further the protection of Lechuguilla Cave and the other significant care resources of Carlsbad Caverns National Park and the lands within the cave protection area.
ADDITIONAL PROTECTION AND RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
Additional Protection.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall take additional steps to protect Lechuguilla Cave or the other significant cave resources of Carlsbad Caverns National Park and the lands within the cave protection area, if on the basis of scientific analysis found by the Secretary to be relevant and credible, the Secretary determines it is appropriate to do so.
Limitations on access.--To the extent the Secretary finds appropriate to protect Lechuguilla Cave and the other significant cave resources of Carlsbad Caverns National Park or the lands within the cave protection area, the Secretary may limit or prohibit access to or across lands owned by the United States or prohibit the removal from the lands any mineral, geological, or cave resources except as the Secretary may permit for scientific purposes.
Insufficient authority.--If the Secretary determines that existing law, including this Act, provides the Secretary insufficient authority to take any step the Secretary determines to be desirable to protect Lechuguilla Cave or other significant cave resources of Carlsbad Caverns National Park or the lands within the cave protection area, the Secretary shall inform the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate concerning the additional authority the Secretary believes to be necessary.
Relation to Other Laws.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as increasing or diminishing the ability of any party to seek compensation pursuant to any applicable law, including section 1491 of title 28, United States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Tucker Act''), or as precluding any defense or claim otherwise available to the United States in connection with any action seeking compensation from the United States.