This Act may be cited as the ``American Indian Education Foundation Act of 1999''.
AMERICAN INDIAN EDUCATION FOUNDATION.
In General.--Part B of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 215 the following: ``CHAPTER 216.
AMERICAN INDIAN EDUCATION FOUNDATION ``Sec.
Liability of officers and agents.
Transfer of donated funds.
Organization ``(a) Federal Charter.--The American Indian Education Foundation (herein in this chapter referred to as the `foundation') is a federally chartered corporation.
Perpetual Existence.--Except as otherwise provided, the foundation has perpetual existence.
Nature of Corporation.--The foundation is a charitable and nonprofit corporation and is not an agency or instrumentality of the United States.
Place of Incorporation and Domicile.--The foundation is declared to be incorporated and domiciled in the District of Columbia.
Definitions.--In this chapter-- ``(1) the term `American Indian' has the meaning given the term `Indian' in section 4(d) of the Indian Self-Determination and Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(d)); and ``(2) the term `Bureau funded school' has the meaning given that term in section 1146 of the Education Amendments of 1978 (25 United States Code 2026).
Purposes ``The purposes of the foundation are-- ``(1) to encourage, accept, and administer private gifts of real and personal property or any income therefrom or other interest therein for the benefit of, or in support of, the mission of the Office of Indian Education Programs of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (or its successor office); ``(2) to undertake and conduct such other activities as will further the educational opportunities of American Indians who attend a Bureau funded school; and ``(3) to participate with, and otherwise assist, Federal, State, and tribal governments, agencies, entities, and individuals in undertaking and conducting activities that will further the educational opportunities of American Indians attending Bureau funded schools.
Governing body ``(a) Board of Directors.-- ``(1) The board of directors (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the `board') is the governing body of the foundation.
The board may exercise, or provide for the exercise of, the powers of the foundation.
The number of members of the board, the manner of their selection (including the filling of vacancies), and their terms of office are as provided in the constitution and bylaws of the foundation.
However, the board shall have at least 11 members, 2 of whom shall be the Secretary of the Interior and the Assistant Secretary of the Interior for Indian Affairs, who shall serve as ex officio nonvoting members, and the initial members of the board shall be appointed by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to section 3(a) of the American Indian Education Foundation Act of 1999.
The members of the board shall be United States citizens who are knowledgeable or experienced in American Indian education and shall, to the extent practicable, represent diverse points of view relating to the education of American Indians.
Officers.-- ``(1) The officers of the foundation are a secretary, elected from among the members of the board, and any other officers provided for in the constitution and bylaws of the foundation.
The secretary shall serve, at the direction of the board, as its chief operating officer and shall be knowledgeable and experienced in matters relating to education in general and education of American Indians in particular.
The manner of election, term of office, and duties of the officers are as provided in the constitution and bylaws of the foundation.
Compensation.--Members of the board shall not receive compensation for their services as members, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses incurred by them in the performance of the duties of the foundation.
Powers ``The foundation-- ``(1) shall adopt a constitution and bylaws for the management of its property and the regulation of its affairs, which may be amended; ``(2) may adopt and alter a corporate seal; ``(3) may make contracts, subject to the limitations of this chapter; ``(4) may acquire (through a gift or otherwise), own, lease, encumber, and transfer real or personal property as necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of the foundation; ``(5) may sue and be sued; and ``(6) may perform any other act necessary and proper to carry out the purposes of the foundation.
Principal office ``The principal office of the foundation shall be in the District of Columbia.
However, the activities of the foundation may be conducted, and offices may be maintained, throughout the United States in accordance with the constitution and bylaws of the foundation.
Service of process ``The foundation shall comply with the law on service of process of each State in which it is incorporated and of each State in which the foundation carries on activities.
Liability of officers and agents ``The foundation is liable for the acts of its officers and agents acting within the scope of their authority.
Members of the board are personally liable only for gross negligence in the performance of their duties.
Restrictions ``(a) Limitation on Spending.--Beginning with the fiscal year following the first full fiscal year during which the foundation is in operation, the administrative costs of the foundation may not exceed 10 percent of the sum of-- ``(1) the amounts transferred to the foundation under section 21609 during the preceding fiscal year; and ``(2) donations received from private sources during the preceding fiscal year.
Appointment and Hiring.--The appointment of officers and employees of the foundation shall be subject to the availability of funds.
Status.--The members of the board, and the officers, employees, and agents of the foundation are not, by reason of their association with the foundation, officers, employees, or agents of the United States.
Transfer of donated funds ``The Secretary of the Interior may transfer to the foundation funds held by the Department of the Interior under the Act of February 14, 1931 (Chap.
171; 46 United States Statutes at Large 1106) (25 United States Code 451), if the transfer or use of such funds is not prohibited by any term under which the funds were donated.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part B of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 215 the following new item: ``216.
American Indian Education Foundation................. 21601''.
INITIAL PERIOD AFTER ESTABLISHMENT.
Board of Directors.-- (1) Initial board.--Notwithstanding the first sentence of section 21603(a)(2) of title 36, United States Code, not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall appoint the initial voting members of the board of directors under section 21603 of title 36, United States Code (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``board'').
The initial members of the board shall have staggered terms (as determined by the Secretary of the Interior).
Successive boards.--The composition of all successive boards after the initial board shall be in conformity with the constitution and bylaws of the American Indian Education Foundation organized under chapter 216 of title 36, United States Code (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``foundation'').
Administrative Services and Support.-- (1) Provision of support by secretary.--Subject to paragraph (2), during the 5-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior-- (A) may provide personnel, facilities, and other administrative support services to the foundation; (B) may provide funds to reimburse the travel expenses of the members of the board under section 21603(c)(2) of title 36, United States Code; and (C) shall require and accept reimbursements from the foundation for any-- (i) services provided under subparagraph (A); and (ii) funds provided under subparagraph (B).
Reimbursement.--Reimbursements accepted under paragraph (1)(C) shall be deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the appropriations then current and chargeable for the cost of providing services described in paragraph (1)(A) and the travel expenses described in paragraph (1)(B).
Continuation of certain services.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Secretary of the Interior may continue to provide facilities and necessary support services to the foundation after the termination of the 5-year period specified in paragraph (1), on a space available, reimbursable cost basis.