This Act may be cited as the ``Neighborhood Security Act of 2003''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) National Neighborhood Watch was created by the National Sheriffs Association in 1972 through funding provided by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration.
Neighborhood Watch is a voluntary program that supports local efforts to safeguard communities.
A national registry of Neighborhood Watch units does not exist.
On January 30, 2002, President Bush announced the creation of Citizen Corps.
Beginning in September 2002, in cooperation of the National Sheriffs Association, Citizen Corps has aimed to encourage citizens to form Neighborhood Watch groups in their local communities to bolster homeland security.
Citizens in local communities should be encouraged and empowered to engage in homeland security activities to reduce the threat to homeland security from terrorism.
The Nation's homeland security system should do as much as possible to-- (A) encourage the creation of, and participation in, high-quality Neighborhood Watch programs in local communities; (B) disseminate information about homeland security efforts; and (C) educate citizens on how to prevent, and respond to, possible terrorist attacks.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To provide each community in each city, suburb, and small town within the United States with the opportunity to establish an effective Neighborhood Watch in which all community members have the opportunity to participate.
To create 50,000 new Neighborhood Watches by the end of 2007.
To enhance the quality of existing Neighborhood Watches.
Grants Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General, through the Office of Justice Programs, is authorized to award 1 or more grants to eligible entities to develop and improve Neighborhood Watches throughout the Nation.
Eligible entities.--Nonprofit organizations and professional associations are eligible to receive grants under this section.
Use of Funds.--Grants awarded pursuant to subsection (a) shall be used to-- (1) complete a survey of Neighborhood Watches that identifies such programs by ZIP code; (2) establish a national registry of Neighborhood Watch leaders, with appropriate contact information; (3) through the survey under paragraph (1), identify best practices and model programs among Neighborhood Watches for-- (A) educating community members with respect to the prevention of terrorism and crime; (B) preventing or assisting with the prevention of terrorism and crime; (C) appropriately responding to terrorism and crime; and (D) achieving broad community involvement in activities under subparagraphs (A) through (C); (4) using the best practices identified in paragraph (3), create a manual for communities seeking to-- (A) establish a new Neighborhood Watch; or (B) improve an existing Neighborhood Watch; and (5) engage in outreach and respond to inquiries in order to disseminate information about-- (A) the benefits of effective Neighborhood Watches; (B) the means to establish new Neighborhood Watches; and (C) the means to improve existing Neighborhood Watches.
In response to an appropriate request to create a Neighborhood Watch, the grantee shall provide a Neighborhood Watch start-up kit which includes material useful for a Neighborhood Watch that is identified by the grantee.
Application.-- (1) In general.--Each eligible entity desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Attorney General at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.
Criteria.--Applicants for grants under this section shall be selected based on-- (A) the applicant's ability to carry out the activities described in subsection (b); (B) the applicant's experience coordinating Neighborhood Watches; (C) adequate consultation with state and local law enforcement; and (D) and other criteria, as determined by the Attorney General.
There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2004 and such sums as are necessary for fiscal years 2005 through 2008 to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.