TAX CREDIT FOR CERTAIN POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
23. CREDIT FOR POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to one-half of all political contributions, and all newsletter fund contributions, paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) shall not exceed $100 ($200 in the case of a joint return).
Verification.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) shall be allowed, with respect to any political contribution or newsletter fund contribution, only if such contribution is verified in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulation.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Candidate.--The term `candidate' means, with respect to any Federal, State, or local elective public office, an individual who-- ``(A) publicly announces before the close of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the political contribution is made that the individual is a candidate for nomination or election to such office; and ``(B) meets the qualifications prescribed by law to hold such office.
National political party.--The term `national political party' means-- ``(A) in the case of political contributions made during a taxable year of the taxpayer in which the electors of President and Vice President are chosen, a political party presenting candidates or electors for such offices on the official election ballot of ten or more States; or ``(B) in the case of political contributions made during any other taxable year of the taxpayer, a political party which met the qualifications described in subparagraph (A) in the last preceding election of a President and Vice President.
Newsletter fund.--The term `newsletter fund' means a fund described in section 527(g)(1).
Political contribution.--The term `political contribution' means a contribution or gift of money, or the fair market value of a contribution or gift of property, to-- ``(A) an individual who is a candidate for nomination or election to any Federal, State, or local elective public office in any primary, general, or special election, for use by such individual to further the candidacy of the individual for nomination or election to such office; ``(B) any committee, association, or organization (whether or not incorporated) organized and operated exclusively for the purposes of influencing, or attempting to influence, the nomination or election of one or more individuals who are candidates for nomination or election to any Federal, State, or local elective public office, for use by such committee, association, or organization to further the candidacy of such individual or individuals for nomination or election to such office; ``(C) the national committee of a national political party; ``(D) the State committee of a national political party as designated by the national committee of such party; or ``(E) a local committee of a national political party as designated by the State committee of such party designated under subparagraph (D).
State and local.--The term `State' means the various States and the District of Columbia; and the term `local' means a political subdivision or part thereof, or two or more political subdivisions or parts thereof, of a State.''.
Cross References.-- ``For transfer of appreciated property to a political organization, see section 84.
``For certain indirect contributions to political parties, see section 276.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
23. Credit for political contributions.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31 of the calendar year in which this Act is enacted.
Repeal of Provisions Concerning Presidential Campaign Fund.-- The following provisions of such Code are hereby repealed: (1) Part VIII of subchapter A of chapter 61 of subtitle F of such Code (relating to designation of income tax payments to Presidential Election Campaign Fund).
Subtitle H (relating to financing of Presidential election campaigns).
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Table of parts.--The table of parts of subchapter A of chapter 61 of subtitle F of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to part VIII.
Table of subtitles.--The table of subtitles of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to subtitle H. (c) Effective Dates.-- (1) Designation of income tax payments to fund.--The amendment made by subsection (a)(1) applies to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
Financing of presidential election campaigns.--The amendment made by subsection (a)(2) shall take effect on the date that is 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, except that no payment may be made from the Presidential Election Campaign Fund or the Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account with respect to any Presidential election occurring more than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Amounts Remaining in Funds.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit into the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts any amounts that remain, on the date that is 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, in the Presidential Election Campaign Fund or the Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account.