OF PENSION BENEFIT CLAIMS.
In General.--Section 503 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1133) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of the heading the following: ``and arbitration of pension claims''; (2) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b)(1) Any claim of a participant or beneficiary against an employee pension benefit plan with respect to benefits under such plan remaining unresolved, after opportunity for review provided under subsection (a) has been exercised, may be resolved through arbitration, upon the request of the participant or beneficiary which is filed with the Secretary, in such form and manner as shall be prescribed by regulation and within the 60-day period after the participant or beneficiary has received written notice from the plan of the completion of such review.
The filing of a request for arbitration under this section with respect to any claim shall constitute a waiver of any right to review of such claim other than as provided in this subsection.
An arbitration proceeding under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with fair and equitable procedures to be prescribed by the Secretary.
Individuals serving as arbitrators under this section shall be selected by the Secretary from employees of the Department of Labor or, to the extent considered by the Secretary more cost-effective, from individuals whose services are acquired from other sources.
If the parties have not provided by agreement for the costs of the arbitration, including arbitrator's fees, the arbitrator shall assess such fees, in an amount for each party not to exceed $500.
The arbitrator may also award to prevailing participants and beneficiaries reasonable attorney's fees and pre-judgment interest on unpaid benefits.
The award may require payment of punitive damages by any party if the arbitrator finds that any failure by the party with respect to unpaid benefits constitutes willful misconduct.
Any arbitration proceedings under this subsection shall, to the extent consistent with this title, be conducted in the same manner, subject to the same limitations, carried out with the same powers (including subpena power), and enforced in the United States courts as an arbitration proceeding carried out under title 9, United States Code, as if such arbitration had been entered into by the parties by mutual agreement.
Any arbitration award which is not appealed under paragraph (4) may be reviewed only pursuant to sections 9 through 13 of such title 9.
(A) Upon completion of the arbitration proceedings in favor of one of the parties, a party aggrieved by the arbitrator's award may bring an action in an appropriate United States district court to vacate or modify the award.
Any action under this paragraph must be brought no later than 30 days after the date of the issuance of the arbitrator's award, and in such action, the findings of fact shall be subject to de novo review.
The district courts of the United States shall have exclusive jurisdiction of an action under this paragraph without regard to the amount in controversy.
An action under this section may be brought in the district where the plan is administered or where a defendant resides or does business, and process may be served in any district where a defendant resides, does business, or may be found.
In any action under this paragraph, the court may award all or a portion of the costs and expenses incurred in connection with such action, including reasonable attorney's fees, to a prevailing participant or beneficiary.
A copy of the complaint in any action under this paragraph shall be served upon the Secretary by certified mail.
The Secretary may intervene in any such action.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The item relating to section 503 in the table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Claims procedure and arbitration of pension claims.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to claims arising on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PRE-JUDGMENT INTEREST ON UNPAID BENEFITS; PUNITIVE DAMAGES FOR WILLFUL MISCONDUCT.
Pre-judgment Interest.--Section 502(a)(1)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1132(a)(1)(B)) is amended by inserting ``(together with reasonable pre-judgment interest on unpaid pension plan benefits)'' after ``to recover benefits due to him under the terms of his plan''.
Attorney Fees and Costs of Action.--Section 502(g) of such Act (29 United States Code 1132(g)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``or (3)'' after ``paragraph (2)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) In any action or settlement proceeding under this title with respect to an employee pension benefit plan brought by a participant or beneficiary under such plan in which the participant or beneficiary prevails or substantially prevails, the participant or beneficiary shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees, reasonable expert witness fees, and other reasonable costs relating to the action.
Fees to which the participant or beneficiary is entitled under the paragraph shall be at generally prevailing hourly rates.''.
Punitive Damages for Willful Misconduct.--Section 502(c) of such Act (29 United States Code 1132(c)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (7); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph: ``(6) In any case in which any party consisting of the plan sponsor, the plan administrator, or any other fiduciary of a pension plan knowingly and willfully acts or fails to act for the purpose of depriving a participant or beneficiary of the full and timely payment of a benefit under the plan in violation of the terms of the plan or this title, such party may, in the court's discretion, be jointly and severally liable to such participant or beneficiary, in any action brought under subsection (a)(1)(B), for punitive damages in addition to any other remedy available to such participant or beneficiary.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to causes of action arising on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ANNUAL REPORTS TO PARTICIPANTS AND BENEFICIARIES IN UNDERSTANDABLE LANGUAGE.
In General.--Section 104(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1024(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1) Within 210 days after the close of each plan year, the administrator shall furnish to each participant, and to each beneficiary receiving benefits under the plan-- ``(A) a copy of the statements and schedules, for such plan, described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 103(b)(3); ``(B) a report containing-- ``(i) a description of all investments and assets of the plan, including their value; ``(ii) the names and positions of all of the trustees of the plan, and the time remaining before the expiration of their term; ``(iii) a description of the method of trustee selection; ``(iv) a description of any changes in investment policy of the plan during the fiscal year; and ``(v) an evaluation of the long-term solvency of the plan, including the number of participants and beneficiaries and a summary of their benefits, and a projection of the amount of benefits expected to be paid for the fifth, tenth, and fifteenth plan year following the date of the publication of the report; ``(C) any other material (including the percentage determined under section 103(d)(11)) as is necessary to fairly summarize the latest annual report; and ``(D) information on where participants and beneficiary may receive assistance with respect to the plan.
Such information shall be written and calculated to be understood by the average plan participant, and shall be sufficiently accurate and comprehensive to reasonably apprise such participants and beneficiaries of their rights and obligations under the plan.
The administrator shall make copies of the plan description and the latest annual report and the bargaining agreement, trust agreement, contract, or other instruments under which the plan was established or is operated available for examination by any plan participant or beneficiary in the principal office of the administrator and in such other places as may be necessary to make available all pertinent information to all participants (including such places as the Secretary may prescribe by regulations).
The administrator shall, upon written request of any participant or beneficiary, furnish a copy of the latest annual report, any terminal report, the bargaining agreement, trust agreement, contract, or other instruments under which the plan is established or operated.
The administrator may make a reasonable charge to cover the cost of furnishing such complete copies.
The Secretary may by regulation prescribe the maximum amount which will constitute a reasonable charge under the preceding sentence.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 101(a) of such Act (29 United States Code 1021(a)) is amended to read as follows-- ``Sec.
The administrator of each employee benefit plan shall cause to be furnished in accordance with section 104(b) to each participant covered under the plan and to each beneficiary who is receiving benefits under the plan the information described in sections 104(b)(1) and 105(a) and (c).''.
Section 101(b) of such Act (29 United States Code 1021(b)) is amended by striking paragraph (1) and redesignating paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (5), as paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4), respectively.
Section 102(a)(1) of such Act (29 United States Code 1022(a)(1)) is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
(1) A report shall be furnished to participants and beneficiaries as provided in section 104(b).''.
Section 102(b) of such Act (29 United States Code 1022(b)) is amended by striking ``and summary plan description'' and inserting ``report''.
Section 103(a)(3)(A) of such Act (29 United States Code 1023 (a)(3)(A)) is amended in the second sentence by striking ``104(b)(3)'' and inserting ``104(b)(1) (A) and (C)''.
Section 104(a)(1)(C) of such Act (29 United States Code 1024(a)(1)(C)) is amended to read as follows: ``(C) a copy of the materials required to be furnished to participants and beneficiaries pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section; and''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1998.