This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Pipeline Research, Development, and Demonstration Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) natural gas and hazardous liquid pipelines are a key component of the energy infrastructure of the United States; (2) many of these pipelines are aging facilities and therefore more susceptible to failure; (3) these facilities, with their unprotected rights-of-way, are also highly vulnerable to terrorist attacks and other disruptions; (4) interruptions in service on major pipelines, whether a result of pipeline failure or purposeful action, can have enormous consequences for the economy and security of the United States; (5) new energy sources such as hydrogen will require a new generation of pipelines; and (6) a more coordinated research, development, demonstration, and standardization program is needed to ensure the use of existing technologies and the development of new technologies to increase the safety and security of these critical facilities.
PIPELINE INTEGRITY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION.
Establishment of Cooperative Program.-- (1) In general.--The heads of the participating agencies shall develop and implement a program of research, development, demonstration, and standardization to ensure the integrity of pipeline facilities.
Elements.--The program shall include research, development, demonstration, and standardization activities related to-- (A) materials research and inspection; (B) stress and fracture analysis, and detection of cracks, corrosion, abrasion, and other abnormalities inside pipelines that lead to pipeline failure; (C) leak detection technologies, including detection of leaks at very low volumes; (D) flow metering and methods of analyzing content of pipeline throughput; (E) pipeline security, including improving the surveillance of pipeline rights-of-way; (F) risk assessment methodology; (G) information systems surety; and (H) other elements the heads of the participating agencies consider appropriate.
Activities and capabilities report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the participating agencies shall transmit to the Congress a report on the activities and capabilities of the participating agencies, including the national laboratories, and any other Federal agencies that are relevant to or could contribute to research, development, demonstration, and standardization activities under the program plan prepared under this section.
Program Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the participating agencies shall prepare and transmit to Congress a 5-year program plan to guide activities under this section.
Such program plan shall be submitted to the Pipeline Integrity Technical Advisory Committee established under subsection (c) for review, and the report to Congress shall include the comments of the Advisory Committee.
The 5-year program plan shall describe related activities of Federal agencies that are not participating agencies.
Consultation.--In preparing the program plan, the participating agencies shall consult with appropriate representatives of State and local government and the private sector, including the gas, crude oil, and petroleum product pipeline industries, to help establish program priorities and to select and prioritize appropriate project proposals.
Advice from other entities.--In preparing the program plan, the participating agencies may also seek the advice of other Federal agencies, utilities, manufacturers, institutions of higher learning, pipeline research institutions, national laboratories, environmental organizations, pipeline safety advocates, professional and technical societies, and any other appropriate entities.
Pipeline Integrity Technical Advisory Committee.-- (1) Establishment.--The participating agencies shall establish and manage a Pipeline Integrity Technical Advisory Committee (in this subsection referred to as the ``Advisory Committee'').
The Advisory Committee shall be established not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Duties.--The Advisory Committee shall-- (A) advise the participating agencies on the development and implementation of the program plan prepared under subsection (b); and (B) have a continuing role in evaluating the progress and results of research, development, demonstration, and standardization activities carried out under this section.
Membership.-- (A) Appointment.--The Advisory Committee shall be composed of-- (i) 3 members appointed by the Secretary of Energy; (ii) 3 members appointed by the Secretary of Transportation; and (iii) 3 members appointed by the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
In making such appointments, the participating agencies shall seek recommendations from the National Academy of Sciences.
Qualifications.--Members appointed to the Advisory Committee shall have experience or be technically qualified, by training or knowledge, in the operations of either the hazardous liquid or gas pipeline industries, and have experience in the research and development of pipeline or related technologies.
Compensation.--The members of the Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation, but shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Meetings.--The Advisory Committee shall meet at least 4 times each year.
Termination.--The Advisory Committee shall terminate 5 years after its establishment.
Reports to Congress.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the participating agencies shall each transmit to the Congress a report on the status and results to date of the implementation of their portion of the program plan prepared under subsection (b).
Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the participating agencies shall enter into a memorandum of understanding detailing their respective responsibilities under this Act, consistent with the activities and capabilities identified under section 3(a)(3).
Each of the participating agencies shall have the primary responsibility for ensuring that the elements of the program plan within their jurisdiction are implemented in accordance with this Act.
The Department of Transportation's responsibilities shall reflect its expertise in pipeline inspection and information systems surety.
The Department of Energy's responsibilities shall reflect its expertise in low-volume leak detection and surveillance technologies.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology's responsibilities shall reflect its expertise in standards and materials research.
There are authorized to be appropriated-- (1) to the Secretary of Energy $10,000,000; (2) to the Secretary of Transportation $5,000,000; and (3) to the National Institute of Standards and Technology $5,000,000, for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006 for carrying out this Act.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``participating agencies'' means the Department of Energy, the Department of Transportation, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology.