TEMPORARY REDUCTION IN FUEL TAXES ON GASOLINE, DIESEL FUEL, KEROSENE, AND AVIATION FUEL, BY 4.3 CENTS, OR TO ZERO.
In General.--Section 4081 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to imposition of tax on gasoline, diesel fuel, and kerosene) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Temporary Reduction in Taxes on Gasoline, Diesel Fuel, and Kerosene.-- ``(1) In general.--During the applicable period, each rate of tax referred to in paragraph (2)-- ``(A) shall be reduced by 4.3 cents per gallon, and ``(B) if at any time during the applicable period the national average price of unleaded regular gasoline is at least $2.00 per gallon (as determined by the Secretary of Energy), shall be reduced to zero beginning on the date which is 7 days after such determination and for the remainder of the applicable period, subject to paragraph (3).
Rates of tax.--The rates of tax referred to in this paragraph are the rates of tax otherwise applicable under-- ``(A) clause (i), (ii), (iii) of subsection (a)(2)(A) (relating to gasoline, diesel fuel, and kerosene), and ``(B) paragraph (1) of section 4041(a) (relating to diesel fuel) with respect to fuel sold for use or used in a diesel-powered highway vehicle.
Protecting Social Security Trust Fund.--If upon the determination described in paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary, after consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, determines that such reduction would result in an aggregate reduction in revenues to the Treasury exceeding the Federal on-budget surplus during the remainder of the applicable period, the Secretary shall modify such reduction such that each rate of tax referred to in paragraph (2) and section 4091(e)(1) is reduced in a pro rata manner and such aggregate reduction does not exceed such surplus.
Maintenance of trust fund deposits.--In determining the amounts to be appropriated to the Highway Trust Fund under section 9503 and the Airport and Airway Trust Fund under section 9502, an amount equal to the reduction in revenues to the Treasury by reason of this subsection shall be treated as taxes received in the Treasury under this section.
Applicable period.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `applicable period' means the period beginning after April 15, 2000, and ending before January 1, 2001.''
Aviation Fuel.--Section 4091 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to imposition of tax on aviation fuel) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Temporary Reduction in Tax on Aviation Fuel.-- ``(1) In general.--During the applicable period, the rate of tax otherwise applicable under subsection (b)(1) shall be reduced as provided in section 4081(f)(1).
Maintenance of trust fund deposits.--In determining the amounts to be appropriated to the Airport and Airway Trust Fund under section 9502, an amount equal to the reduction in revenues to the Treasury by reason of this subsection shall be treated as taxes received in the Treasury under this section.
Applicable period.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `applicable period' means the period beginning after April 15, 2000, and ending before January 1, 2001.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--If-- (1) before the tax reduction date, tax has been imposed under section 4081 or 4091 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on any liquid, and (2) on such date such liquid is held by a dealer and has not been used and is intended for sale, there shall be credited or refunded (without interest) to the person who paid such tax (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``taxpayer'') an amount equal to the excess of the tax paid by the taxpayer over the amount of such tax which would be imposed on such liquid had the taxable event occurred on the tax reduction date.
Time for Filing Claims.--No credit or refund shall be allowed or made under this section unless-- (1) claim therefor is filed with the Secretary of the Treasury before the date which is 6 months after the tax reduction date, and (2) in any case where liquid is held by a dealer (other than the taxpayer) on the tax reduction date-- (A) the dealer submits a request for refund or credit to the taxpayer before the date which is 3 months after the tax reduction date, and (B) the taxpayer has repaid or agreed to repay the amount so claimed to such dealer or has obtained the written consent of such dealer to the allowance of the credit or the making of the refund.
Exception for Fuel Held in Retail Stocks.--No credit or refund shall be allowed under this section with respect to any liquid in retail stocks held at the place where intended to be sold at retail.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the terms ``dealer'' and ``held by a dealer'' have the respective meanings given to such terms by section 6412 of such Code; except that the term ``dealer'' includes a producer, and (2) the term ``tax reduction date'' means April 16, 2000.
Certain Rules To Apply.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (b) and (c) of section 6412 of such Code shall apply for purposes of this section.
Imposition of Tax.--In the case of any liquid on which tax would have been imposed under section 4081 or 4091 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 during the applicable period but for the amendments made by this Act, and which is held on the floor stocks tax date by any person, there is hereby imposed a floor stocks tax in an amount equal to the tax which would be imposed on such liquid had the taxable event occurred on the floor stocks tax date.
Liability for Tax and Method of Payment.-- (1) Liability for tax.--A person holding a liquid on the floor stocks tax date to which the tax imposed by subsection (a) applies shall be liable for such tax.
Method of payment.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Time for payment.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid on or before the date which is 6 months after the floor stocks tax date.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) Held by a person.--A liquid shall be considered as ``held by a person'' if title thereto has passed to such person (whether or not delivery to the person has been made).
Gasoline, diesel fuel, and aviation fuel.--The terms ``gasoline'', ``diesel fuel'', and ``aviation fuel'' have the respective meanings given such terms by sections 4083 and 4093 of such Code.
Floor stocks tax date.--The term ``floor stocks tax date'' means January 1, 2001.
Applicable period.--The term ``applicable period'' means the period beginning after April 15, 2000, and ending before January 1, 2001.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate.
Exception for Exempt Uses.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall not apply to gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, or aviation fuel held by any person exclusively for any use to the extent a credit or refund of the tax imposed by section 4081 or 4091 of such Code is allowable for such use.
Exception for Fuel Held in Vehicle Tank.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) on gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, or aviation fuel held in the tank of a motor vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft.
Exception for Certain Amounts of Fuel.-- (1) In general.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a)-- (A) on gasoline (other than aviation gasoline) held on the floor stocks tax date by any person if the aggregate amount of gasoline held by such person on such date does not exceed 4,000 gallons, and (B) on aviation gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, or aviation fuel held on such date by any person if the aggregate amount of aviation gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, or aviation fuel held by such person on such date does not exceed 2,000 gallons.
The preceding sentence shall apply only if such person submits to the Secretary (at the time and in the manner required by the Secretary) such information as the Secretary shall require for purposes of this paragraph.
Exempt fuel.--For purposes of paragraph (1), there shall not be taken into account fuel held by any person which is exempt from the tax imposed by subsection (a) by reason of subsection (d) or (e).
Controlled groups.--For purposes of this subsection-- (A) Corporations.-- (i) In general.--All persons treated as a controlled group shall be treated as 1 person.
Controlled group.--The term ``controlled group'' has the meaning given to such term by subsection (a) of section 1563 of such Code; except that for such purposes the phrase ``more than 50 percent'' shall be substituted for the phrase ``at least 80 percent'' each place it appears in such subsection.
Nonincorporated persons under common control.-- Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, principles similar to the principles of subparagraph (A) shall apply to a group of persons under common control where 1 or more of such persons is not a corporation.
Other Law Applicable.--All provisions of law, including penalties, applicable with respect to the taxes imposed by section 4081 or 4091 of such Code shall, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this subsection, apply with respect to the floor stock taxes imposed by subsection (a) to the same extent as if such taxes were imposed by such section 4081 or 4091.
BENEFITS OF TAX REDUCTION SHOULD BE PASSED ON TO CONSUMERS.
Passthrough to Consumers.-- (1) Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (A) consumers immediately receive the benefit of the reduction in taxes under this Act, and (B) transportation motor fuels producers and other dealers take such actions as necessary to reduce transportation motor fuels prices to reflect such reduction, including immediate credits to customer accounts representing tax refunds allowed as credits against excise tax deposit payments under the floor stocks refund provisions of this Act.
Study.-- (A) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study of the reduction of taxes under this Act to determine whether there has been a passthrough of such reduction.
Report.--Not later than September 30, 2000, the Comptroller General of the United States shall report to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives the results of the study conducted under subparagraph (A).