This Act may be cited as the ``U.S.S.
New Jersey Commemorative Coin Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The U.S.S.
New Jersey was launched December 7, 1942, the start of nearly 50 years of dedicated service to our Nation prior to final decommissioning in 1991.
After commissioning, the U.S.S.
New Jersey was sent to the Pacific, and played a key role in operations in the Marshalls, Marianas, Carolines, Philippines, Iwo Jima, and Okinawa, with a particular highlight being the U.S.S.
New Jersey's service as the flagship for Commander 3d Fleet, Admiral William ``Bull'' Halsey, during the Battle of Leyte Gulf in October 1944.
After the Allied victory in World War II, the U.S.S.
New Jersey was deactivated in 1948 until being called to service for the second time, in November 1950.
New Jersey served two tours in the Western Pacific during the Korean War, serving as flagship for Commander 7th Fleet.
After her valiant service during the Korean War, the U.S.S.
New Jersey was again mothballed in 1957, only to be re- activated again in 1968 to serve as the only active-duty Navy battleship.
New Jersey served a successful tour during the Vietnam conflict, providing critical major-caliber fire support for friendly troops, before again being decommissioned in December 1969.
New Jersey's service to our country did not end with the Vietnam conflict, as she was again called to active duty status in December 1982 and provided a show of strength off the coast of Nicaragua, in Central America in 1983.
The Navy again called upon the U.S.S.
New Jersey to provide critical support by sending her to the Mediterranean in 1983 to provide critical fire support to Marines in embattled Beirut, Lebanon.
New Jersey continued to serve the Navy in a variety of roles, including regular deployments in the Western Pacific.
New Jersey was decommissioned for the fourth and final time in February 1991.
In 1998 Congress passed legislation to decommission the U.S.S.
New Jersey and permanently berth her in the State of New Jersey.
The State has strongly endorsed bringing the U.S.S.
New Jersey home, and has issued commemorative license plates and taken other steps to raise funds for the costs of relocating the U.S.S.
The New Jersey congressional delegation is united in its support for bringing the U.S.S.
New Jersey home to New Jersey.
Denomination.--In commemoration of the U.S.S.
New Jersey, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary may obtain silver for minting coins under this Act from any available source, including stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of service of the U.S.S.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2002''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Obverse of coin.--The obverse of each coin minted under this Act shall bear the likeness of the U.S.S.
General design.--In designing this coin, the Secretary shall also consider incorporating appropriate elements from the tenure of service of the U.S.S.
New Jersey in the Navy.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts and shall be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only one facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act only during the period beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2002.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
In General.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, 10 percent of the proceeds from the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the U.S.S.
New Jersey Battleship Foundation in Middletown, New Jersey, for activities associated with the costs of moving the U.S.S.
New Jersey and permanently berthing her in her new location.
New Jersey Battleship Foundation shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code.