This Act may be cited as the ``Equity in Excellence Act of 2010''.
EQUITY IN EXCELLENCE GRANTS.
In General.--Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part I as part J; and (2) by inserting after section 1830 the following: ``PART I--EQUITY IN EXCELLENCE GRANTS ``SEC.
``The purpose of this part is to support high-need local educational agencies to develop programs that ensure that the rate of growth in academic achievement of high-achieving, educationally disadvantaged students in grades 1 through 4 who are served by the high-need local educational agencies is comparable to that of such students' more advantaged, high-achieving peers.
``In this part: ``(1) Cohort.--The term `cohort' means a group of high- achieving students in any of grades 1 through 4 who attend schools served by the same local educational agency.
Educationally disadvantaged student.--The term `educationally disadvantaged student' means a student who is from a low-income family, as determined by the measure of poverty used for the purposes of section 1113(a)(5) by the local educational agency serving the student.
Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means-- ``(A) a high-need local educational agency; ``(B) a consortium of local educational agencies that includes a high-need local educational agency; or ``(C) an eligible partnership.
Eligible partnership.--The term `eligible partnership' means a partnership consisting of-- ``(A) not less than 1 eligible high-need local educational agency; and ``(B) not less than 1 institution of higher education, or nonprofit organization, with significant expertise in educating students with gifts and talents.
High-achieving.--The term `high-achieving', when used with respect to a student, means a student who-- ``(A) based on a valid and reliable assessment administered upon the student's entry into grade 1, is performing academically in the top 10 percent of the students entering grade 1 at the school, for any subgroup described in section 1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) that includes the student; or ``(B) is identified by the local educational agency or elementary school for gifted education services through teacher or family referrals.
High-need local educational agency.--The term `high- need local educational agency' means a local educational agency that meets the requirements of section 2102(3)(A).
EQUITY IN EXCELLENCE GRANTS.
Program Authorized.-- ``(1) In general.--From amounts appropriated to carry out this part and not reserved under section 1845(b)(2), the Secretary is authorized to award demonstration grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible entities to enable the eligible entities to develop targeted interventions and academic services to ensure that, among the students served by high-need local educational agencies, the rate of growth in academic achievement of the cohort of high-achieving, educationally disadvantaged students is comparable to the cohort of such students' more advantaged, high-achieving peers.
Duration.--A grant awarded under this part shall be for a period of not more than 3 years and may be extended by the Secretary for an additional 2 years, in accordance with section 1845(a)(2).
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under this part shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
AUTHORIZED USE OF FUNDS.
``An eligible entity receiving a grant under this part shall use grant funds to carry out, for the cohorts of high-achieving students served by the high-need local educational agency participating in the eligible entity, all of the following activities: ``(1) Ensuring that assessments provide diagnostic information that informs instruction for high-achieving students.
Implementing evidence-based, innovative educational strategies, such as enrichment programs and academic acceleration strategies, designed to maximize the learning of high-potential and high-achieving students.
Procuring or utilizing high-quality instructional materials.
Carrying out training and professional development for school personnel involved in the teaching of high- achieving, educationally disadvantaged students, such as instructional staff, principals, counselors, and psychologists.
Conducting education and training for parents of high-achieving, educationally disadvantaged students to support educational excellence for such students.
REPORTS AND DATA COLLECTION.
Third-Year Report.-- ``(1) In general.--At the end of the third year of a grant under this part, the eligible entity receiving such grant shall prepare, and submit to the Secretary, a report regarding-- ``(A) how grant funds were expended; and ``(B) the outcomes produced by the grant.
Review.--Upon review of a third-year report submitted by an eligible entity under paragraph (1), the Secretary may extend a grant awarded under this part for not more than 2 more years based on the eligible entity's performance.
Data Collection.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Institute of Education Sciences, shall-- ``(A) collect data annually comparing longitudinal achievement levels of the cohorts of high-achieving, educationally disadvantaged students served by a grant under this part with such students' more advantaged peers; and ``(B) release such data for analysis by independent research institutions.
Reservation.--The Secretary may reserve not more than 1 percent of the total amount appropriated for this part to carry out subsection (a).
``Nothing in this part shall be construed to prohibit a recipient of a grant under this part from serving high-achieving, educationally disadvantaged students simultaneously with students with similar educational needs in the same educational settings, where appropriate.''.
Conforming Amendments.--The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes) is further amended-- (1) in the table of contents in section 2-- (A) by striking the item relating to part I and inserting the following: ``Part J--General Provisions''; and (B) by inserting after the item relating to section 1830 the following: ``PART I--Equity in Excellence Grants ``Sec.
Equity in excellence grants.
Authorized use of funds.
Reports and data collection.
''; (2) in section 1304(c)(2) (20 United States Code 6394(c)(2)), by striking ``part I'' and inserting ``part J''; and (3) in section 1415(a)(2)(C) (20 United States Code 6435(a)(2)(C)), by striking ``part I'' and inserting ``part J''.
Section 1002 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6302) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Equity in Excellence Grants.--For the purpose of carrying out part I, there is authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2011 and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.