This Act may be cited as the ``Maritime Navigation Technology and Research Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The United States should have as a goal the establishment of a vessel traffic control system that is as effective as the United States air traffic control system.
The technology exists to display, in real time electronic charts on board a vessel, the position of any vessel in the immediate area, based on global positioning system satellites.
The global positioning system has an accuracy of less than 100 meters and 3 to 10 meters in a differential mode which could be used to significantly improve the accuracy and reliability of vessel navigation in both harbors and in open water.
Laser navigation technology could be used to enhance harbor safety by improving the accuracy of early warnings to vessels of the clearances needed when approaching various fixed structures.
Existing vessel traffic control systems are often little more than informational services.
Improved vessel traffic control and collision avoidance systems are needed in United States harbors to improve the safety of vessel traffic and protect the marine environment.
Technology for real time tidal and current measurements, if combined with vessel traffic control systems, could improve navigation safety.
RULES REQUIRING STATE-OF-THE-ART VESSEL TRAFFIC CONTROL EQUIPMENT.
Issuance of Rules.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall issue rules which require vessels which operate in harbors in the United States to have operational state-of-the-art navigation, communication, and collision avoidance equipment that is compatible with Coast Guard vessel traffic systems.
Requirements for Certain Vessels.--Rules issued under this section shall require the use, by any vessel of a class to be determined by the Secretary and specified in the rules, of vessel traffic control and collision avoidance equipment that meets performance standards established in the rules for-- (1) determining vessel position with an accuracy that is at least 5 to 10 meters; (2) an onboard visual display, to be updated in real time, showing the location, speed, track, and projected course of both the parent vessel and other vessels within a radius of 40 kilometers; and (3) an onboard collision avoidance alarm system capable of-- (A) computing the potential for collision and alerting the pilot of impending collision; and (B) displaying the best alternatives for evasive action.
Requirements for Other Vessels.--Rules issued under this section shall require the use, by a vessel that is not included in the class specified pursuant to subsection (b), of a transponder capable of transmitting data regarding-- (1) the position, speed, and direction of the vessel; and (2) other pertinent information.
Upgrade of Coast Guard Systems.--The Secretary of Transportation shall upgrade all vessel traffic control systems as necessary to make them compatible with technologies required under rules issued under this section.
In General.-- (1) Requirement.--The Secretary of Transportation shall conduct or provide for the conduct of research and development of technologies for vessel navigation.
Required research.--Research under this subsection shall include-- (A) programs in the maritime applications of the advanced global positioning satellite systems and equivalent or better technology, electronic charting and information display, computerized vessel tracking, vessel transponders, collision avoidance, and computerized alarm systems; and (B) a program to better understand the relationship between human factors and vessel accidents and between human factors and maritime safety, to develop a human factors analysis of the hazards associated with new technologies to be used in maritime traffic control.
Research Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall submit to the Congress and begin implementing a national research plan for research in vessel navigation technology.
Contents.--The national research plan shall describe research and development which will be carried out by the Secretary over a 5-year period to ensure continued advancement in navigation technology that will provide the highest degree of safety.
Establishment and Functions.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall establish and appoint the members of an advisory committee which shall be known as the ``Maritime Navigation Research Advisory Committee''.
The advisory committee shall-- (1) provide advice and recommendations to the Secretary regarding needs, objectives, plans, approaches, content, and accomplishments with respect to the research plan under section 4(b) and the maritime research program carried out by the Department of Transportation; and (2) assist the Secretary in assuring that research under that program is coordinated with similar research being conducted by persons outside of the Department of Transportation.
Membership.--The advisory committee-- (1) shall consist of not more than 20 members appointed by the Secretary from among individuals who are not employees of the Department of Transportation and who are specially qualified to serve on the advisory committee by reason of their education, training, or experience; and (2) shall include representatives of schools, universities, public port authorities, corporations, associations, labor unions, consumers, and other Federal, State, and local government agencies.