BAN ON ACTIVITIES OF POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES IN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
In General.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``ban on activities of political action committees in house of representatives elections ``Sec.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no person other than an individual or a political committee may make contributions, solicit or receive contributions, or make expenditures for the purpose of influencing an election for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress.''.
Definition of Political Committee.--(1) Section 301(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(4)) is amended to read as follows: ``(4) The term `political committee' means-- ``(A) the principal campaign committee of a candidate; ``(B) any national, State, or district committee of a political party, including any subordinate committee thereof; and ``(C) any local committee of a political party which-- ``(i) receives contributions aggregating in excess of $5,000 during a calendar year; ``(ii) makes payments exempted from the definition of contribution or expenditure under paragraph (8) or (9) aggregating in excess of $5,000 during a calendar year; or ``(iii) makes contributions or expenditures aggregating in excess of $1,000 during a calendar year.''.
Section 316(b)(2) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441b(b)(2)) is amended by striking out subparagraph (C).
Candidate's Committees.--(1) Section 315(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) For the purposes of the limitations provided by paragraphs (1) and (2), any political committee which is established or financed or maintained or controlled by any candidate or Federal officeholder shall be deemed to be an authorized committee of such candidate or officeholder.''.
Section 302(e)(3) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 432(e)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) No political committee that supports or has supported more than one candidate may be designated as an authorized committee, except that a candidate for the office of President nominated by a political party may designate the national committee of such political party as the candidate's principal campaign committee, but only if that national committee maintains separate books of account with respect to its functions as a principal campaign committee.''.
Rules Applicable When Ban Not in Effect.--For purposes of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, during any period in which the limitation under section 323 of that Act (as added by subsection (a)) is not in effect-- (1) the amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall not be in effect; and (2) it shall be unlawful-- (A) for any person that is treated as a political committee by reason of paragraph (1) and is directly or indirectly established, administered, or supported by a connected organization which is a corporation, labor organization, or trade association to make contributions to any candidate or the candidate's authorized committee; and (B) for any person that is treated as a political committee by reason of paragraph (1) and is not directly or indirectly established, administered, or supported by a connected organization which is a corporation, labor organization, or trade association to make contributions to any candidate or the candidate's authorized committee for any election aggregating in excess of $1,000.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTION LIMITATION ON CONTRIBUTIONS FROM PERSONS OTHER THAN LOCAL INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTS.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i)(1) A candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not, with respect to a reporting period for an election, accept contributions from persons other than local individual residents totaling in excess of the total of contributions accepted from local individual residents.
As used in this subsection, the term `local individual resident' means an individual who resides in the congressional district involved.
(A) Any candidate who accepts contributions that exceed the limitation under this subsection with respect to the pre-election report period or the post-election report period shall pay to the Commission, for deposit in the Treasury, an amount equal to 5 times the amount of the excess contributions plus a civil penalty in an amount determined by the Commission.
Any candidate who accepts contributions that exceed the limitation under this subsection with respect to a period other than a period referred to in subparagraph (A) shall pay to the Commission, for deposit in the Treasury, an amount equal to 3 times the amount of the excess contributions.
Each report under section 304(a)(6) shall include a certification by the treasurer of the committee that the contributions reported do not exceed the limitation under this subsection.''.
EXPENDITURE LIMITATION OF $600,000 FOR EACH HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATE.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not make expenditures of more than $600,000 with respect to a general election, including any primary election related to such general election.''.
PERSONAL CONTRIBUTION LIMITATION OF $100,000 FOR EACH HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATE.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), as amended by sections 2 and 3, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not make personal contributions of more than $100,000 with respect to a general election, including any primary election related to such general election.''.
BAN ON INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURES IN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes), as amended by section 1, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``ban on independent expenditures in house of representatives elections ``Sec.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no person may make any independent expenditure with respect to an election for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress.''.
BAN ON SOFT MONEY IN ELECTIONS FOR FEDERAL OFFICE.
Section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (8), by striking out ``include--'' in the matter before clause (i) and all that follows through the end of the subparagraph, and inserting in lieu thereof ``include the value of services provided without compensation by any individual who volunteers on behalf of a candidate or political committee.
''; (2) by striking out paragraph (9)(B); (3) by redesignating paragraph (9)(A) as paragraph (9); and (4) by redesignating clauses (i) and (ii) of paragraph (9), as so redesignated by paragraph (3) of this subsection, as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively.
Limitation on Mass Mailings During an Election Year.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (6) of section 3210(a) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(G)(i) A Member of or Member-elect to the House may not, during any even-numbered calendar year, mail any mass mailing as franked mail which is postmarked on or before the Tuesday next after the 1st Monday in November of such year.
Nothing in clause (i) shall be considered to make permissible, with respect to the portion of the year remaining after the Tuesday referred to in such clause, the mailing of any mass mailing which would be impermissible under any other provision of law or any rule or regulation.''.
Conforming amendment.--Subparagraph (F) of section 3210(a)(6) of such title is amended by striking ``(A) and (C)'' and inserting ``(A), (C), and (G),''.
Definition of a Mass Mailing.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (6) of section 3210(a) of title 39, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(H) For purposes of applying this section with respect to a Member of or Member-elect to the House, subparagraph (E) shall be deemed to be amended-- ``(i) by striking `500' and inserting `25'; and ``(ii) by striking `or' at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting `; or', and by adding after clause (iii) the following: `` `(iv) in furtherance of the administrative duties of the Member.'.''.
Conforming amendment.--Subparagraph (E) of section 3210(a)(6) of such title is amended by striking ``As used'' and inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (H), as used''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act and shall apply with respect to mail sent on or after such date.
For purposes of any determination as to whether or not a mailing sent by a Member of or Member-elect to the House of Representatives constitutes a mass mailing, mail sent before such date shall be considered separately from any mail sent on or after such date.