This Act may be cited as the ``Missouri River Enhancement and Monitoring Act of 2004''.
In this Act: (1) Center.--The term ``Center'' means the River Studies Center of the Biological Resources Division of the United States Geological Survey, located in Columbia, Missouri.
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given that term in section 4 of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b).
River.--The term ``River'' means the Missouri River.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Biological Resources Division of the United States Geological Survey.
State.--The term ``State'' means-- (A) the State of Iowa; (B) the State of Kansas; (C) the State of Missouri; (D) the State of Montana; (E) the State of Nebraska; (F) the State of North Dakota; (G) the State of South Dakota; and (H) the State of Wyoming.
Establishment.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Director of the United States Geological Survey, shall establish a program at the Center-- (1) to determine and monitor the biological and chemical characteristics of the River; (2) to determine and monitor the interrelationship of those characteristics with the hydrology and geomorphology of the river; and (3) to monitor and assess the biota, including threatened or endangered species, habitats, and water quality of the River.
Development.--To develop the program, the Secretary of the Interior and the Director of the United States Geological Survey shall consult with-- (1) the Governors of affected States, acting through-- (A) the Missouri River Natural Resources Committee; and (B) the Missouri River Basin Association; and (2) the Secretary of Agriculture; (3) the Secretary of the Army; (4) the Western Area Power Administration; (5) the Fish and Wildlife Service; (6) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; and (7) the Missouri River Basin Indian Tribes.
Activities.--The program described in subsection (a) shall provide scientific information to-- (1) guide the operation and management of the River; (2) measure and model the impact of management alternatives through-- (A) monitoring of biota, including threatened or endangered species, habitats, and water quality; (B) focused investigations of cause and effect relationships; and (C) identification and evaluation of methods to conserve fish and wildlife, including threatened and endangered species; and (3) make recommendations on means to restore or enhance the ecosystem of the River.
Baseline.--The program described in subsection (a) shall establish a baseline of conditions against which future activities can be measured.
Database.--The Secretary of the Interior shall-- (1) establish a database on River biota, including threatened or endangered species, habitats, and water quality; and (2) make the database readily available to the entities listed in subsection (b) and the public.
Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of establishment of the program described in subsection (a), and not less frequently than every 3 years thereafter, the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Geological Survey, shall-- (1) review the program; (2) as necessary, establish and revise the objectives of the program; and (3) submit to Congress a report on the environmental health of the River.
Indian Tribes.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior may enter into contracts, pursuant to the Indian Self Determination Act (title I of the Indian Self Determination and Education Assistance Act; 25 United States Code chapter 14, subchapter II, part A (25 United States Code 450f et sequentes)) with Tribes whose Reservations are located along the River and have an interest in environmental restoration.
The tasks to be contracted shall assist in the implementation of the research and monitoring program elements set forth in this section and shall complement the activities undertaken by the Secretary of the Interior and the affected State Governments.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior to carry out this section-- (A) $6,500,000 for fiscal year 2005; (B) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2006; and (C) $15,100,000 for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2020.
Allocation of funds.--Funding of the program shall be implemented in the following manner: (A) Not more than the following percentage of the funds available shall be directed to the Center: (i) 25 percent in fiscal year 2005.
40 percent in fiscal year 2006.
65 percent in fiscal years after 2007.
At least 50 percent of such funds shall be directed to the Center in fiscal years after 2007.
The remaining funds shall be made available by the Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the Center, to State hydrology, environmental quality, natural resource, and fish and wildlife agencies in the River basin in order to collect field data, provide field operational support for monitoring, and conduct monitoring activities that are designed to enhance and supplement existing scientific knowledge of the River system.
Threatened and endangered species.--Of the amounts made available under paragraph (1) for each fiscal year, $1,500,000 shall be made available to the Secretary of the Interior and the State agencies with jurisdiction for River fish and wildlife to monitor and conduct focused investigations of endangered fish, including the response of the pallid sturgeon to main stem reservoir operations.
Funding of focused investigations.--The focused investigations component of the program established under paragraph (3) shall be funded using a competitive process.
Each year, the directors of the State fish and game agencies with jurisdiction for River fish and wildlife, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, and the entities listed under subsection (b)(1), shall prioritize information needs and issue a request for proposals to State, Federal, for-profit, and not- for-profit organizations with River interest and expertise.
The directors and the Secretary shall review and select those proposals to be funded.