This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Child Health Immunization Act of 1993''.
Findings.-- (1) Current circumstances.--Congress finds the following: (A) Immunizations are among the most cost-effective means of preventing disease.
Although Federal support for childhood immunizations has been in existence since 1962, the full potential of immunizations remains to be achieved.
Enactment and enforcement of school immunization requirements have resulted in excellent immunization levels (96 percent or greater) in school children.
However, approximately 80 percent of vaccine doses should be received before the second birthday in order to protect children during their most vulnerable periods.
Many children do not receive their basic immunizations by that time, and in some inner cities as few as 10 percent of 2-year-olds have received a complete series.
This low level of immunizations has been reflected in recent years by outbreaks of measles among inadequately immunized preschool children.
The childhood immunization services delivery infrastructure is both public and private.
There is considerable evidence to suggest that the private infrastructure has been eroded over the past decade as a result of the significantly increased cost of privately purchased vaccines.
Prices for privately purchased vaccines exceed the prices paid for like vaccines in some other industrialized nations by over 2500 percent.
High vaccine costs, coupled with the growing number of uninsured and underinsured families, has resulted in private physicians increasingly referring their private-pay patients to overburdened public clinics for vaccinations.
Eleven States now have programs that provide vaccines without charge to both public and private health care providers.
Other States that have sought to establish such programs have been denied additional discounted vaccines by manufacturers.
There is no evidence to suggest that a negotiated price that takes into account the reasonable cost of production, marketing, research and development, and distribution will not fairly compensate vaccine manufacturers.
Indeed, a recent report by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment supports the proposition that negotiated rates can assure fair compensation while holding down costs.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services has experience negotiating vaccine purchase through the Federal contract system.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program is an essential element in a comprehensive immunization program and should be applied to additional vaccines recommended for universal use in children.
Needed actions.--With respect to actions necessary to ensure the full immunization of children at the earliest possible age, Congress finds the following: (A) The Federal Government should purchase and provide free of charge to health care providers vaccines recommended for universal use in children.
This action will not only remove financial barriers to immunization that impede children from being vaccinated at the appropriate time, but will also facilitate the development of an immunization tracking system.
The Federal Government and the States should develop linked registries to track the immunization status of the Nation's children.
The registry system should have the capability to notify parents of inadequately immunized children of the need to protect their children with specific vaccines.
The coordinated national information and education outreach initiative operated through the Department of Health and Human Services should be sustained to bring needed information to parents and health care providers and focus their attention on the importance of achieving the full and timely immunization of children at the earliest appropriate age.
Private and public health insurers should be encouraged to provide adequate reimbursement for the administration of childhood vaccines.
Volunteer community activities to promote the full immunization of children at the earliest appropriate age should be encouraged.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program should be extended and improved.
Vaccine information materials should be simplified to ensure that parents can understand the benefits and risks of vaccines.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to ensure that all children in the United States are fully immunized against vaccine preventable infectious diseases at the earliest appropriate age.
FEDERAL PURCHASE OF CHILDHOOD VACCINES.
Establishment of Program.--The Social Security Act (42 United States Code 301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new title: ``TITLE XXI--FEDERAL PURCHASE OF CHILDHOOD VACCINES ``purchase by the secretary ``Sec.
Purchase of Vaccines.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall regularly contract for the purchase of vaccines included on the list promulgated by the Secretary pursuant to section 1931 (referred to in this section as `recommended childhood vaccines') in amounts-- ``(A) necessary for distribution under the Public Health Service Act to meet anticipated needs for the routine and catch-up immunization of children in the United States in accordance with the recommendations promulgated under section 1931 and for foreseeable outbreak control activities; ``(B) necessary for the maintenance of a reserve vaccine supply sufficient for a 6-month period; and ``(C) which take into account minimum waste due to breakage or other unavoidable losses.
Consultations.-- ``(A) Preprocurement consultations.--The Secretary may consult with representatives of State governments, experts in vaccine delivery, health care providers, and others with expertise in purchasing and pricing pharmaceutical products prior to soliciting bids or offers for recommended childhood vaccines under this section.
Health care providers shall also furnish periodic estimates to the States of the providers' future dosage needs for recommended childhood vaccines distributed under the Public Health Service Act.
States receiving Federal grants for immunization registries shall report such data to the Secretary.
All reports shall be made with such frequency and in such detail as the Secretary may prescribe.
Consultations with federal agencies.--The Secretary shall, in order to determine the appropriate vaccines and amounts of vaccines to be purchased under paragraph (1), consult with Federal agencies involved in research regarding, or the regulation, procurement, or distribution of, recommended childhood vaccines.
Such consultation may be effected through the establishment of a Vaccine Requirements Panel to be composed entirely of representatives of the relevant Federal agencies, or through such other means as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Cost or pricing data.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall negotiate a reasonable price for vaccines to be purchased under this section that fairly takes into account the excise tax under section 4131 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the various costs described in subparagraph (C).
Manufacturers.--A manufacturer of recommended childhood vaccines shall provide cost or pricing data in support of the manufacturer's proposed price at the time the manufacturer responds to a procurement instituted by the Secretary under this section.
A manufacturer shall also provide such data upon the request of the Secretary whenever the Secretary determines that contract modifications are necessary.
Type of information.--The information required under subparagraph (B) shall include data related to the research and development costs of the vaccine, production costs, handling, shipping, and other costs associated with delivering the vaccine to health care providers and States in accordance with the distribution plan of the Secretary (through the manufacturers or a State, as the case may be) under the Public Health Service Act, marketing costs, profit levels sufficient to encourage future investments in research and development of new or improved vaccines, the cost of maintaining adequate capacity for outbreak control, and any other data the Secretary determines appropriate.
Confidentiality of data.-- ``(A) In general.--Information provided to the Secretary under paragraph (3) shall be treated as trade secret or confidential information subject to section 552(b)(4) of title 5, United States Code, and section 1905 of title 18, United States Code, and shall not be revealed to any person other than those authorized by the Secretary in connection with carrying out official duties under this section.
Prohibition on withholding.--Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed as authorizing the withholding of information provided under paragraph (3) from any duly authorized subcommittee or committee of the Congress.
If the Secretary provides such information to any subcommittee or committee, the Secretary shall give written notice to the manufacturer that provided the information.
Written procedures.--The Secretary shall establish written procedures to ensure the confidentiality of information provided under paragraph (3).
Prohibition on additional shipping or handling charges.--Each contract for the purchase of recommended childhood vaccines under this section shall contain a provision by which the manufacturer agrees to ship or otherwise arrange for the delivery of such vaccines in accordance with the distribution plan of the Secretary (through the manufacturers or a State, as the case may be) without imposing any additional charge for shipping, handling, or any other cost on the health care provider or State to which the vaccine is shipped or delivered.
Multiple suppliers.--To ensure a reliable and adequate supply of vaccine and to stimulate competition, the Secretary shall enter into contracts when feasible with multiple manufacturers of the same recommended childhood vaccine, under such terms and conditions and utilizing such procurement processes as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Reporting requirements.--Each contract for the purchase of recommended childhood vaccines under this section shall require the manufacturer to report in a standardized form to the Secretary, or the Secretary's designee, and appropriate States, at intervals determined by the Secretary, data regarding the destination of the vaccines by lot number, and any other information related to the vaccines purchased that the Secretary may require.
Funding.--There shall be made available for expenditure by the Secretary, out of the Comprehensive Child Immunization Account in the Treasury of the United States established pursuant to section 3(b) of the Comprehensive Child Health Immunization Act of 1993, such amounts as are required to carry out this section for fiscal year 1995 and for each fiscal year thereafter during which this section remains in effect.''.
Funding for Program.-- (1) Maintenance of separately identifiable account.--There shall be established in the Treasury of the United States a Comprehensive Child Immunization Account for the purpose of funding the activities under section 2101 of the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (a) of this section).
Source of receipts.--Receipts shall be credited to the account established under paragraph (1) as may be provided in Federal law.
Termination of Program.--Such 2101 of the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (a) of this section) shall cease to be in effect beginning on such date as may be prescribed by a Federal law providing for immunization services for all children as part of a broad-based reform of the national health care system.
REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING IMMUNIZATIONS OF CHILDREN UNDER STATE MEDICAID PROGRAMS.
Coverage of Immunizations under Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Testing (EPSDT).--Section 1905(r)(1)(B)(iii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(r)(1)(B)(iii)) is amended to read as follows: ``(iii) administration of appropriate recommended childhood vaccines included on the list promulgated by the Secretary under section 1931, taking into account the health history of the individual,''.
Reimbursement Rates for Recommended Childhood Vaccines.-- Section 1902(a)(13) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(13)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (E); (2) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (F); and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(G) that payments to providers shall include amounts, as appropriate, as reimbursement for the administration of recommended childhood vaccines in accordance with section 1905(r)(1)(B)(iii);''.
Recommended Childhood Vaccines.--Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``recommended childhood vaccines ``Sec.
Not later than October 1, 1994, (and periodically thereafter as the Secretary determines appropriate in view of advances in scientific understanding in the areas of immunization and disease control) the Secretary shall promulgate a list of vaccines that provide immunization against naturally occurring infectious diseases and are recommended for universal use in children.
The Secretary shall concurrently promulgate recommendations regarding the appropriate dosage for each such vaccine, and the age or ages of children at which each vaccine should be administered.''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall be effective with respect to calendar quarters beginning on and after October 1, 1994.
Extension for state law amendment.--In the case of a State plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act which the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires State legislation in order for the plan to meet the additional requirements imposed by the amendments made by subsection (b), the State plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the requirements of such title solely on the basis of its failure to meet these additional requirements before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of enactment of this Act.
For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.
NATIONAL VACCINE INJURY COMPENSATION PROGRAM AMENDMENTS.
Use of Vaccine Injury Compensation Trust Fund.-- (1) Section 9510(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking out ``, and before October 1, 1992,''.
Section 6601(r) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989 is amended by striking out ``$2,500,000 for each of fiscal years 1991 and 1992'' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof `` $3,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and each fiscal year thereafter''.
Permanent Extension of Authority to Impose Taxes for the Vaccine Injury Compensation Trust Fund.-- (1) Permanent extension of tax.--Section 4131(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is repealed.
Reinstatement of tax.--The tax imposed by section 4131 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is hereby reinstated effective April 1, 1993.
NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION TRACKING SYSTEM.
On such date as section 2101 of the Social Security Act (as added by section 3(a) of this Act) shall cease to be in effect as provided in section 3(c) of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall implement a program to ensure participation of all health care providers in a national immunization tracking system.