Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Air Service Survival Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) air service in rural areas is essential to a national transportation network; (2) the rural air service infrastructure supports the safe operation of all air travel; (3) rural air service creates economic benefits for all air carriers by making the national aviation system available to passengers from rural areas; (4) rural air service has suffered since deregulation; (5) the essential air service program under the Department of Transportation-- (A) provides essential airline access to rural and isolated rural communities throughout the Nation; (B) is necessary for the economic growth and development of rural communities; (C) is a critical component of the national transportation system of the United States; and (D) has endured serious funding cuts in recent years; and (6) a reliable source of funding must be established to maintain air service in rural areas and the essential air service program.
FEES TO FINANCE ESSENTIAL AIR SERVICE PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 401 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Fees to finance essential air service program ``(a) Establishment of Fees.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the effective date of this section, the Federal Aviation Administration shall establish and begin collecting fees for the following services provided by the Federal Aviation Administration: ``(A) Services (other than air traffic control services) provided to a foreign government.
Air traffic control services for flights over the United States or its territories by air carriers that neither arrive at nor depart from a United States airport (other than such flights by foreign government aircraft engaged in official business).
Considerations.--In establishing fees under paragraph (1), the Administration shall consider the fair value, or cost, of the service provided by the Administration.
Deposit of proceeds.--The Administration shall deposit all proceeds from fees collected under paragraph (1) in the account established by subsection (b)(1).
Account in the Treasury.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a separate account which shall consist of amounts deposited into the account by the Administration under subsection (a)(3).
Availability of amounts.-- ``(A) In general.--Funds in the account established by paragraph (1) shall be available to the Administration to pay compensation to air carriers under the essential air service program established by subchapter II of chapter 417 of this title.
Unobligated funds.--Any unobligated funds remaining in the account at the end of a fiscal year shall be available to the Administration for safety- related projects at airports for which essential air service is provided under subchapter II of chapter 417 of this title.
Such projects shall be subject to the requirements of subchapter I of chapter 471 of this title.
Reporting of transactions.--For each fiscal year, the Administration shall transmit to Congress a report on the receipts, obligations, and expenditures of funds in the account established by paragraph (1).''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``40121.
Fees to finance essential air service program.''.
MODIFICATIONS TO ESSENTIAL AIR SERVICE PROGRAM.
Administration by FAA.--Subchapter II of chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``Secretary of Transportation'' each place it appears (other than section 41733(a)) and inserting ``Federal Aviation Administration''; (2) by striking ``Secretary'' each place it appears (other than section 41733(a)) and inserting ``Administration''; (3) by striking ``Administrator of the Federal Aviation'' each place it appears; and (4) in section 41733(b)(1), as amended by paragraph (2) of this subsection, by inserting ``Federal Aviation'' before ``Administration'' the first place it appears.
Matching Funds.--Section 41737 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Matching Funds.--No earlier than 2 years after the effective date of this subsection, the Administration may require a public agency that controls a commercial service airport (as defined by section 47102(7) of this title) to provide matching funds for compensation provided under this subchapter for basic essential air service to the airport in an amount not to exceed 10 percent of the amount of the compensation.''.
Elimination of Sunset.--Subchapter II of chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking section 41742; and (2) by striking the item relating to section 41742 in the analysis of such subchapter.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the first day of the first fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.