TITLE I--DRUG COURTS SEC.
The Attorney General may make grants to States, State courts, local courts, units of local government, and Indian tribal governments, acting directly or through agreements with other public or private entities, for programs that involve-- (1) continuing judicial supervision over offenders with substance abuse problems who are not violent offenders; and (2) the integrated administration of other sanctions and services, which shall include-- (A) mandatory periodic testing for the use of controlled substances or other addictive substances during any period of supervised release or probation for each participant; (B) substance abuse treatment for each participant; (C) diversion, probation, or other supervised release involving the possibility of prosecution, confinement, or incarceration based on noncompliance with program requirements or failure to show satisfactory progress; and (D) programmatic, offender management, and aftercare services such as relapse prevention, health care, education, vocational training, job placement, housing placement, and child care or other family support services for each participant who requires such services.
Consultation.--The Attorney General shall consult with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and any other appropriate officials in carrying out this title.
Use of Components.--The Attorney General may utilize any component or components of the Department of Justice in carrying out this title.
Regulatory Authority.--The Attorney General may issue regulations and guidelines necessary to carry out this title.
Applications.--In addition to any other requirements that may be specified by the Attorney General, an application for a grant under this title shall-- (1) include a long-term strategy and detailed implementation plan; (2) explain the applicant's inability to fund the program adequately without Federal assistance; (3) certify that the Federal support provided will be used to supplement, and not supplant, State, Indian tribal, and local sources of funding that would otherwise be available; (4) identify related governmental or community initiatives which complement or will be coordinated with the proposal; (5) certify that there has been appropriate consultation with all affected agencies and that there will be appropriate coordination with all affected agencies in the implementation of the program; (6) certify that participating offenders will be supervised by one or more designated judges with responsibility for the drug court program; (7) specify plans for obtaining necessary support and continuing the proposed program following the conclusion of Federal support; and (8) describe the methodology that will be used in evaluating the program.
To request funds under this title, the chief executive or the chief justice of a State or the chief executive or chief judge of a unit of local government or Indian tribal government shall submit an application to the Attorney General in such form and containing such information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.
The Federal share of a grant made under this title may not exceed 75 percent of the total costs of the program described in the application submitted under section 103 for the fiscal year for which the program receives assistance under this title, unless the Attorney General waives, wholly or in part, the requirement of a matching contribution under this section.
In-kind contributions may constitute a portion of the non-Federal share of a grant.
The Attorney General shall ensure that, to the extent practicable, an equitable geographic distribution of grant awards is made.
A State, Indian tribal government, or unit of local government that receives funds under this title during a fiscal year shall submit to the Attorney General a report in March of the following year regarding the effectiveness of this title.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TRAINING, AND EVALUATION.
Technical Assistance and Training.--The Attorney General may provide technical assistance and training in furtherance of the purposes of this title.
Evaluations.--In addition to any evaluation requirements that may be prescribed for grantees, the Attorney General may carry out or make arrangements for evaluations of programs that receive support under this title.
Administration.--The technical assistance, training, and evaluations authorized by this section may be carried out directly by the Attorney General, in collaboration with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or through grants, contracts, or other cooperative arrangements with other entities.
For the purpose of carrying out this title, there are authorized to be appropriated $200,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2002.
TITLE II--YOUTH COURTS SEC.
From amounts appropriated under section 202, the Attorney General shall carry out a program in accordance with title I, except as follows: (1) The program under this title shall be carried out only with respect to individuals who are under the age of 21 (individually referred to in this section as a ``youth'').
A youth may participate in the program only if a parent or other legal guardian of the youth participates in the program.
For the purpose of carrying out section 201, there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2002.