This Act may be cited as the ``School Food Fresh Act of 2007''.
In this Act: (1) Commodity program.--The term ``commodity program'' means any of-- (A) the commodity supplemental food program established under section 5 of the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of 1973 (7 United States Code 612c note; Public Law 93-86); (B) the food distribution program on Indian reservations established under section 4(b) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2013(b)); (C) the emergency food assistance program established under the Emergency Food Assistance Act of 1983 (7 United States Code 7501 et sequentes) and section 27 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2036); (D) the school lunch program established under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et sequentes); (E) the summer food service program for children established under section 13 of that Act (42 United States Code 1761); (F) the child and adult care food program established under section 17 of that Act (42 United States Code 1766); and (G) the school breakfast program established under section 4 of that Act (42 United States Code 1773).
Department.--The term ``Department'' means the Department of Agriculture.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Task force.--The term ``Task Force'' means the multiagency task force established under section 3(a).
In General.--The Secretary shall establish, in the office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services, a multiagency task force for the purpose of providing coordination and direction for commodity programs.
Composition.--The Task Force shall be composed of at least 4 members, including-- (1) a representative from the Food Distribution Division of the Food and Nutrition Service, who shall-- (A) be appointed by the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services; and (B) serve as Chairperson of the Task Force; (2) at least 1 representative from the Agricultural Marketing Service, who shall be appointed by the Under Secretary for Marketing and Regulatory Programs; (3) at least 1 representative from the Farm Services Agency, who shall be appointed by the Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services; and (4) at least 1 representative from the Food Safety and Inspection Service, who shall be appointed by the Under Secretary for Food Safety.
Duties.-- (1) In general.--The Task Force shall be responsible for evaluation and monitoring of the commodity programs to ensure that the commodity programs meet the mission of the Department-- (A) to support the United States farm sector; (B) to comply with the most recent Dietary Guidelines for Americans published under section 301 of the National Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research Act of 1990 (7 United States Code 5341); and (C) to contribute to the health and well-being of individuals in the United States through the distribution of domestic agricultural products through commodity programs.
Specific duties.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Task Force shall-- (A) review and make recommendations regarding the specifications used for the procurement of food commodities, taking into consideration recommendations based on the results of evaluations carried out using grants made available under section 4; (B) review and make recommendations regarding the effective distribution of food commodities; (C) review and make recommendations regarding efficient and effective systems to ensure the best use of Federal funds to maximize the quantity and quality of foods purchased for recipient agencies and the best use of those purchased foods by recipient agencies; and (D) on the request of the Secretary, review and make recommendations regarding future updates of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans published under section 301 of the National Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research Act of 1990 (7 United States Code 5341).
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that describes, for the period covered by the report-- (1) the findings and recommendations of the Task Force; and (2) policies implemented for the betterment of commodity programs.
GRANTS FOR SPECIFICATION DEVELOPMENT.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall provide 5 competitive grants to nonprofit research institutions (including research universities) selected by the Secretary for use in evaluating the product specifications of food commodity products procured through commodity programs to determine-- (1) the consistency of those specifications with the nutritional goals of the commodity program; (2) the acceptability of the products procured under the specifications by recipient agencies and consumers; and (3) the extent to which food commodities purchased through commodity programs are comparable to any commercial counterparts to those commodities.
Types of Grants.--Of the 5 grants provided under subsection (a), a grant shall be provided for the evaluation and recommendation of product specifications for each of the categories of-- (1) fruits and vegetables; (2) meat; (3) poultry; (4) grains, nuts, and oils; and (5) dairy products.
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date on which the Secretary provides a grant under this section, the recipient of the grant shall submit to the Secretary and the Task Force a report that-- (1) describes the results of evaluations carried out using funds from the grant; and (2) includes recommendations based on those results.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $2,500,000.
USDA SCHOOL FOOD FRESH PROGRAM.
Section 10603 of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 612c-4) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
PURCHASE OF SPECIALTY CROPS.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Fruits, vegetables, other specialty food crops.--The terms `fruits', `vegetables', and `other specialty food crops' shall have the meaning given the terms by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Service institution.--The term `service institution' has the meaning given the term in section 13(a) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1761(a)).
Purchase Authority.--Of the funds made available under section 32 of the Act of August 24, 1935 (7 United States Code 612c), for fiscal year 2008 and each subsequent fiscal year, the Secretary shall use not less than $200,000,000 each fiscal year to purchase fruits, vegetables, and other specialty food crops.
USDA School Food Fresh Program.-- ``(1) Definition of eligible product.--In this subsection, the term `eligible product' means a fruit or vegetable item that-- ``(A) is offered by a vendor approved by the Secretary under paragraph (4); ``(B) is fresh, dried, or frozen in a manner that maximizes retention of nutrient density; and ``(C) to the maximum extent practicable, reflects local preferences and supports local agriculture.
Agreements.--The Secretary, acting through such regional procurement offices of the Department of Agriculture as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, shall carry out a program under which the Secretary shall enter into agreements with local and regional distributors to supply eligible products to schools and service institutions.
Funds.--Eligible products supplied under an agreement described in paragraph (2) shall be purchased by schools and service institutions using funds that are allocated to the schools or service institutions for the purpose of-- ``(A) purchasing fruits and vegetables; or ``(B) providing nutritious meals.
Vendors.-- ``(A) In general.--A local or regional distributor of eligible products that seeks to supply eligible products to schools and service institutions under this subsection shall apply to the Secretary for approval as a participating vendor.
Conditions for approval.--The Secretary shall approve a vendor as eligible to supply eligible products under this subsection if the vendor-- ``(i) demonstrates the ability to supply those eligible products; ``(ii) complies with standards for food safety developed by the Secretary; ``(iii) consistently provides products that meet standards of grade, size, freshness, and quality as required by the Secretary or a local procurement officer; and ``(iv) demonstrates the ability to supply eligible products from local growers and processors.
Monitoring.-- ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall develop and implement a system for monitoring vendors approved under this paragraph.
Certification.--A monitoring system under clause (i) may include a requirement to obtain certification-- ``(I) in accordance with a program designed by the Secretary; and ``(II) for which the Secretary may require compensation.
Funding.-- ``(A) In general.--Of the amount specified in subsection (b), the Secretary shall use not less than $50,000,000 each fiscal year for the purchase of eligible products for distribution to schools and service institutions in accordance with section 6(a) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1755(a)).
Additional available funds.--A school or service institution that uses an agreement described in paragraph (2) to purchase eligible products may allocate up to 30 percent of the funds of the school or service institution authorized under section 6 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1755), and such additional funds as are necessary from funds allocated to the school or service institution under sections 4 and 11 of that Act (42 United States Code 1753, 1759a), for the purpose of procuring eligible products through vendors approved by the Secretary under paragraph (4).
Authorization of appropriations for administrative expenses.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to pay administrative costs incurred in carrying out this subsection.''.
USE OF COMMODITY ENTITLEMENT FUNDS.
In General.--The Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, purchase for commodity programs foods that are in the least-processed state.
Processing of Foods.--The Secretary, upon the approval of national processing agreements, shall make available to all schools and other recipient agencies the opportunity to divert unprocessed or minimally-processed commodity foods to subsequent processors for conversion into usable end products.