That this Act may be cited as the ``Hispanic American Affairs Act of 1993''.
statement of purpose Sec.
It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) assure that Federal programs and resources are reaching all Mexican Americans, Puerto Rican Americans, Cuban Americans, and all other Hispanic Americans and are providing the assistance needed by such individuals; (2) assure that the laws, policies, and practices of the Federal Government provide equal opportunities for Hispanic Americans in all areas, including the areas of employment, education, health, housing, community development, economic development, and grant and contract procurement; and (3) seek out and develop new programs and resources that may be necessary to handle problems that are unique to Hispanic Americans.
establishment of office Sec.
There is established in the Executive Office of the President the Office of Hispanic American Affairs (hereinafter referred to as the ``Office'').
The Office shall be headed by a Director (hereinafter referred to as the ``Director'') who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
duties of the director Sec.
The Director shall-- (1) advise Federal departments and agencies regarding appropriate action to be taken to help assure that Federal programs are providing the assistance needed by Hispanic Americans; (2) advise Federal departments and agencies on the development and implementation of comprehensive and coordinated policies, plans, and programs which focus on the special problems and needs of Hispanic Americans including economic development, education, housing, and health care programs and advise such departments and agencies on the priorities of such policies, plans, and programs; (3) advise and assist Hispanic American groups and individuals in receiving assistance available under law; (4) establish and maintain a Hispanic American information clearinghouse which shall collect, analyze, and disseminate information concerning the social and economic conditions encountered by Hispanic individuals; (5) carry out the functions relating to equal employment opportunity for Hispanic Americans transferred to the Director under section 8; and (6) appraise the laws, policies, and performance of the Federal Government with respect to the achievement or denial of equal opportunities for Hispanic Americans, and report such appraisal annually to the President and the Congress in the report required under section 11.
In carrying out the functions of the Director, the Director may-- (1) conduct, directly or by grant or contract, such surveys, studies, research, and demonstration and technical assistance projects; (2) establish such relationships with State and local governments and the private sector as may be appropriate; and (3) promote the participation of State and local governments and the private sector as may be appropriate to identify and assist in solving the special problems of Hispanic Americans.
The Director shall utilize the Special Assistants for Hispanic American Affairs established in each Federal department or agency under section 12 to carry out the functions transferred under section 8. advisory task forces Sec.
The Director may appoint one or more advisory task forces from among persons who are representative of and involved in the affairs of the Mexican American, Puerto Rican American, and Cuban American communities, and of other elements of the Hispanic American community.
Each such task force shall-- (1) advise the Director with respect to the functions of the Director under this Act; (2) be subject to the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act; and (3) each year and at the time of completion of work of the task force, transmit to Congress and the President a report concerning the activities of the task force.
Each member of an advisory task force appointed under subsection (a) who is not otherwise employed by the United States Government shall receive compensation at a rate equal to the daily maximum rate prescribed for a position above GS-15 under the General Schedule under section 5108 of title 5, United States Code, for each day, including traveltime, such member is engaged in the actual performance of duties as a member of a task force.
A member of a task force who is an officer or employee of the United States Government shall serve without additional compensation.
All members of a task force shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
The Director shall provide staffing and support to any task force appointed under subsection (a) in order to assist the members of the task force in carrying out their duties.
In carrying out the provisions of this Act, the Director is authorized-- (1) to appoint such personnel as the Director considers necessary without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and to pay such personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates; (2) to employ experts and consultants in accordance with the provisions of section 3109 of such title, at rates of pay which do not exceed the maximum rate prescribed for a position above GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5108 of such title; (3) to promulgate such rules, regulations, and procedures as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the Office, and to delegate authority for the performance of any function to any officer or employee of the Office under the direction and supervision of the Director; (4) to utilize, with their consent, the services, equipment, personnel, information, and facilities of other Federal departments and agencies and of State, local, and private agencies and instrumentalities, with or without reimbursement therefor; (5) to enter into agreements with other Federal departments and agencies as may be appropriate; (6) to operate such regional offices as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act; (7) without regard to the provisions of section 3324 of title 31, United States Code, to enter into and perform such contracts, leases, cooperative agreements, or other transactions as may be necessary in the conduct of the functions of the Office, with any public agency or with any person, and make payments (in advance, by transfer, or otherwise) and grants to any public agency or private nonprofit organization; (8)(A) to accept voluntary and uncompensated services, without regard to the provisions of section 1342 of title 31, United States Code; (B) to accept volunteer service in accordance with section 3111 of title 5, United States Code; and (9) to request such information, data, and reports from any Federal department or agency as the Director may from time to time require and as may be produced consistent with other law.
Upon request of the Director, the head of each Federal department or agency shall promptly make the services, equipment, personnel, facilities, and information of the department or agency (including suggestions, estimates, and statistics) available to the Office to the greatest extent practicable.
Upon request of the Director, the head of each Federal department or agency shall promptly detail any of the personnel of the department or agency to the Office.
Any such detail shall be made on a reimbursable basis.
In carrying out the provisions of this Act, the Director shall provide leadership and coordination for all Federal departments and agencies, particularly the offices established under section 12, and shall provide such guidance to Federal departments and agencies as the President determines is appropriate in implementing this Act.
Each department or agency shall issue appropriate rules and regulations to further the purposes of this Act.
transfers of functions from the office of personnel management Sec.
All functions of the Office of Personnel Management under section 717 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Executive Order 11478, issued August 8, 1969, which the Director of the Office of Management and Budget determines relate to equal employment opportunity for Hispanic individuals, commonly known as the Hispanic Employment Program, are transferred to the Director.
transfer of personnel and property Sec.
All personnel, liabilities, contracts, property, and records as are determined by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget to be employed, held, or used primarily in connection with any function transferred under this Act, are transferred to the Office.
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), personnel engaged in functions transferred under this Act shall be transferred in accordance with applicable laws and regulations relating to the transfer of functions.
The transfer of personnel pursuant to subsection (a) shall be without reduction in classification or compensation for one year after such transfer.
All laws relating to any office, agency, or function transferred under this Act shall, insofar as such laws are applicable, remain in full force and effect.
All orders, determinations, rules, and regulations made or issued in connection with any function transferred by this Act, and in effect at the time of the transfer, shall continue in effect to the same extent as if such transfer had not occurred, until modified, superseded, or repealed.
The provisions of this Act shall not affect any proceedings pending at the time this section takes effect before any agency, or part thereof, functions of which are transferred by this Act, but such proceedings, to the extent that they relate to functions so transferred shall be continued before the Office.
No action or other proceeding commenced by or against any office or agency or any officer of the United States acting in the official capacity of such officer shall abate by reason of any transfer made pursuant to this Act, but the court, on any motion or supplemental petition filed at any time within twelve months after such transfer takes effect which shows a necessity for the survival of such action or other proceeding to obtain a settlement of the question involved, may allow the action or proceeding to be maintained by or against the appropriate office or agency or officer of the United States.
Within six months after the end of each fiscal year, the Director shall submit a report to the President and the Congress concerning the activities of the Office during the preceding fiscal year.
Such report shall include the appraisal of Federal performance in achieving equal opportunity for Hispanic Americans required under section 4(a)(6) and recommendations for legislative action relating to the achievement of the purposes of this Act.
offices in various executive agencies Sec.
The President shall establish and maintain an Office of Hispanic American Affairs in the following Federal departments and agencies: (1) the Department of State; (2) the Department of Treasury; (3) the Department of Defense and each military department; (4) the Department of Justice; (5) the Department of the Interior; (6) the Department of Agriculture; (7) the Department of Commerce; (8) the Department of Labor, including programs of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance; (9) the Department of Health and Human Services; (10) the Department of Housing and Urban Development; (11) the Department of Transportation; (12) the Department of Energy; (13) the Department of Education; (14) the Department of Veterans' Affairs; (15) the Office of Personnel Management; (16) the Federal Communications Commission; (17) the Small Business Administration; (18) the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; (19) the National Science Foundation; (20) the Federal Home Loan Bank Board; (21) the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; (22) the Postal Rate Commission; (23) the Environmental Protection Agency; (24) the General Services Administration; (25) the United States Postal Service; and (26) such other Federal departments or agencies as the President may designate.
Each Office of Hispanic American Affairs established under subsection (a) shall be headed by a Special Assistant for Hispanic American Affairs, who shall be appointed by the head of the Federal department or agency in which the office is located.
The Special Assistant for Hispanic American Affairs designated within each department or agency shall assist the Director in carrying out within each department or agency the functions transferred under section 8.
The Special Assistant for Hispanic American Affairs of each department or agency may participate in all policy planning and development for all programs of the department or agency to insure the consideration of factors impacting on the various Hispanic communities.
The head of each Federal department or agency shall insure the participation of the Special Assistant for Hispanic American Affairs in the review of all pertinent and relevant rules, regulations, and guidelines, and other management directives to assure that the laws, policies, and practices of the Federal Government are providing equal opportunities for Hispanics in all areas, including the areas of education, health, housing, community development, economic development, grant and contract procurement, and employment.
The Special Assistant for Hispanic American Affairs shall make recommendations to the head of the Federal department or agency concerning problems and special needs that are unique to Hispanics, and shall be available to advise and assist Hispanic groups and individuals who seek assistance or services from the department or agency.
duties of the secretary of commerce Sec.
The Secretary of Commerce shall take necessary steps to insure that existing information clearinghouse functions within the Department of Commerce encompass the collection and dissemination of information in easily accessible form concerning the social, economic, employment, health, and housing needs and conditions of the Hispanic population of the Nation.
ban on partisan political activities Sec.
No funds authorized to carry out this Act shall be used to finance any activities designed to influence the outcome of any election to Federal office or any voter registration activity, or to pay the salary of the chairperson or any employee of a political committee after the date on which such persons engage in such activity, as determined by the Office of Personnel Management.
For the purposes of this section, the term ``election'' has the same meaning as in section 301(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(1)), the term ``Federal office'' has the same meaning as in section 301(3) of such Act (2 United States Code 431(3)), and the term ``political committee'' has the same meaning as in section 301(4) of such Act (2 United States Code 431(4)).
limitation on contract authority Sec.
The authority of the Director to enter into contracts under this Act shall be to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.
compensation of director Sec.
Section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Director, Office of Hispanic American Affairs.''.
authorization of appropriations Sec.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
The provisions of this Act shall take effect upon the date of enactment of this Act, except that the provisions of sections 8 through 10 shall take effect on the date which is 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act or on such earlier date as the President shall specify by Executive order.