SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Export Growth Act of 2012''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--IMPROVED COORDINATION OF EXPORT PROMOTION PROGRAMS Sec.
Consolidation of duplicative export promotion activities; information about trade missions and trade fairs.
Clarification of roles of members of Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee.
Representative of State agencies on Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee.
Reports to Congress with respect to activities of Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee.
Report on improvements to Export.gov as a single window for export information.
Report on developing a single window for information about export control compliance.
TITLE II--FACILITATION OF EXPORT OPPORTUNITIES FOR SMALL BUSINESSES Sec.
Small business export matchmaking pilot program.
Small business inter-agency task force on export financing.
Availability of State resource guides on Export.gov.
TITLE I--IMPROVED COORDINATION OF EXPORT PROMOTION PROGRAMS SEC.
CONSOLIDATION OF DUPLICATIVE EXPORT PROMOTION ACTIVITIES; INFORMATION ABOUT TRADE MISSIONS AND TRADE FAIRS.
In General.--Section 2312(b) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``, including by identifying opportunities to consolidate or co-locate offices of agencies involved in such activities'' after ``export financing activities''; (2) in paragraph (5)-- (A) by inserting ``, including the use and coordination of electronic databases,'' after ``the appropriate levels and allocation of resources''; and (B) by striking ``; and'' and inserting a semicolon; (3) by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (7); and (4) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following: ``(6) to the maximum extent practicable, provide a detailed listing of current and future Federal and State-led trade missions, trade fairs, and related activities to ensure better delivery of services to United States businesses; and''.
Availability of Information.--The Secretary of Commerce shall make available the information on Federal and State-led trade missions, trade fairs, and related activities described in paragraph (6) of section 2312(b) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988, as added by subsection (a)(4) of this section, on the website Export.gov or a successor website.
CLARIFICATION OF ROLES OF MEMBERS OF TRADE PROMOTION COORDINATING COMMITTEE.
Section 2312(c) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727(c)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3), (4), (5), and (6) as paragraphs (4), (5), (6), and (8), respectively; (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) with respect to export promotion and export financing activities of each department or agency that is a member of the TPCC-- ``(A) clearly identify and explain the role of the department or agency; and ``(B) describe the goals and objectives of the department or agency and explain the rationale for measuring and reporting on those goals and objectives;''; (3) in paragraph (5) (as redesignated)-- (A) by inserting ``and Congress'' after ``the President''; and (B) by striking ``paragraph (3)'' and inserting ``paragraph (4)''; (4) in paragraph (6) (as redesignated), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a semicolon; (5) by inserting after paragraph (6) (as redesignated) the following: ``(7) include any recommendations of the Comptroller General of the United States that relate to coordination of the TPCC and departments and agencies that are members of the TPCC; and''; and (6) in paragraph (8) (as redesignated), by striking ``United States National Tourism Organization'' and inserting ``United States Travel Association''.
REPRESENTATIVE OF STATE AGENCIES ON TRADE PROMOTION COORDINATING COMMITTEE.
Section 2312(d) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727(d)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following: ``(2) Representative of state agencies.--In addition to the members specified in paragraph (1), there shall be one member of the TPCC that represents State agencies with responsibility for export promotion and export financing.''.
REPORTS TO CONGRESS WITH RESPECT TO ACTIVITIES OF TRADE PROMOTION COORDINATING COMMITTEE.
Section 2312(f) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727(f)) is amended to read as follows: ``(f) Reports to Congress.-- ``(1) Reports by tpcc.--The chairperson of the TPCC shall prepare and submit to the appropriate congressional committees, not later than March 30 of each year, a report that-- ``(A) describes the strategic plan developed by the TPCC pursuant to subsection (c), the implementation of such plan, and any revisions thereto; and ``(B) describes the implementation of sections 303 and 304 of the FREEDOM Support Act (22 United States Code 5823 and 5824) concerning funding for export promotion activities and the interagency working groups on energy of the TPCC.
Reports by inspector general of department of commerce.-- ``(A) In general.--The Inspector General of the Department of Commerce shall prepare and submit to the appropriate congressional committees, not later than March 30 of each year, a report on the extent to which-- ``(i) the TPCC is successfully carrying out the duties described in subsection (b); and ``(ii) the strategic plan described in subsection (c) is being implemented successfully.
Consultation.--In preparing the report required under subparagraph (A), the Inspector General of the Department of Commerce shall, to the maximum extent practicable, consult with the inspector general of each other Federal department or agency that is a member of the TPCC.
Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this subsection, the term `appropriate congressional committees' means-- ``(A) the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, the Committee on Finance, the Committee on Foreign Relations, and the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate; and ``(B) the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the Committee on Financial Services, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Small Business, and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives.''.
REPORT ON IMPROVEMENTS TO EXPORT.GOV AS A SINGLE WINDOW FOR EXPORT INFORMATION.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of International Trade of the Small Business Administration shall, after consultation with the entities specified in subsection (b), submit to the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate and the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives a report that includes the recommendations of the Director for improving the experience provided by the website Export.gov (or a successor website) as-- (1) a comprehensive resource for information about exporting articles from the United States; and (2) a single website for exporters to submit all information required by the Federal Government with respect to the exportation of articles from the United States.
Entities Specified.--The entities specified in this subsection are-- (1) small business concerns (as defined in section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632)) that are exporters; and (2) the President's Export Council, State agencies with responsibility for export promotion or export financing, district export councils, and trade associations.
REPORT ON DEVELOPING A SINGLE WINDOW FOR INFORMATION ABOUT EXPORT CONTROL COMPLIANCE.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small Business Administration shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report assessing the benefits of developing a website to serve as-- (1) a comprehensive resource for complying with and information about the export control laws and regulations of the United States; and (2) a single website for exporters to submit all information required by the Federal Government with respect to export controls.
Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (1) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate; and (2) the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives.
TITLE II--FACILITATION OF EXPORT OPPORTUNITIES FOR SMALL BUSINESSES SEC.
In this title-- (1) the terms ``Administration'' and ``Administrator'' mean the Small Business Administration and the Administrator thereof, respectively; (2) the term ``region of the Administration'' has the meaning given that term in section 3(u) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632(u)); and (3) the term ``small business concern'' has the meaning given that term under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632).
Section 22(c)(11) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649(c)(11)) is amended by inserting ``, which shall include conducting not fewer that 1 outreach event each fiscal year in each State that promotes exporting as a business development opportunity for small business concerns'' before the semicolon.
SMALL BUSINESS EXPORT MATCHMAKING PILOT PROGRAM.
Pilot Program Established.--The Administrator shall establish a pilot program to conduct, in each region of the Administration, matchmaking events that are designed to facilitate contact between small business concerns and potential foreign buyers or international clients.
Program.--The Administrator-- (1) shall conduct at least 1 matchmaking event in each region of the Administration each year; and (2) may hold a matchmaking event in coordination with an outreach event required under section 22(c)(11) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649(c)(11)), as amended by section 202 of this Act.
Sunset.--The authority of the Administrator under this section shall terminate on September 30, 2015.
Section 22 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 649) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (l) as subsection (m); and (2) by inserting after subsection (k) the following: ``(l) Export Control Education.--The Associate Administrator shall ensure that all programs of the Administration to support exporting by small business concerns place a priority on educating small business concerns about Federal export control regulations.''.
SMALL BUSINESS INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE ON EXPORT FINANCING.
The Administrator, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Export-Import Bank of the United States, and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation shall jointly establish a Small Business Inter-Agency Task Force on Export Financing to-- (1) review and improve Federal export finance programs for small business concerns; and (2) coordinate the activities of the Federal Government to assist small business concerns seeking to export.
AVAILABILITY OF STATE RESOURCE GUIDES ON EXPORT.GOV.
The Secretary of Commerce shall make available on the website Export.gov (or a successor website) information on the resources relating to export promotion and export financing available in each State-- (1) organized by State; and (2) including information on State agencies with responsibility for export promotion or export financing and district export councils and trade associations located in the State.