NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL PROGRAM BUDGET.
Section 1003(c) of the National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1502 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (5), (6), and (7), as paragraphs (6), (7), and (8), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph: ``(5) The Director shall request the head of a department or agency to include in the department or agency's budget submission to the Office of Management and Budget funding requests for specific initiatives that are consistent with the President's priorities for the National Drug Control Strategy and certifications made pursuant to paragraph (3), and the head of the department or agency shall comply with such a request.''.
CONTROL OF DRUG-RELATED RESOURCES.
Section 1003 of the National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1502) is amended-- (1) in subsection (d)-- (A) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows: ``(2) request the head of a department of agency to place department or agency personnel who are engaged in drug control activities on temporary detail to another department or agency in order to implement the National Drug Control Strategy, and the head of the department or agency shall comply with such a request; (B) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (6); (C) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting a semicolon; and (D) by adding after paragraph (7) the following new paragraphs: ``(8) except to the extent that the Director's authority under this paragraph is limited in an annual appropriation Act by specific reference to this paragraph, transfer funds appropriated to a National Drug Control Program agency account to a different National Drug Control Program agency account in an amount that does not exceed 2 percent of the amount appropriated to either account, after having received the approval of the Committee on Appropriations of each House of Congress; and ``(9) in order to ensure compliance with the National Drug Control Program, issue to the head of a National Drug Control Program agency a funds control notice described in subsection (f).
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(f) Funds Control Notices.--(1) A funds control notice may direct that all or part of an amount appropriated to the National Drug Control Program agency account be obligated by-- ``(A) months, fiscal year quarters, or other time periods; and ``(B) activities, functions, projects, or object classes.
An officer or employee of a National Drug Control Program agency shall not make or authorize an expenditure or obligation contrary to a funds control notice issued by the Director.
In the case of a violation of paragraph (2) by an officer or employee of a National Drug Control Program agency, the head of the agency, upon the request of and in consultation with the Director, may subject the officer or employee to appropriate administrative discipline, including, when circumstances warrant, suspension from duty without pay or removal from office.
Limit on Number of Political Appointees.--Not more than 10 percent of the members of the officers and employees of the Office of National Drug Control Policy (including the Director, Deputy Directors, and Associate Directors) may be in positions that are-- ``(1) positions of a confidential or policy-determining character under Schedule C of subpart C of part 213 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations; ``(2) Senior Executive Service positions filled by noncareer appointees; or ``(3) positions on the Executive Schedule under subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code.
Prohibition on Political Campaigning.--No Federal officer in the Office of the National Drug Control Policy who is appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, may use his official authority or influence for partisan political purposes.''.
SPECIAL FORFEITURE FUND AMENDMENTS.
Establishment of Fund.--Section 6073 of the Asset Forfeiture Amendments Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1509) is amended-- (1) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows: ``(b) Transfers From Other Funds.-- ``(1) Department of justice deposits.--(A) On October 1 of each of fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998, the Attorney General shall estimate, with the concurrence of the Director, the excess unobligated balance anticipated as of September 30 in the Department of Justice Assets Forfeiture Fund established under section 524(c) of title 28, United States Code.
For fiscal year 1993, the excess unobligated balance as of September 30 shall be estimated within 15 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph.
In each of fiscal years 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998, the Attorney General shall transfer to the Fund the excess unobligated balance estimated under subparagraph (A).
Such transfers shall be made at the end of each quarter of a fiscal year on a pro rata basis.
In order to account for unanticipated fluctuations in the Department of Justice Assets Forfeiture Fund balance during a fiscal year, the transfer at the end of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year shall be adjusted by the Attorney General, with the concurrence of the Director, so that the transfer is equal to the actual remaining excess unobligated balance in the Department of Justice Assets Forfeiture Fund on September 30.
Transfers under this subparagraph shall be made only to the extent that the aggregate amount of such transfers during a fiscal year does not exceed $150,000,000.
Department of the treasury deposits.--(A) On October 1 of each of fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998, the Secretary of the Treasury shall estimate, with the concurrence of the Director, the excess unobligated balance anticipated as of September 30 in the Department of the Treasury Forfeiture Fund established under section 9703 of title 31, United States Code.
For fiscal year 1993, the excess unobligated balance as of September 30 shall be estimated within 15 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph.
In each of fiscal years 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Fund the excess unobligated balance estimated under subparagraph (A).
Such transfers shall be made at the end of each quarter of a fiscal year on a pro rata basis.
In order to account for unanticipated fluctuations in the Department of the Treasury Forfeiture Fund balance during a fiscal year, the transfer at the end of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year shall be adjusted by the Secretary of the Treasury, with the concurrence of the Director, so that the transfer is equal to the actual remaining excess unobligated balance in the Department of the Treasury Forfeiture Fund on September 30.
Transfers under this subparagraph shall be made only to the extent that the aggregate amount of such transfers during a fiscal year does not exceed $150,000,000.''.
by redesignating subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f), as subsections (e), (f), (g), and (h), respectively; and (3) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Super Surplus.--(1) Any unobligated balance up to $20,000,000 remaining in the Fund on September 30 of a fiscal year shall be available to the Director, subject to appropriation and subject to paragraph (2), to transfer to, and for obligation and expenditure in connection with drug control activities of, any Federal agency or State or local entity with responsibilities under the National Drug Control Strategy.
A transfer may be made under paragraph (1) only with the advance written approval of the Committee on Appropriations of each House of Congress.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Department of justice assets forfeiture fund.--Section 524(c)(9) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(B) The Attorney General shall make transfers from the Fund to the Office of National Drug Control Policy's Special Forfeiture Fund in the manner provided in section 6073(b)(1) of the Asset Forfeiture Amendments Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1509(b)(1)).
''; (B) by striking subparagraph (C); and (C) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively.
Department of the treasury forfeiture fund.--Section 9703(g) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking paragraphs (3) and (4) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(3) The Secretary of the Treasury shall make transfers from the Fund to the Office of National Drug Control Policy's Special Forfeiture Fund in the manner provided in section 6073(b)(2) of the Asset Forfeiture Amendments Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1509(b)(2)).''.
COORDINATION WITH EXECUTIVE BRANCH AGENCIES.
Section 1004 of the National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1503) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows: ``(1) Each Federal Government program manager, agency head, or department head with responsibilities under the National Drug Control Strategy shall provide such information (including reports, memoranda, letters, studies, surveys, and information maintained in data collection systems) for purposes of drug control as the Director may request.
Information shall be transmitted timely and in such manner and format as may be prescribed by the Director.
''; (2) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively; (3) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection: ``(b) National Drug Control Data Collection Systems.--(1) For each National Drug Control Program agency, the Director may designate certain data collection systems as being essential for drug control purposes.
The Director may require data collection systems designated under paragraph (1) to be modified in accordance with standards established by the Director to ensure appropriate scope and coverage of data collection.
''; and (4) by striking subsection (c)(2) (as redesigned by paragraph (2)) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(2) An officer or employee of a National Drug Control Program Agency shall not take any action to implement a change in the drug control policy of the agency unless the policy change has been certified in advance by the Director under paragraph (1) as being consistent with the National Drug Control Strategy.''.
TERMINATION OF OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY.
Section 1009 of the National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1506) is amended by striking ``the date which is 5 years after the date of the enactment of this subtitle'' and inserting ``September 30, 1998''.
DIRECTOR AS A MEMBER OF THE CABINET.
The Director of National Drug Control Policy shall be a member of the President's Cabinet.
Section 1011 of the National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1508) is amended by striking ``4'' and inserting ``9''.