This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans' Memorial Preservation and Recognition Act of 2001''.
VETERANS' MEMORIAL RESTORATION FUND.
Establishment.--Part VI of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 87--MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS ``Sec.
Grants to provide for repair and upkeep of veterans memorials on public property.
Grants to provide for repair and upkeep of veterans memorials on public property ``(a) The Secretary may make grants for the following purposes: ``(1) To cover the costs of the repair or restoration of any injury or depredation to a veterans' memorial on public property.
To cover any other cost associated with the repair, restoration, maintenance, or upkeep of veterans' memorials on public property.
A grant under subsection (a) with respect to a veterans' memorial shall be made to the individual or entity that has authority or responsibility for the upkeep and maintenance of the memorial.
Any such grant shall be in such manner and in accordance with such criteria as the Secretary may prescribe.
Except as otherwise provided by law, a grant under this section shall be made from amounts in the fund established under subsection (d).
(1) There is established on the books of the Treasury a fund to be known as the `Veterans' Memorial Restoration Fund' (in this subsection referred to as the `Fund').
There shall be deposited in the Fund amounts as follows: ``(A) Amounts appropriated to the Fund.
Amounts collected as civil penalties under section 1369(b) of title 18.
Amounts donated to the United States for purposes of deposit in the Fund.
Any other amounts transferred to the Fund under law.
Amounts in the Fund are available for the purpose of making grants under this section.
Such amounts may not be used for any other purpose.
Amounts in the Fund are in addition to any other amounts available to the Secretary for purposes of the repair, restoration, maintenance, or upkeep of veterans' memorials.
In this section, the term `veterans' memorial' means a structure, plaque, statue, or other monument commemorating the service of any person or persons in the Armed Forces.''.
Clerical Amendments.--The tables of chapters at the beginning of title 38, United States Code, and at the beginning of part VI of that title, are each amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``87.
CRIMINAL AND CIVIL PENALTIES FOR DESECRATION OF VETERANS' MEMORIALS.
In General.--Chapter 65 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Desecration of veterans' memorials on public property ``(a) Whoever, in a circumstance described in subsection (c), willfully damages a veterans' memorial on public property shall be punished-- ``(1) if the cost of repairing the damage to such memorial exceeds the sum of $1,000, by a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than 10 years, or both; and ``(2) if the cost of repairing the damage to such memorial does not exceed the sum of $1,000, by a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
(1) Whoever violates subsection (a) shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount equal to the cost of repairing the damages upon which the violation is based.
A civil penalty for an offense under this subsection is in addition to any fine or penalty for the offense under subsection (a) or any other provision of law.
Amounts collected under this subsection shall be deposited in the Veterans' Memorial Restoration Fund under section 8701 of title 38.
The circumstance referred to in subsection (a) is that, in violating that subsection, the defendant-- ``(1) travels or causes another to travel in interstate or foreign commerce; or ``(2) uses the mail or an instrumentality of interstate or foreign commerce.
As used in this section, the term `veterans' memorial' means a structure, plaque, statue, or other monument commemorating the service of any person or persons in the Armed Forces of the United States.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 65 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1369.
Desecration of veterans' memorials.''.
HIGHWAY SIGNS RELATING TO VETERANS CEMETERIES.
In General.--Notwithstanding the terms of any agreement entered into by the Secretary of Transportation and a State under section 109(d) or 402(a) of title 23, United States Code, a veterans cemetery shall be treated as a site for which a supplemental guide sign may be placed on any Federal-aid highway.
Applicability.--Subsection (a) shall apply to an agreement entered into before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.