In General.--Section 7123 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Availability of Dispute Resolutions.-- ``(1) In general.--The procedures prescribed under subsection (b)(1) and the pilot program established under subsection (b)(2) shall provide that a taxpayer may request mediation or arbitration in any case unless the Secretary has specifically excluded the type of issue involved in such case or the class of cases to which such case belongs as not appropriate for resolution under such subsection.
The Secretary shall make any determination that excludes a type of issue or a class of cases public within 5 working days and provide an explanation for each determination.
Independent mediators.-- ``(A) In general.--The procedures prescribed under subsection (b)(1) shall provide the taxpayer an opportunity to elect to have the mediation conducted by an independent, neutral individual not employed by the Internal Revenue Service Office of Appeals.
Cost and selection.-- ``(i) In general.--Any taxpayer making an election under subparagraph (A) shall be required-- ``(I) to share the costs of such independent mediator equally with the Internal Revenue Service Office of Appeals, and ``(II) to limit the selection of the mediator to a roster of recognized national or local neutral mediators.
Exception.--Clause (i)(I) shall not apply to any taxpayer who is an individual or who was a small business in the preceding calendar year if such taxpayer had an adjusted gross income that did not exceed 250 percent of the poverty level, as determined in accordance with criteria established by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in the taxable year preceding the request.
Small business.--For purposes of clause (ii), the term `small business' has the meaning given such term under section 41(b)(3)(D)(iii).
Availability of process.--The procedures prescribed under subsection (b)(1) and the pilot program established under subsection (b)(2) shall provide the opportunity to elect mediation or arbitration at the time when the case is first filed with the Office of Appeals and at any time before deliberations in the appeal commence.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION OF TIME FOR CONTESTING IRS LEVY.
Extension of Time for Return of Property Subject to Levy.-- Subsection (b) of section 6343 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``9 months'' and inserting ``3 years''.
Period of Limitation on Suits.--Subsection (c) of section 6532 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1) by striking ``9 months'' and inserting ``3 years'', and (2) in paragraph (2) by striking ``9-month'' and inserting ``3-year''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to-- (1) levies made after the date of the enactment of this Act, and (2) levies made on or before such date if the 9-month period under section 6343(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (without regard to this section) has not expired as of such date.
WAIVER OF INSTALLMENT AGREEMENT FEE.
In General.--Section 6159 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (g) and by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection: ``(f) Waiver of Installment Agreement Fee.--The Secretary shall waive the fees imposed on installment agreements under this section for any taxpayer with an adjusted gross income that does not exceed 250 percent of the poverty level, as determined in accordance with criteria established by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and who has agreed to make payments under the installment agreement by electronic payment through a debit instrument.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SUSPENSION OF RUNNING OF PERIOD FOR FILING PETITION OF SPOUSAL RELIEF AND COLLECTION CASES.
Petitions for Spousal Relief.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (e) of section 6015 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Suspension of running of period for filing petition in title 11 cases.--In the case of a person who is prohibited by reason of a case under title 11, United States Code, from filing a petition under paragraph (1)(A) with respect to a final determination of relief under this section, the running of the period prescribed by such paragraph for filing such a petition with respect to such final determination shall be suspended for the period during which the person is so prohibited from filing such a petition, and for 60 days thereafter.''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to petitions filed under section 6015(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Collection Proceedings.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (d) of section 6330 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (A) by striking ``appeal such determination to the Tax Court'' in paragraph (1) and inserting ``petition the Tax Court for review of such determination'', (B) by striking ``Judicial review of determination'' in the heading of paragraph (1) and inserting ``Petition for review by tax court'', (C) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3), and (D) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) Suspension of running of period for filing petition in title 11 cases.--In the case of a person who is prohibited by reason of a case under title 11, United States Code, from filing a petition under paragraph (1) with respect to a determination under this section, the running of the period prescribed by such subsection for filing such a petition with respect to such determination shall be suspended for the period during which the person is so prohibited from filing such a petition, and for 30 days thereafter.''.
Conforming amendment.--Subsection (c) of section 6320 of such Code is amended by striking ``(2)(B)'' and inserting ``(3)(B)''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to petitions filed under section 6330 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
VENUE FOR APPEAL OF SPOUSAL RELIEF AND COLLECTION CASES.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 7482(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (E), (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (F)(ii) and inserting a comma, and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraphs: ``(G) in the case of a petition under section 6015(e), the legal residence of the petitioner, or ``(H) in the case of a petition under section 6320 or 6330-- ``(i) the legal residence of the petitioner if the petitioner is an individual, and ``(ii) the principal place of business or principal office or agency if the petitioner is an entity other than an individual.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to petitions filed after the date of enactment of this Act.
INCREASE IN MONETARY PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN UNAUTHORIZED DISCLOSURES OF INFORMATION.
In General.--Paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of section 7213(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are each amended by striking ``$5,000'' and inserting ``$10,000''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to disclosures made after the date of the enactment of this Act.
DE NOVO TAX COURT REVIEW OF CLAIMS FOR EQUITABLE INNOCENT SPOUSE RELIEF.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 6015(e)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new flush sentence: ``Any review of a determination by the Secretary with respect to a claim for equitable relief under subsection (f) shall be reviewed de novo by the Tax Court.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to petitions filed or pending before the Tax Court on and after the date of the enactment of this Act.
BAN ON RAISING NEW ISSUES ON APPEAL.
In General.--Chapter 77 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITION ON INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE RAISING NEW ISSUES IN AN INTERNAL APPEAL.
In General.--In reviewing an appeal of any determination initially made by the Internal Revenue Service, the Internal Revenue Service Office of Appeals may not consider or decide any issue that is not within the scope of the initial determination.
Certain Issues Deemed Outside of Scope of Determination.--For purposes of subsection (a), the following matters shall be considered to be not within the scope of a determination: ``(1) Any issue that was not raised in a notice of deficiency or an examiner's report which is the subject of the appeal.
Any deficiency in tax which was not included in the initial determination.
Any theory or justification for a tax deficiency which was not considered in the initial determination.
No Inference With Respect to Issues Raised by Taxpayers.-- Nothing in this section shall be construed to provide any limitation in addition to any limitations in effect on the date of the enactment of this section on the right of a taxpayer to raise an issue, theory, or justification on an appeal from a determination initially made by the Internal Revenue Service that was not within the scope of the initial determination.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 77 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Prohibition on Internal Revenue Service raising new issues in an internal appeal.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to matters filed or pending with the Internal Revenue Service Office of Appeals on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
LIMITATION ON ENFORCEMENT OF LIENS AGAINST PRINCIPAL RESIDENCES.
In General.--Section 7403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (1) by striking ``In any case'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--In any case'', and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Limitation with respect to principal residence.-- ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any property used as the principal residence of the taxpayer (within the meaning of section 121) unless the Secretary of the Treasury makes a written determination that-- ``(i) all other property of the taxpayer, if sold, is insufficient to pay the tax or discharge the liability, and ``(ii) such action will not create an economic hardship for the taxpayer.
Delegation.--For purposes of this paragraph, the Secretary of the Treasury may not delegate any responsibilities under subparagraph (A) to any person other than-- ``(i) the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, or ``(ii) a district director or assistant district director of the Internal Revenue Service.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to actions filed after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO MANDATORY TERMINATION FOR MISCONDUCT.
Termination of Unemployment for Inappropriate Review of Tax- Exempt Status.--Section 1203(b) of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (26 United States Code 7804 note) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (10) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) in the case of any review of an application for tax- exempt status by an organization described in section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, developing or using any methodology that applies disproportionate scrutiny to any applicant based on the ideology expressed in the name or purpose of the organization.''.
Mandatory Unpaid Administrative Leave for Misconduct.-- Paragraph (1) of Section 1203(c) of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (26 United States Code 7804 note) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the Commissioner of Internal Revenue takes a personnel action other than termination for an act or omission described in subsection (b), the Commissioner shall place the employee on unpaid administrative leave for a period of not less than 30 days.''.
Limitation on Alternative Punishment.--Paragraph (1) of section 1203(c) of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (26 United States Code 7804 note) is amended by striking ``The Commissioner'' and inserting ``Except in the case of an act or omission described in subsection (b)(3)(A), the Commissioner''.
EXTENSION OF DECLARATORY JUDGMENT PROCEDURES TO SOCIAL WELFARE ORGANIZATIONS.
In General.--Section 7428(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (C) and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) with respect to the initial classification or continuing classification of an organization described in section 501(c)(4) which is exempt from tax under section 501(a), or''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to pleading filed after the date of the enactment of this Act.
19. REVIEW BY THE TREASURY INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR TAX ADMINISTRATION.
Review.--Subsection (k)(1) of section 8D of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E); (3) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph: ``(D) shall-- ``(i) review any criteria employed by the Internal Revenue Service to select tax returns (including applications for recognition of tax- exempt status) for examination or audit, assessment or collection of deficiencies, criminal investigation or referral, refunds for amounts paid, or any heightened scrutiny or review in order to determine whether the criteria discriminates against taxpayers on the basis of race, religion, or political ideology; and ``(ii) consult with the Internal Revenue Service on recommended amendments to such criteria in order to eliminate any discrimination identified pursuant to the review described in clause (i); and''; and (4) in subparagraph (E), as so redesignated, by striking ``and (C)'' and inserting ``(C), and (D)''.
Semiannual Report.--Subsection (g) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Any semiannual report made by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration that is required pursuant to section 5(a) shall include-- ``(A) a statement affirming that the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration has reviewed the criteria described in subsection (k)(1)(D) and consulted with the Internal Revenue Service regarding such criteria; and ``(B) a description and explanation of any such criteria that was identified as discriminatory by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration.