This Act may be cited as the ``Eliminating Disparities in Diabetes Prevention Access and Care Act of 2009''.
TITLE I--NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH SEC.
RESEARCH, TREATMENT, AND EDUCATION.
In General.--Subpart 3 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285c et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
DIABETES IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.
In General.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health shall expand, intensify, and support ongoing research and other activities with respect to pre-diabetes and diabetes, particularly type 2, in minority populations, including research to identify clinical, socioeconomic, geographical, cultural, and organizational factors that contribute to type 2 diabetes in such populations.
Certain Activities.--Activities under subsection (a) regarding type 2 diabetes in minority populations shall include the following: ``(1) Continuing research on behavior and obesity, including through the obesity research center that is sponsored by the National Institutes of Health.
Research on environmental factors that may contribute to the increase in type 2 diabetes.
Support for new methods to identify environmental triggers and genetic interactions that lead to the development of type 2 diabetes in minority newborns.
Such research should follow the newborns through puberty, an increasingly high-risk period for developing type 2 diabetes.
Research to identify genes that predispose individuals to the onset of developing type 1 and type 2 diabetes and to the development of complications.
Research to prevent complications in individuals who have already developed diabetes, such as research that attempts to identify the genes that predispose individuals with diabetes to the development of complications.
Research methods and alternative therapies to control blood glucose.
Support of ongoing research efforts examining the level of glycemia at which adverse outcomes develop during pregnancy and to address the many clinical issues associated with minority mothers and fetuses during diabetic and gestational diabetic pregnancies.
Education.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health shall-- ``(1) through the National Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities and the National Diabetes Education Program-- ``(A) make grants to programs funded under section 485F (relating to centers of excellence) for the purpose of establishing a mentoring program for health care professionals to be more involved in weight counseling, obesity research, and nutrition; and ``(B) provide for the participation of minority health professionals in diabetes-focused research programs; and ``(2) make grants for programs to establish a pipeline from high school to professional school that will increase minority representation in diabetes-focused health fields by expanding Minority Access to Research Careers (MARC) program internships and mentoring opportunities for recruitment.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `minority population' means a racial and ethnic minority group, as defined in section 1707(g).
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for fiscal year 2010 and each subsequent fiscal year.''.
Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating Committee.--Section 429 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285c-3) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) In each annual report prepared by the Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating Committee, the Committee shall include an assessment of the Federal activities and programs related to diabetes in minority populations.
Such assessment shall-- ``(A) compile the current activities of all current Federal health programs to allow for the assessment of their adequacy as a systemic method of addressing the impact of diabetes mellitus on minority populations; ``(B) develop strategic planning activities to develop an effective and comprehensive Federal plan to address diabetes mellitus within minority populations which will involve all appropriate Federal health programs and shall-- ``(i) include steps to address issues including type 1 and type 2 diabetes in children and the disproportionate impact of diabetes mellitus on minority populations; and ``(ii) remain consistent with the programs and activities identified in section 399O, as well as remaining consistent with the intent of the Eliminating Disparities in Diabetes Prevention Access and Care Act of 2009; and ``(C) assess the implementation of such a plan throughout Federal health programs.
For the purposes of this subsection, the term `minority population' means a racial and ethnic minority group, as defined in section 1707(g).
For the purpose of carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for fiscal year 2010 and each subsequent fiscal year.''.
TITLE II--CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION SEC.
RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 317T the following section: ``SEC.
DIABETES IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.
Research and Other Activities.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall conduct and support research and other activities with respect to diabetes in minority populations.
Certain activities.--Activities under paragraph (1) regarding diabetes in minority populations shall include the following: ``(A) Expanding the National Diabetes Laboratory capacity for translational research and the identification of genetic and immunological risk factors associated with diabetes.
Enhancing the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey to include risk factors for type 2 diabetes and pre-diabetes with emphasis on eating and dietary habits, and focus, including cultural and socioeconomic factors, on Hispanic American, African- American, American Indian and Alaskan Native, and Asian American, Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander communities.
Further enhancing the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey by over-sampling Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Other Pacific Islanders in appropriate geographic areas to better determine the prevalence of diabetes in such populations as well as to improve the data collection of diabetes penetration disaggregated into major ethnic groups within such populations.
Within the Division of Diabetes Translation, providing for prevention research to better understand how to influence health care systems changes to improve quality of care being delivered to such populations, and within the Division of Diabetes Translation, carrying out model demonstration projects to design, implement, and evaluate effective diabetes prevention and control intervention for such populations.
Through the Division of Diabetes Translation, carrying out culturally appropriate community-based interventions designed to address issues and problems experienced by such populations.
Conducting applied research within the Division of Diabetes Translation to reduce health disparities within such populations with diabetes.
Conducting applied research on primary prevention within the Division of Diabetes Translation to specifically focus on such populations with pre- diabetes.
Education.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall direct the Division of Diabetes Translation to conduct and support programs to educate the public on the causes and effects of diabetes in minority populations.
Certain activities.--Programs under paragraph (1) regarding education on diabetes in minority populations shall include carrying out public awareness campaigns directed toward such populations to aggressively emphasize the importance and impact of physical activity and diet in regard to diabetes and diabetes-related complications through the National Diabetes Education Program.
Diabetes; Health Promotion, Prevention Activities, and Access.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall carry out culturally appropriate diabetes health promotion and prevention programs for minority populations.
Certain activities.--Activities regarding culturally appropriate diabetes health promotion and prevention programs for minority populations shall include the following: ``(A) Expanding the Diabetes Prevention and Control Program (currently existing in all the States and territories) and providing funds for education and community outreach on diabetes.
Providing funds for an expansion of the Diabetes Prevention Program Initiative that focuses on physical inactivity and diet and its relation to type 2 diabetes within such populations.
Providing funds to strengthen existing surveillance systems to improve the quality, accuracy, and timeliness of morbidity and mortality diabetes data for such populations.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `minority population' means a racial and ethnic minority group, as defined in section 1707(g).
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for fiscal year 2010 and each subsequent fiscal year.''.
TITLE III--HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION SEC.
RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES.
Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended-- (1) by redesignating the section 399R inserted by section 2 of Public Law 110-373 as section 399S; (2) by redesignating the section 399R inserted by section 3 of Public Law 110-374 as section 399T; and (3) by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PROGRAMS TO EDUCATE HEALTH PROVIDERS ON THE CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF DIABETES IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall conduct and support programs described in subsection (b) to educate health professionals on the causes and effects of diabetes in minority populations.
Programs.--Programs described in this subsection, with respect to education on diabetes in minority populations, shall include the following: ``(1) Making grants for diabetes-focused education classes or training programs on cultural sensitivity and patient care within such populations for health care providers.
Providing funds to community health centers for programs that provide diabetes services and screenings.
Providing additional funds for the Health Careers Opportunity Program, Centers for Excellence, and the Minority Faculty Fellowship Program to partner with the Office of Minority Health under section 1707 and the National Institutes of Health to strengthen programs for career opportunities within minority populations focused on diabetes treatment and care.
Developing a diabetes focus within, and providing additional funds for, the National Health Service Corps Scholarship program to place individuals in areas that are disproportionately affected by diabetes and to provide health care services to such areas.
Establishing a diabetes ambassador program for recruitment efforts to increase the number of underrepresented minorities currently serving in student, faculty, or administrative positions in institutions of higher learning, hospitals, and community health centers.
Establishing a loan repayment program that focuses on diabetes care and prevention in minority populations.''.
TITLE IV--ADDITIONAL PROGRAMS SEC.
RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES.
Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 280g et sequentes), as amended by section 301, is further amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES REGARDING DIABETES IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.
Research and Other Activities.-- ``(1) In general.--In addition to activities under sections 317U and 434B, the Secretary shall conduct and support research and other activities with respect to diabetes within minority populations.
Certain activities.--Activities under paragraph (1) regarding diabetes in minority populations shall include the following: ``(A) Through the National Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities, the Office of Minority Health under section 1707, the Health Resources and Services Administration, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Indian Health Service, establishing partnerships within minority populations to conduct studies on cultural, familial, and social factors that may influence health promotion, diabetes management, and prevention.
Through the Indian Health Service, in collaboration with other appropriate Federal agencies, coordinating the collection of data on ethnic and culturally appropriate diabetes treatment, care, prevention, and services by health care professionals to the American Indian population.
Programs relating to clinical research.-- ``(A) Education regarding clinical trials.--The Secretary shall carry out education and awareness programs designed to increase participation of minority populations in clinical trials.
Minority researchers.--The Secretary shall carry out mentorship programs for minority researchers who are conducting or intend to conduct research on diabetes in minority populations.
Supplementing clinical research regarding children.--The Secretary shall make grants to supplement clinical research programs to assist such programs in obtaining the services of health professionals and other resources to provide specialized care for children with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
Additional programs.--Activities under paragraph (1) regarding education on diabetes in minority populations shall include providing funds for new and existing diabetes-focused education grants and programs for present and future students and clinicians in the medical field from minority populations, including for the following: ``(A) For Federal and State loan repayment programs for health profession students within communities of color.
For the Office of Minority Health under section 1707 for training health profession students to focus on diabetes within such populations.
For State and local entities to establish diabetes awareness week or day every month in schools, nursing homes, and colleges through partnerships with the Office of Minority Health under section 1707 and the Health Resources and Services Administration.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `minority population' means a racial and ethnic minority group as defined in section 1707(g).
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for fiscal year 2010 and each subsequent fiscal year.