This Act may be cited as the ``Learning Differences Act of 1998''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Disability is a natural part of the human experience and encompasses physical, mental, and cognitive impairments.
The term ``learning disability'' refers to a number of specific learning disabilities, such as dyslexia.
These disorders may manifest themselves in an imperfect ability to listen, think, speak, read, write, spell, reason, or perform mathematical calculations.
Learning disabilities tend to endure from childhood into adulthood.
2,600,000 of the 5,100,000 children with disabilities served under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act in elementary and secondary education are children with learning disabilities.
About 2 percent of all undergraduate students nationwide report having a learning disability.
Different teaching strategies are needed to enable them to develop their talents and perform up to their capacity.
A greater number of individuals with learning disabilities can benefit from postsecondary education, and contribute more fully to society and the economy, with adequate and appropriate programs, services, adaptations, and accommodations.
Civil rights laws protect individuals with disabilities, including individuals with learning disabilities, in postsecondary education, and institutions of higher education require assistance to comply with these laws.
Exemplary institutions of higher education dedicated to meeting the needs of individuals with learning disabilities exist and can serve as a national resource for other institutions in educating these students.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To assist model institutions of higher education with demonstrated prior experience in serving individuals with learning disabilities.
To demonstrate and disseminate programs, services, adaptations, accommodations, strategies, and approaches to teaching individuals with disabilities in postsecondary education.
In General.--The Secretary of Education may award grants to, and enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with, not more than 5 institutions of higher education that are described in section 4 for demonstration projects to develop, test, and disseminate, in accordance with section 5, methods, techniques, and procedures for ensuring equal educational opportunity for individuals with learning disabilities in postsecondary education.
Award Basis.--Grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements shall be awarded on a competitive basis.
Award Period.--Grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements shall be awarded for a period of 3 years.
Entities eligible to apply for a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under this Act are institutions of higher education (as defined in section 1201 of the Higher Education Act of 1956) with demonstrated prior experience with meeting the postsecondary educational needs of individuals with learning disabilities.
A recipient of a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under this Act shall use the funds received under this Act to carry out each of the following activities: (1) Developing or identifying innovative, effective, and efficient approaches, strategies, supports, modifications, adaptations, and accommodations that enable individuals with learning disabilities to fully participate in postsecondary education.
Synthesizing research and other information related to the provision of services to individuals with learning disabilities in postsecondary education.
Conducting training sessions for personnel from other institutions of higher education to enable them to meet the special needs of postsecondary students with learning disabilities.
Preparing and disseminating products based upon the activities described in paragraphs (1) through (3).
Coordinating findings and products from the activities described in paragraphs (1) through (4) with other similar products and findings through participation in conferences, groups, and professional networks involved in the dissemination of technical assistance and information on postsecondary education.
The Secretary of Education shall ensure that, to the extent feasible, there is a national geographic distribution of grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements awarded under this Act throughout the States, except that the Secretary may give priority to a historically Black college or university that satisfies the requirements of section 4.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2001.