This Act may be cited as the ``Career And Technical Innovation Fund Act of 2012''.
CAREER AND TECHNICAL INNOVATION FUND.
In General.--The Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 United States Code 2301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE IV--CAREER AND TECHNICAL INNOVATION FUND ``SEC.
``The purposes of this title are to strengthen the ability of career and technical education programs to prepare students to meet the needs of the future workforce by-- ``(1) funding the identification, development, evaluation, and expansion of new and innovative, research- and evidence- based career and technical education practices, programs, and strategies in order to-- ``(A) significantly increase student achievement on the core indicators of performance as outlined in section 113; ``(B) reduce gaps in program participation and completion rates among populations of career and technical education students; and ``(C) improve the effectiveness of career and technical education teachers, leaders, and counselors; ``(2) funding the development of innovative career and technical programs of study, as described in section 122(c)(1)(A), in new and emerging industries at the regional (or local) level; ``(3) developing rigorous evidence of the effectiveness of innovative strategies on career and technical education student outcomes and career and technical education program outcomes; and ``(4) supporting the rapid development, expansion, adoption, and implementation of tools and resources that improve the efficiency, effectiveness, or pace of adoption of such career and technical education practices, programs, and strategies.
``The Secretary may reserve not more than 5 percent of funds appropriated to carry out this title for any fiscal year to carry out activities of national significance.
Such activities shall include-- ``(1) capacity building; ``(2) technical assistance; ``(3) evaluation; and ``(4) dissemination of best practices developed with grant funds provided under this title.
PROGRAM AUTHORIZED; LENGTH OF GRANTS; PRIORITIES.
Program Authorization.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall use funds made available to carry out this title for a fiscal year to award grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible entities.
Eligible entity.-- ``(A) In general.--In this title, the term `eligible entity' means a group or consortium that includes not less than 2 of the following (at least 1 of which shall be an entity described in clause (i), (ii), (iii), or (iv)): ``(i) A local educational agency or a consortium of such agencies.
An area career and technical education school or a consortium of such schools.
An institution of higher education whose most common degree awarded is an associate's degree, or a consortium of such institutions.
A postsecondary vocational institution, as defined in section 102(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965, or a consortium of such institutions.
An entity that carries out apprenticeship programs registered under the Act of August 16, 1937 (commonly known as the National Apprenticeship Act (29 United States Code 50 et seq; 50 United States Statutes at Large 664, chapter 663)).
An institution of higher education whose most common degree awarded is a bachelor's or higher degree, or a consortium of such institutions.
A business or industry representative partner that provides training.
Other partners.--An eligible entity may also include a State board or local board (as such terms are defined in section 101 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2801)), an eligible agency, a community-based organization, a nonprofit organization, or other business or industry representative.
Record of success.--In order to be eligible to receive a grant under this title, at least 1 of the members of the eligible entity shall have a recent record of success in improving career and technical education outcomes, career and technical education program outcomes, or both, in the area addressed in the application.
Duration of Grants.--The Secretary-- ``(1) shall award grants under this title for a period of not more than 3 years; and ``(2) may extend such grants for not more than an additional 2-year period if the grantee demonstrates to the Secretary that it is achieving its program objectives and, as applicable, has improved education outcomes for career and technical education students.
Rural Set-Aside.--The Secretary shall ensure that not less than 22 percent of the funds awarded under subsection (a) for any fiscal year are for projects that meet the following requirements, except that the Secretary shall not be required to make such awards unless a sufficient number of otherwise eligible high-quality applications are received: ``(1) Eligible entities that include local educational agencies.--If the eligible entity includes a local educational agency or a consortium of such agencies, both of the following requirements shall be met: ``(A) The eligible entity includes-- ``(i) a local educational agency with an urban-centric district locale code of 32, 33, 41, 42, or 43, as determined by the Secretary; ``(ii) a consortium of such local educational agencies; or ``(iii) an educational service agency or a nonprofit organization with demonstrated expertise in serving students from rural areas.
A majority of the schools to be served by the project are designated with a school locale code of 41, 42, or 43, or a combination of such codes, as determined by the Secretary, and-- ``(i) are served by a local educational agency serving a geographic area in which 20 percent or more of the children 5 through 17 years of age are from families with incomes below the poverty level; ``(ii) are served by a local educational agency in which the total number of students in average daily attendance at all of the schools served by the local educational agency is fewer than 600; or ``(iii) are served by a local educational agency located in a county that has a total population density of fewer than 10 persons per square mile.
Eligible entities that do not include local educational agencies.--If the eligible entity does not include a local educational agency or a consortium of such agencies, the eligible entity shall demonstrate that it will serve individuals-- ``(A) at least 20 percent of whom are from families with incomes below the poverty level; ``(B) who reside in an area served by a local educational agency in which the total number of students in average daily attendance at all of the schools served by the local educational agency is fewer than 600; or ``(C) who reside in a county that has a total population density of fewer than 10 persons per square mile.
Standards of Evidence.--An eligible entity that desires a grant under this title shall demonstrate that the activities the entity proposes to carry out with funds under this title are likely to succeed in improving student outcomes.
Evidence shall include a rationale based on research findings or a reasonable hypothesis that the activities proposed by the eligible entity will improve student outcomes.
``Each eligible entity that desires to receive a grant under this title shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
At a minimum, each application shall-- ``(1) describe the project for which the applicant is seeking a grant and how the evidence supporting that project meets the standards of evidence, as described in section 403(d); ``(2) describe how the applicant will address at least 1 of the areas described in section 405(a)(1); ``(3) describe how the project will support the goal of innovation as outlined in the purposes of this title; ``(4) provide an estimate of the number of students that the applicant plans to serve under the proposed project, including the percentage of those students who are from special populations; ``(5) describe the applicant's plan for continuing the proposed project after funding under this title ends; ``(6) describe the applicant's partnership and communication with business, industry, and labor, as appropriate; ``(7) provide evidence of the eligible entity's ability to carry out the project, which may include information on other successful efforts to increase student achievement; ``(8) provide a description of the applicant's plan for independently evaluating the effectiveness of activities carried out with funds under this title; ``(9) provide an assurance that the applicant will-- ``(A) cooperate with evaluations, as requested by the Secretary; ``(B) make data available to third parties for validation and further study, in accordance with applicable data privacy laws, including section 444 of the General Education Provisions Act (20 United States Code 1232g, commonly known as the `Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974'); ``(C) participate in communities of practice; and ``(D) disseminate information about project activities; ``(10) provide a description of how the innovative project will support and coordinate with any funds received by project partners under title I, and with the activities outlined in State and local plans under title I; and ``(11) include an assurance from the applicable eligible agency that the project is aligned with State goals.
Uses of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--Each eligible entity that receives a grant under this title shall use the grant funds to carry out 1 or more of the following activities: ``(A) Designing and implementing programs of study aligned to labor market needs in new or emerging industries or occupations.
More seamlessly integrating academic and career and technical education components through new or improved education delivery models.
Implementing new assessment systems within career and technical education programs that measure career readiness skills for students, particularly focusing on measures of employability skills and industry-recognized credentials.
Incorporating new and emerging workforce skills into current career and technical education curriculum to ensure all programs are aligned to industry needs.
Ensuring students have access to up-to-date career pathway and labor market information through new or expanded comprehensive career education programs that link to existing labor market data.
Developing new programs to help students transition from secondary education to postsecondary education, or from completion of one postsecondary program to another postsecondary program awarding a higher-level credential.
Increasing the use of technology within career and technical education programs.
Redesigning current programs through the comprehensive use of innovative delivery models, curriculum, professional development, and other key elements.
Designing programs specifically targeted to disadvantaged populations, such as high school dropouts or dislocated workers.
Incorporating comprehensive work-based learning programs into the programs of study described in subparagraph (A).
Additional uses of funds.--In addition to the activities described in paragraph (1), each eligible entity that receives a grant under this title may use the grant funds-- ``(A) to improve the effectiveness of career and technical education teachers, administrators, or counselors through innovative recruitment, retention, or professional development efforts; and ``(B) for an independent evaluation of the innovative practices carried out with the grant.
Authority to Subgrant.-- ``(1) In general.--If an eligible entity that receives a grant under this title includes a member that is a nonprofit organization, such nonprofit organization may use the grant funds to award subgrants to other entities to provide support to 1 or more schools or local educational agencies.
Compliance with requirements of grantees.--Each entity awarded a subgrant under paragraph (1) shall comply with the requirements of this title relating to grantees, as appropriate.
``The Secretary shall establish performance measures for the programs and activities carried out under this title.
These measures, at a minimum, shall track the grantee's progress in improving outcomes for each subgroup of students included in the definition of special populations that is served by the grantee, including, as applicable, by-- ``(1) each of the core indicators of performance, as outlined in section 113; ``(2) improving career and technical education teacher and school leader effectiveness; or ``(3) any other indicator as the grantee may determine relative to the specific project proposed.
``Each eligible entity that receives a grant under this title shall submit to the Secretary, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may require, an annual report that includes information on the entity's progress on the performance measures established under section 406, and the data supporting such progress.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2013 through 2017.''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 324 the following: ``TITLE IV--CAREER AND TECHNICAL INNOVATION FUND ``Sec.
Program authorized; length of grants; priorities.