Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Economic Growth and Debt Reduction Act''.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is-- (1) to ensure a balanced Federal budget by fiscal year 2002; (2) to create a mechanism to monitor total costs of direct spending programs, and, in the event that actual or projected costs exceed targeted levels, to require the President and Congress to address adjustments in direct spending; and (3) to ensure that windfall revenues are used to promote economic growth through lower taxes.
ESTABLISHMENT OF DIRECT SPENDING AND REVENUE TARGETS.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the initial direct spending targets for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2002 shall equal total outlays for all direct spending except net interest as provided in H. Con.
84, the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 1998; and (2) the revenue targets are the revenue amounts provided in H. Con.
84, the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 1998.
ANNUAL REVIEW OF DIRECT SPENDING AND RECEIPTS BY PRESIDENT.
As part of each budget submitted under section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, the President shall provide an annual review of direct spending and receipts, which shall include-- (1) information on total outlays for programs covered by the direct spending targets, including actual outlays for the prior fiscal year and projected outlays for the current fiscal year and the 5 succeeding fiscal years; and (2) any amount by which revenues for a budget year and any outyears through fiscal year 2002 exceed the revenue target in section 2(2).
Inclusion on Scorecard.--The Office of Management and Budget shall include the amount of any changes in revenues determined pursuant to section 3(2) as a deficit decrease under the estimates and reports required by section 252(b) and section 254 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
Use of Revenues Exceeding Target.--Any amount not to exceed the amount of deficit decrease determined under section 3(2) may only be offset by legislation decreasing revenues.
SPECIAL DIRECT SPENDING MESSAGE BY PRESIDENT.
Trigger.--If the information submitted by the President under section 3(1) indicates-- (1) that actual outlays for direct spending in the prior fiscal year exceeded the applicable direct spending target; or (2) that outlays for direct spending for the current or budget year are projected to exceed the applicable direct spending targets, the President shall include in his budget a special direct spending message meeting the requirements of subsection (b).
Contents.--The special direct spending message shall include-- (1) an analysis of the variance in direct spending over the direct spending targets; and (2) the President's recommendations for eliminating overages, if any, in the prior, current, or budget year.
Proposed Special Direct Spending Resolution.--The special direct spending message shall include the text of a special direct spending resolution implementing the President's recommendations through reconciliation directives instructing the appropriate committees of the House of Representatives and Senate to determine and recommend changes in laws within their jurisdictions.
REQUIRED RESPONSE BY CONGRESS.
In General.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider a concurrent resolution on the budget unless that concurrent resolution fully eliminates the entirety of any overage contained in the applicable report of the President under section 5 through reconciliation directives.
Waiver and Suspension.--This section may be waived or suspended in the Senate only by the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members, duly chosen and sworn.
This section shall be subject to the provisions of section 258 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
Appeals.--Appeals in the Senate from the decisions of the Chair relating to any provision of this section shall be limited to 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the appellant and the manager of the bill or joint resolution, as the case may be.
An affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members of the Senate, duly chosen and sworn, shall be required in the Senate to sustain an appeal of the ruling of the Chair on a point of order raised under this section.
RELATIONSHIP TO BALANCED BUDGET AND EMERGENCY DEFICIT CONTROL ACT.
Reductions in outlays resulting from legislation reported pursuant to section 6 or reductions in revenues reported pursuant to section 4(b) shall not be taken into account for purposes of any budget enforcement procedures under the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 and the Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
For any fiscal year for which the overage is less than one-half of 1 percent of the direct spending target for that year, the procedures set forth in sections 5 and 6 shall not apply.
This Act shall apply to direct spending targets and revenues for fiscal years 1998 through 2002 and shall expire at the end of fiscal year 2002.