This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness for Small Business and Employees Act of 1998''.
TITLE I--TRUTH IN EMPLOYMENT SEC.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) An atmosphere of trust and civility in labor-management relationships is essential to a productive workplace and a healthy economy.
The tactic of using professional union organizers and agents to infiltrate a targeted employer's workplace, a practice commonly referred to as ``salting'' has evolved into an aggressive form of harassment not contemplated when the National Labor Relations Act was enacted and threatens the balance of rights which is fundamental to our system of collective bargaining.
Increasingly, union organizers are seeking employment with nonunion employers not because of a desire to work for such employers but primarily to organize the employees of such employers or to inflict economic harm specifically designed to put nonunion competitors out of business, or to do both.
While no employer may discriminate against employees based upon the views of employees concerning collective bargaining, an employer should have the right to expect job applicants to be primarily interested in utilizing the skills of the applicants to further the goals of the business of the employer.
The purposes of this title are-- (1) to preserve the balance of rights between employers, employees, and labor organizations which is fundamental to our system of collective bargaining; (2) to preserve the rights of workers to organize, or otherwise engage in concerted activities protected under the National Labor Relations Act; and (3) to alleviate pressure on employers to hire individuals who seek or gain employment in order to disrupt the workplace of the employer or otherwise inflict economic harm designed to put the employer out of business.
PROTECTION OF EMPLOYER RIGHTS.
Section 8(a) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 158(a)) is amended by adding after paragraph (5) the following flush sentence: ``Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as requiring an employer to employ any person who is not a bona fide employee applicant, in that such person seeks or has sought employment with the employer with the primary purpose of furthering another employment or agency status: Provided, That this sentence shall not affect the rights and responsibilities under this Act of any employee who is or was a bona fide employee applicant, including the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection.''.
TITLE II--FAIR HEARING SEC.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Bargaining unit determinations by their nature require the type of fact-specific analysis that only case-by-case adjudication allows.
The National Labor Relations Board has for decades held hearings to determine the appropriateness of certifying a single location bargaining unit.
The imprecision of a blanket rule limiting the factors considered material to determining the appropriateness of a single location bargaining unit detracts from the National Labor Relations Act's goal of promoting stability in labor relations.
The purpose of this title is to ensure that the National Labor Relations Board conducts a hearing process and specific analysis of whether or not a single location bargaining unit is appropriate, given all of the relevant facts and circumstances of a particular case.
Section 9(c) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 159(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(6) If a petition for an election requests the Board to certify a unit which includes the employees employed at one or more facilities of a multi-facility employer, and in the absence of an agreement by the parties (stipulation for certification upon consent election or agreement for consent election) regarding the appropriateness of the bargaining unit at issue for purposes of subsection (b), the Board shall provide for a hearing upon due notice to determine the appropriateness of the bargaining unit.
In making its determination, the Board shall consider functional integration, centralized control, common skills, functions and working conditions, permanent and temporary employee interchange, geographical separation, local autonomy, the number of employees, bargaining history, and such other factors as the Board considers appropriate.''.
TITLE III--ATTORNEYS FEES SEC.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Certain small businesses and labor organizations are at a great disadvantage in terms of expertise and resources when facing actions brought by the National Labor Relations Board.
The attempt to ``level the playing field'' for small businesses and labor organizations by means of the Equal Access to Justice Act has proven ineffective and has been underutilized by these small entities in their actions before the National Labor Relations Board.
The greater expertise and resources of the National Labor Relations Board as compared with those of small businesses and labor organizations necessitate a standard that awards fees and costs to certain small entities when they prevail against the National Labor Relations Board.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this title-- (1) to ensure that certain small businesses and labor organizations will not be deterred from seeking review of, or defending against, actions brought against them by the National Labor Relations Board because of the expense involved in securing vindication of their rights; (2) to reduce the disparity in resources and expertise between certain small businesses and labor organizations and the National Labor Relations Board; and (3) to make the National Labor Relations Board more accountable for its enforcement actions against certain small businesses and labor organizations by awarding fees and costs to these entities when they prevail against the National Labor Relations Board.
AMENDMENT TO NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS ACT.
The National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``awards of attorneys' fees and costs ``Sec.
Administrative Proceedings.--An employer who, or a labor organization that-- ``(1) is the prevailing party in an adversary adjudication conducted by the Board under this or any other Act, and ``(2) had not more than 100 employees and a net worth of not more than $1,400,000 at the time the adversary adjudication was initiated, shall be awarded fees and other expenses as a prevailing party under section 504 of title 5, United States Code, in accordance with the provisions of that section, but without regard to whether the position of the Board was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `adversary adjudication' has the meaning given that term in section 504(b)(1)(C) of title 5, United States Code.
Court Proceedings.--An employer who, or a labor organization that-- ``(1) is the prevailing party in a civil action, including proceedings for judicial review of agency action by the Board, brought by or against the Board, and ``(2) had not more than 100 employees and a net worth of not more than $1,400,000 at the time the civil action was filed, shall be awarded fees and other expenses as a prevailing party under section 2412(d) of title 28, United States Code, in accordance with the provisions of that section, but without regard to whether the position of the United States was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
Any appeal of a determination of fees pursuant to subsection (a) or this subsection shall be determined without regard to whether the position of the United States was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.''.
Agency Proceedings.--Subsection (a) of section 20 of the National Labor Relations Act (as added by section 302) applies to agency proceedings commenced on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Court Proceedings.--Subsection (b) of section 20 of the National Labor Relations Act (as added by section 302) applies to civil actions commenced on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.