SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Military Voting Support Act of 2001''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Sense of the Senate regarding the importance of voting by members of the uniformed services.
Standard for invalidation of ballots cast by absent uniformed services voters in Federal elections.
Guarantee of residency and voting rights.
Use of buildings on military installations and reserve component facilities as polling places.
Maximizing the access of recently separated uniformed services voters to the polls.
Uniformed services electronic voting demonstration project.
Governors' reports on implementation of Federal Voting Assistance Program recommendations.
SENSE OF THE SENATE REGARDING THE IMPORTANCE OF VOTING BY MEMBERS OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.
It is the sense of the Senate that each administrator of a Federal, State, or local election should-- (1) be aware of the importance of the ability of each uniformed services voter (as defined in section 7(a)(4)) to exercise their right to vote; and (2) perform their duties with the intent to ensure that-- (A) each uniformed services voter receives the utmost consideration and cooperation when voting; and (B) each valid ballot cast by such a voter is duly counted.
STANDARD FOR INVALIDATION OF BALLOTS CAST BY ABSENT UNIFORMED SERVICES VOTERS IN FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
In General.--Section 102 of the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (42 United States Code 1973ff-1) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Each State'' and inserting ``(a) In General.--Each State''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Standards for Invalidation of Certain Ballots.-- ``(1) In general.--A State may not refuse to count a ballot submitted in an election for Federal office by an absent uniformed services voter on the grounds that the ballot was improperly or fraudulently cast unless the State finds clear and convincing evidence of fraud in the preparation or casting of the ballot by the voter.
Clear and convincing evidence.--For purposes of this subsection, the lack of a witness signature, address, postmark, or other identifying information may not be considered clear and convincing evidence of fraud (absent any other information or evidence).
No effect on filing deadlines under state law.-- Nothing in this subsection may be construed to affect the application to ballots submitted by absent uniformed services voters of any ballot submission deadline applicable under State law.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to ballots described in section 102(b) of the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (as added by such subsection) that are submitted with respect to elections that occur after the date of enactment of this Act.
GUARANTEE OF RESIDENCY AND VOTING RIGHTS.
Guarantee of Residency.--Article VII of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940 (50 United States Code 700 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
For purposes of voting for any Federal office (as defined in section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431)) or any office of a State, a person in the military service who is absent from a State because of compliance with military or naval orders shall not, solely by reason of that absence, be deemed to have-- ``(1) lost a residence or domicile in any State (regardless of the intent of the person); ``(2) acquired a residence or domicile in any other State; or ``(3) become resident in or a resident of any other State.
In this section, the term `State' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a territory or possession of the United States.''.
Guarantee of Voting Rights.-- (1) Registration and balloting.--Section 102 of the Uniformed and Overseas Absentee Voting Act (42 United States Code 1973ff-1) (as amended by section 3) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Elections for State and Local Offices.--Each State shall-- ``(1) permit absent uniformed services voters to use absentee registration procedures and to vote by absentee ballot in general, special, primary, and runoff elections for State and local office; and ``(2) accept and process, with respect to any election described in paragraph (1), any otherwise valid voter registration application from an absent uniformed services voter, if the application is received by the appropriate State election official not less than 30 days before the election.''.
Conforming amendment.--The heading of title I of the Uniformed and Overseas Absentee Voting Act (42 United States Code 1973ff et seq.)
is amended to read as follows: ``TITLE I--REGISTRATION AND VOTING BY ABSENT UNIFORMED SERVICES VOTERS AND OVERSEAS VOTERS IN ELECTIONS''.
USE OF BUILDINGS ON MILITARY INSTALLATIONS AND RESERVE COMPONENT FACILITIES AS POLLING PLACES.
Use of Military Installations Authorized.--Section 2670 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``Under'' and inserting ``(a) Use by Red Cross.--Under''; (2) by striking ``this section'' and inserting ``this subsection''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Use as Polling Places.--(1) Notwithstanding chapter 29 of title 18 (including sections 592 and 593 of such title), the Secretary of a military department may make a building located on a military installation under the jurisdiction of the Secretary available for use as a polling place in any Federal, State, or local election for public office.
Once a military installation is made available as the site of a polling place with respect to a Federal, State, or local election for public office, the Secretary shall continue to make the site available for subsequent elections for public office unless the Secretary provides to Congress advance notice in a reasonable and timely manner of the reasons why the site will no longer be made available as a polling place.
In this section, the term `military installation' has the meaning given the term in section 2687(e) of this title.''.
Use of Reserve Component Facilities.-- (1) Use permitted by secretary.--Section 18235 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Pursuant to a lease or other agreement under subsection (a)(2), the Secretary may make a facility covered by subsection (a) available for use as a polling place in any Federal, State, or local election for public office notwithstanding chapter 29 of title 18 (including sections 592 and 593 of such title).
Once a facility is made available as the site of a polling place with respect to an election for public office, the Secretary shall continue to make the facility available for subsequent elections for public office unless the Secretary provides to Congress advance notice in a reasonable and timely manner of the reasons why the facility will no longer be made available as a polling place.''.
Use permitted by states.--Section 18236 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Pursuant to a lease or other agreement under subsection (c)(1), a State may make a facility covered by subsection (c) available for use as a polling place in any Federal, State, or local election for public office notwithstanding chapter 29 of title 18 (including sections 592 and 593 of such title).''.
Conforming Amendments to Title 18.-- (1) Not considered troops at polls.--Section 592 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``This section shall not prohibit the use of buildings located on military installations, or the use of reserve component facilities, as polling places in Federal, State, and local elections for public office in accordance with section 2670(b), 18235, or 18236 of title 10.''.
Not considered interference by armed forces.--Section 593 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``This section shall not prohibit the use of buildings located on military installations, or the use of reserve component facilities, as polling places in Federal, State, and local elections for public office in accordance with section 2670(b), 18235, or 18236 of title 10.''.
Conforming Amendment to Voting Rights Law.--Section 2003 of the Revised Statutes (42 United States Code 1972) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Making a military installation or reserve component facility available as a polling place in a Federal, State, or local election for public office in accordance with section 2670(b), 18235, or 18236 of title 10, United States Code, shall be deemed to be consistent with this section.''.
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The heading of section 2670 of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Buildings on military installations: use by American National Red Cross and as polling places in Federal, State, and local elections''.
The item relating to such section in the table of sections at the beginning of chapter 159 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``2670.
Buildings on military installations: use by American National Red Cross and as polling places in Federal, State, and local elections.''.
MAXIMIZING THE ACCESS OF RECENTLY SEPARATED UNIFORMED SERVICES VOTERS TO THE POLLS.
In General.--For purposes of voting in any primary, special, general, or runoff election for Federal office (as defined in section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431)), each State shall, with respect to any recently separated uniformed services voter requesting to vote in the State-- (1) deem the voter to be a resident of the State; (2) waive any requirement relating to any period of residence or domicile in the State for purposes of registering to vote or voting in that State; (3) accept and process, with respect to any primary, special, general, or runoff election, any otherwise valid voter registration application from the voter on the day of the election; and (4) permit the voter to vote in that election.
Definitions.-- (1) State.--The term ``State'' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a territory or possession of the United States.
Recently separated uniformed services voter.--The term ``recently separated uniformed services voter'' means any individual that was a uniformed services voter (as defined in section 7(a)(4)) on the date that is 60 days before the date on which the individual seeks to vote and who-- (A) presents to the election official Department of Defense form 214 evidencing their former status as such a voter, or any other official proof of such status; (B) is no longer such a voter; and (C) is otherwise qualified to vote.
UNIFORMED SERVICES ELECTRONIC VOTING DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Federal office.--The term ``Federal office'' has the meaning given such term in section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Defense.
Uniformed services.--The term ``uniformed services'' means the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard, the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service, and the commissioned corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Uniformed services voter.--The term ``uniformed services voter'' means-- (A) a member of a uniformed service on active duty; (B) a member of the merchant marine (as defined in section 107 of the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (42 United States Code 1973ff-6)); and (C) a spouse or dependent of a member referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B) who is qualified to vote.
Demonstration Project.--During the elections for Federal office held in 2002, the Secretary shall establish a demonstration project for the purpose of determining the feasibility and advisability of the use of an electronic voting system by uniformed services voters during the elections for Federal office to be held in 2004.
Report.--Not later than June 1, 2003, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on the demonstration project conducted under subsection (b) together with such recommendations for legislative and administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
GOVERNORS' REPORTS ON IMPLEMENTATION OF FEDERAL VOTING ASSISTANCE PROGRAM RECOMMENDATIONS.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Legislative recommendation.--The term ``legislative recommendation'' means a recommendation of the Presidential designee suggesting a modification in the laws of a State for the purpose of maximizing the access to the polls of absent uniformed services voters and overseas voters, including each recommendation made under section 104 of the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (42 United States Code 1973ff-3).
Presidential designee.--The term ``Presidential designee'' means the head of the executive department designated under section 101 of the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (42 United States Code 1973ff).
Reports.--During the period described in subsection (c), not later than 90 days after the date on which a State receives a legislative recommendation, the State shall submit to the Presidential designee and to each Member of Congress that represents that State, a report on the status of the implementation of that recommendation.
Period Described.--The period described in this subsection is the period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act and ending 3 years after such date.