TITLE I--INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION Sec.
The International Development Association Act, 22 United States Code 284 et sequentes, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
In order to pay for the United States contribution to the tenth replenishment of the resources of the association authorized in section 526 of Public Law 103-87, there are authorized to be appropriated, without fiscal year limitation, $550,000,000 for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury.''.
TITLE II--AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK Sec.
The African Development Bank Act, 22 United States Code 290i et sequentes, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
Subscription Authorized.--(1) The United States Governor of the Bank may subscribe on behalf of the United States to ______________ additional shares of the capital stock of the Bank.
Any subscription by the United States to the capital stock of the Bank shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--In order to pay for the increase in the United States subscription to the Bank provided for in subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated, without fiscal year limitation, $____________ for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury.''.
TITLE III--INTEREST SUBSIDY ACCOUNT OF THE SUCCESSOR (ESAF II) TO THE ENHANCED STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT FACILITY OF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Sec.
The Bretton Woods Agreements Act, 22 United States Code 286 et sequentes, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``contribution to the interest subsidy account of the successor (esaf ii) to the enhanced structural adjustment facility of the international monetary fund (fund) ``Sec.
Contribution Authorized.-- ``(1) In General.--Subject to paragraph (2), the United States Governor of the Fund may contribute $75,000,000 to the Interest Subsidy Account of the Successor (ESAF II) to the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility of the Fund on behalf of the United States.
Contribution.--The contribution authorized in paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitation on Authorization of Appropriations.--To pay for the contribution authorized in subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $75,000,000 without fiscal year limitation for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury.''.
TITLE IV--MIDDLE EAST DEVELOPMENT BANK Sec.
This title may be cited as the ``Bank for Economic Cooperation and Development in the Middle East and North Africa Act''.
acceptance of membership Sec.
The President is hereby authorized to accept membership for the United States in the Bank for Economic Cooperation and Development in the Middle East and North Africa (hereinafter the ``Bank'') provided for by the agreement establishing the Bank (hereinafter the ``Agreement'').
governor and alternate governor Sec.
The Governor and the Alternate Governor of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, appointed under section 3 of the Bretton Woods Agreements Act, as amended (22 United States Code 286a), shall serve ex-officio as the Governor and the Alternate Governor at the inaugural meeting of the Board of Governors of the Bank.
Thereafter, the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint a Governor of the Bank and an alternate for the Governor.
No person shall be entitled to receive any salary or other compensation from the United States for services as a Governor or Alternate Governor.
applicability of bretton woods agreements act Sec.
The provisions of section 4 of the Bretton Woods Agreements Act, as amended, 59 United States Statutes at Large 512, 22 United States Code 286b, shall apply with respect to the Bank to the same extent as with respect to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund.
federal reserve banks as depositories Sec.
Any Federal Reserve bank which is requested to do so by the Bank may act as its depository, or as its fiscal agent, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall exercise general supervision over the carrying out of these functions.
subscription of stock Sec.
The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to subscribe on behalf of the United States up to 7,011,270 shares of the capital stock of the Bank; provided, however, that the subscription shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
There is hereby authorized to be appropriated, without fiscal year limitation, for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury of the subscription of the United States for those shares, $1,050,007,800.
Any payment made to the United States by the Bank as a distribution of net income shall be covered into the Treasury as a miscellaneous receipt.
jurisdiction of united states courts and enforcement of arbitral awards Sec.
For the purpose of any civil action which may be brought within the United States, its territories or possessions, or the Common-wealth of Puerto Rico, by or against the Bank in accordance with the Agreement, including an action brought to enforce an arbitral award against the Bank, the Bank shall be deemed to be an inhabitant of the Federal judicial district in which its principal office within the United States, or its agent appointed for purpose of accepting service or notice of service of process, is located, and any such action to which the Bank shall be a party shall be deemed to arise under the laws of the United States, and the district courts of the United States, including the courts enumerated in section 460 of title 28, United States Code, shall have original jurisdiction of any such action.
When the Bank is the defendant in any action in a State court, it may, at any time before trial, remove such action into the appropriate district court of the United States by following the procedure for removal provided in section 1446 of title 28, United States Code.
effectiveness of agreement Sec.
The Agreement shall have full force and effect in the United States, its territories and possessions, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, upon acceptance of membership by the United States in, and the establishment of, the Bank.
exemption from securities laws for certain securities issued by the bank; reports required Sec.
The seventh sentence of the seventh undesignated paragraph of section 5136 of the Revised Statutes of the United States as amended, 12 United States Code 24, is further amended by striking out ``or'' after ``the Inter-American Investment Corporation,'' and by inserting, ``or the Bank for Economic Cooperation and Development in the Middle East and North Africa,'' after ``the International Finance Corporation''.
Any securities issued by the Bank (including any guarantee by the Bank, whether or not limited in scope) in connection with borrowing of funds, or the guarantee of securities as to both principal and interest, shall be deemed to be exempted securities within the meaning of section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, (15 United States Code 77c), and section 3(a)(12) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (15 United States Code 78c).
The Bank shall file with the Securities and Exchange Commission such annual and other reports with regard to such securities as the Commission shall determine to be appropriate in view of the special character of the Bank and its operations and necessary in the public interest or for the protection of investors.
The Securities and Exchange Commission, acting in consultation with such agency or officer as the President shall designate, is authorized to suspend the provisions of paragraph (b) at any time as to any or all securities issued or guaranteed by the Bank during the period of such suspension.
The Commission shall include in its annual reports to Congress such information as it shall deem advisable with regard to the operation and effect of this section and in connection therewith shall include any views submitted for such purpose by any association of dealers registered with the Commission.
Section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act, 22 United States Code 262r(c)(2), is amended by striking out ``and'' after ``Inter-American Development Bank'' and inserting ``and Bank for Economic Cooperation and Development in the Middle East and North Africa'' after ``Inter-American Development Corporation''.
Section 51 of Public Law 91-599, as amended 84 United States Statutes at Large 1657; 22 United States Code 276c-2, is amended by striking out ``and'' after ``the African Development Bank,'' and inserting ``and the Bank for Economic Cooperation and Development in the Middle East and North Africa,'' after ``the Inter-American Investment Corporation''.