This Act may be cited as the ``American 5-Cent Coin Design Continuity Act of 2002''.
DESIGNS ON THE 5-CENT COIN COMMEMORATING THE BICENTENNIAL OF THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b) and after consulting with the Coin Design Advisory Committee and the Commission of Fine Arts, the Secretary of the Treasury may change the design on the obverse and the reverse of the 5-cent coin for coins issued in 2003 and 2004 in commemoration of the bicentennial of the Louisiana Purchase.
Design Specifications.-- (1) Obverse.--If the Secretary of the Treasury elects to change the obverse of 5-cent coins issued during 2003 and 2004, the design shall include an image of President Thomas Jefferson in commemoration of his role with respect to the Louisiana Purchase and the commissioning of the Louis and Clark Expedition to explore the newly acquired territory.
Reverse.--If the Secretary of the Treasury elects to change the reverse of the 5-cent coins issued during 2003 and 2004, the design selected shall commemorate the Louisiana Purchase.
Other inscriptions.--5-cent coins issued during 2003 and 2004 shall continue to meet all other requirements for inscriptions and designations applicable to circulating coins under section 5112(d)(1) of title 31, United States Code.
DESIGNS ON THE 5-CENT COIN SUBSEQUENT TO THE COMMEMORATION OF THE BICENTENNIAL OF THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE.
In General.--Section 5112(d)(1) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the 4th sentence the following new sentences: ``The obverse of any 5-cent coin issued after December 31, 2004, shall bear an image of Thomas Jefferson.
The reverse of any 5- cent coin issued after December 31, 2004, shall bear an image of the home of Thomas Jefferson at Monticello.''.
Design Consultation.-- The 2d sentence of section 5112(d)(2) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``, after consulting with the Coin Design Advisory Committee and the Commission of Fine Arts,'' after ``The Secretary may''.
COIN DESIGN ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
In General.--Subchapter III of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 5136 (as amended by section 5 of this Act) the following new section: ``Sec.
Coin Design Advisory Committee (a) Establishment.--There is hereby established the Coin Design Advisory Committee (in this section referred to as the ``Advisory Committee'').
Membership.-- (1) Appointment.--The Advisory Committee shall consist of 9 members, as follows: ``(A) The Chief of Staff to the Secretary of the Treasury.
4 persons appointed by the President-- ``(i) 1 of whom shall be appointed for a term of 4 years from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Committee by virtue of their education, training, or experience as a nationally or internationally recognized curator in the United States of a numismatic collection; ``(ii) 1 of whom shall be appointed for a term of 4 years from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Committee by virtue of their experience in the medallic arts or sculpture; ``(iii) 1 of whom shall be appointed for a term of 3 years from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Committee by virtue of their education, training, or experience in American history; and ``(iv) 1 of whom shall be appointed for a term of 2 years from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Committee by virtue of their education, training, or experience in numismatics.
1 person appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Committee by virtue of their education, training, or experience, including staff employees of the House of Representatives, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Speaker.
1 person appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Committee by virtue of their education, training, or experience, including staff employees of the House of Representatives, who shall serve at the pleasure of the minority leader.
1 person appointed by the majority leader of the Senate from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Committee by virtue of their education, training, or experience, including staff employees of the Senate, who shall serve at the pleasure of the majority leader.
1 person appointed by the minority leader of the Senate from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Committee by virtue of their education, training, or experience, including staff employees members of the Senate, who shall serve at the pleasure of the minority leader.
Continuation of service.--Each appointed member may continue to serve after the expiration of the term of office to which such member was appointed until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
Vacancy.-- ``(A) In general.--Any vacancy on the Advisory Committee shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Acting officials may serve.--In the event of a vacancy in a position described in paragraph (1)(A), and pending the appointment of a successor, or during the absence or disability of any individual serving in any such position, any individual serving in an acting capacity in any such position may serve on the Advisory Committee while serving in such capacity.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Advisory Committee shall be the person serving in the position described in paragraph (1)(A) (or serving in an acting capacity in such position).
Pay and expenses.--Members of the Advisory Committee shall serve without pay for such service but each member of the Advisory Committee shall be reimbursed from the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund for expenses incurred in connection with attendance of such members at meetings of the Advisory Committee.
Meetings.--The Advisory Committee shall meet, not less frequently than quarterly, at the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members.
Quorum.--7 members of the Advisory Committee shall constitute a quorum.
Duties of the Advisory Committee.--The duties of the Advisory Committee are as follows: ``(1) Advise the Secretary of the Treasury on any design proposals relating to circulating coinage and numismatic items, including congressional gold medals.
Advise the Secretary of the Treasury with regard to any other proposals or issues relating to any items produced by the United States Mint that the Secretary may request of the Advisory Committee.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Advisory Committee, the Director of the United States Mint shall provide to the Advisory Committee the administrative support services necessary for the Advisory Committee to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
Annual Report.-- ``(1) Required.--Not later than January 30 of each year, the Advisory Committee shall submit a report to the Committee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.
Contents.--The report required by paragraph (1) shall describe the activities of the Advisory Committee during the preceding year and the reports and recommendations made by the Advisory Committee to the Secretary of the Treasury.
Federal Advisory Committee Act Does Not Apply.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply with respect to the Committee, except that each meeting of the Advisory Committee shall be open to the public following publication of a notice of the meeting in the Federal Register.