CRIMINAL OFFENSES COMMITTED OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES (a) In General.--Subtitle A of title 10 of the United States Code is amended by inserting after chapter 49 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 50--CRIMINAL OFFENSES COMMITTED OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES ``Sec.
Criminal offenses committed by a member of the armed forces or by any person serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside of the United States.
Delivery to authorities of foreign countries.
Definitions ``In this chapter: ``(1) The term `United States' includes the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States.
The term `special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States' has the same meaning as is provided in section 7 of title 18.
The term `criminal offense' means an offense classified in section 1 of title 18 as a felony or a misdemeanor (not including a petty offense).
Criminal offenses committed by a member of the armed forces or by any person serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside of the United States ``(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person who, while serving as a member of the armed forces outside the United States, or while serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside of the United States, engages in conduct which would constitute a criminal offense if the conduct were engaged in within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States shall be guilty of a like offense against the United States and shall be subject to the same punishment as is provided under the provisions of title 18 for such like offense.
A member of the armed forces may not be tried pursuant to an indictment or information charging an offense described under subsection (a) while such member is subject to trial by court-martial for the conduct charged in such indictment or information.
A person employed by the armed forces outside the United States is not punishable under subsection (a) of this section for conduct described in such subsection if such person is not a national of the United States and was appointed to his position of employment in the country in which such person engaged in such conduct.
(1) Except in the case of a prosecution approved as provided in paragraph (2), prosecution of a person may not be commenced under this section for an offense described in subsection (a) if a foreign government, in accordance with jurisdiction recognized by the United States, has prosecuted such person for the conduct constituting such offense.
The Attorney General of the United States, the Deputy Attorney General of the United States, the Associate Attorney General of the United States, or an Assistant Attorney General of the United States may approve a prosecution which, except for this paragraph, is prohibited under paragraph (1).
An approval of prosecution under this paragraph must be in writing.
The authority to approve a prosecution under this paragraph may not be delegated below the level of Assistant Attorney General.
(1) The Secretary of Defense may designate and authorize any member of the armed forces serving in a law enforcement position in a criminal investigative agency of the Department of Defense to apprehend and detain, outside the United States, any person described in subsection (a) who is reasonably believed to have engaged in conduct which constitutes a criminal offense under such subsection.
A person apprehended and detained under paragraph (1) shall be released to the custody of civilian law enforcement authorities of the United States for removal to the United States for judicial proceedings in relation in conduct referred to in such paragraph unless (A) such person is delivered to authorities of a foreign country under section 993 of this title, or (B) such person is pending court-martial under chapter 47 of this title for such conduct.
Delivery to authorities of foreign countries ``(a) Any member of the armed forces designated and authorized under subsection (e) of section 992 of this title may deliver any person described in subsection (a) of such section to the appropriate authorities of a foreign country in which such person is alleged to have engaged in conduct described in such subsection (a) if-- ``(1) the appropriate authorities of that country request the delivery of the person to such country for trial for such conduct as an offense under the laws of that country; and ``(2) the delivery of such person to that country is authorized by a treaty or other international agreement to which the United States is a party.
The Secretary of Defense may confine or otherwise restrain a person whose delivery is requested under subsection (a) until the completion of the trial of such person by the foreign country making such request.
The Secretary of Defense shall determine what officials of a foreign country constitute appropriate authorities for the purposes of this section.''.
Technical Amendment.--The tables of chapters at the beginning of such title and such subtitle are each amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 49 the following: ``50.
Criminal Offenses Outside the United States........... 991''.