SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Thomas Cole National Historic Site Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Establishment of Thomas Cole National Historic Site.
Retention of ownership and management of historic site by Greene County Historical Society.
Administration of historic site.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``historic site'' means the Thomas Cole National Historic Site established by section 4 of this Act.
The term ``Hudson River artists'' means artists who were associated with the Hudson River school of landscape painting.
The term ``plan'' means the general management plan developed pursuant to section 6(d).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Society'' means the Greene County Historical Society of Greene County, New York, which owns the Thomas Cole home, studio, and other property comprising the historic site.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Hudson River school of landscape painting was inspired by Thomas Cole and was characterized by a group of 19th century landscape artists who recorded and celebrated the landscape and wilderness of America, particularly in the Hudson River Valley region in the State of New York.
Thomas Cole is recognized as America's most prominent landscape and allegorical painter of the mid-19th century.
Located in Greene County, New York, the Thomas Cole House, also known as Thomas Cole's Cedar Grove, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and has been designated as a National Historic Landmark.
Within a 15 mile radius of the Thomas Cole House, an area that forms a key part of the rich cultural and natural heritage of the Hudson River Valley region, significant landscapes and scenes painted by Thomas Cole and other Hudson River artists, such as Frederic Church, survive intact.
The State of New York has established the Hudson River Valley Greenway to promote the preservation, public use, and enjoyment of the natural and cultural resources of the Hudson River Valley region.
Establishment of the Thomas Cole National Historic Site will provide opportunities for the illustration and interpretation of cultural themes of the heritage of the United States and unique opportunities for education, public use, and enjoyment.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to preserve and interpret the home and studio of Thomas Cole for the benefit, inspiration, and education of the people of the United States; (2) to help maintain the integrity of the setting in the Hudson River Valley region that inspired artistic expression; (3) to coordinate the interpretive, preservation, and recreational efforts of Federal, State, and other entities in the Hudson Valley region in order to enhance opportunities for education, public use, and enjoyment; and (4) to broaden understanding of the Hudson River Valley region and its role in American history and culture.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THOMAS COLE NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
Establishment.--There is established, as an affiliated area of the National Park System, the Thomas Cole National Historic Site in the State of New York.
Description.--The historic site shall consist of the home and studio of Thomas Cole, comprising approximately 3.4 acres, located at 218 Spring Street, in the village of Catskill, New York, as generally depicted on the boundary map numbered TCH/80002, and dated March 1992.
RETENTION OF OWNERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF HISTORIC SITE BY GREENE COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY.
The Greene County Historical Society of Greene County, New York, shall continue to own, manage, and operate the historic site.
ADMINISTRATION OF HISTORIC SITE.
Applicability of National Park System Laws.--The historic site shall be administered by the Society in a manner consistent with this Act and all laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes; commonly known as the National Park Service Organic Act), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes; commonly known as the Historic Sites, Buildings, and Antiquities Act).
Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) Assistance to society.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the Society to preserve the Thomas Cole House and other structures in the historic site and to assist with education programs and research and interpretation of the Thomas Cole House and associated landscapes.
Other assistance.--To further the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the State of New York, the Society, the Thomas Cole Foundation, and other public and private entities to facilitate public understanding and enjoyment of the lives and works of the Hudson River artists through the provision of assistance to develop, present, and fund art exhibits, resident artist programs, and other appropriate activities related to the preservation, interpretation, and use of the historic site.
Artifacts and Property.-- (1) Personal property generally.--The Secretary may acquire personal property associated with, and appropriate for, the interpretation of the historic site.
Works of art.--The Secretary may acquire works of art associated with Thomas Cole and other Hudson River artists for the purpose of display at the historic site.
General Management Plan.--Within two complete fiscal years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a general management plan for the historic site with the cooperation of the Society.
Upon the completion of the plan, the Secretary shall provide a copy of the plan to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
The plan shall include recommendations for regional wayside exhibits, to be carried out through cooperative agreements with the State of New York and other public and private entitles.
The plan shall be prepared in accordance with section 12(b) of Public Law 91-383 (16 United States Code 1a-1 et sequentes; commonly known as the National Park System General Authorities Act).
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives September 9, 1998.