This Act may be cited as the ``Public Lands Forever Wild Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Constitution of the State of New York (Article XIV, Section I) contains a prohibition on extraction on State-owned public lands, which has served the State and its citizens well and is a good model for the management of the approximately 650,000,000 acres of Federal public lands.
The Federal agencies responsible for the management of these Federal public lands, primarily the Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and Bureau of Land Management of the Department of the Interior, and the Tennessee Valley Authority, currently permit massive corporate extraction on the vast majority of these public lands without accounting for the other assets of these lands.
With little or no accounting, let alone honest and fully-costed accounting, vast areas of these Federal public lands, and the rivers and streams and other resources on these lands, are being taken, liquidated, or despoiled by private industry at great, but unaccounted for, public expense.
The economic benefits of this coporate extraction are out-weighed by the costs and risks to the public, including risks to human health, welfare, and survivability.
National Forest System lands, a component of the Federal public lands, serve as the source of 80 percent of America's fresh drinking water.
These forests and other Federal public lands produce much of America's topsoil, replenish oxygen and water, moderate weather, climate, and flooding.
Surveys indicate that at least 80 percent of the American public believes that National Forest System lands are protected in the same manner and to the same extent as national parks and wants the Federal public lands, and the rivers and streams and other resources on these lands, protected from harm.
The Federal public lands should be fully and completely protected from all further development and harm and should not be leased, sold or exchanged, or be taken by any corporation, public or private, and the timber, grazing browse, minerals, oil and gas, and other resource on these lands should not be sold, removed or destroyed.
PROHIBITIONS ON COMMERCIAL EXTRACTION ON FEDERAL PUBLIC LANDS.
Protection of Public Lands.--Federal public lands shall be fully and completely protected from all further development and harm, including zero tree cutting, zero road building, zero logging, zero mining, zero grazing, zero drilling, zero water degradation, zero motorized trail development, zero motorized recreation area development, zero building of commercial recreational buildings, zero allowance of new commercial recreation areas and developments, zero water diversions and zero dams, and no exceptions may be made to these prohibitions.
Federal public lands shall not be leased, sold, or exchanged, or be taken by any corporation, public or private, nor shall the timber, grazing browse, minerals, oil and gas, water, or any other resource thereon be sold, removed, or destroyed.
Public Lands Defined.--In this Act, the term ``Federal public lands'' means all federally-owned lands and waters, now owned or hereafter acquired, within all National Parks, National Forests, National Grasslands, National Monuments, National Wildlife Refuges, Bureau of Land Management lands, Army Corps of Engineers lands, Tennessee Valley Authority Lands, and National Wilderness Areas.
Other Management Requirements.-- (1) Roads.--All roads on all Federal public lands shall be inventoried, a determination shall be made of those which are essential and those unnecessary.
Based upon the inventory determination, essential roads shall be identified and maintained and all others shall be obliterated and revegetated within 10 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Inventories.--The Federal agencies having jurisdiction over Federal public lands shall prepare an inventory of all Federal public lands by acre, roads, rivers, and streams by mile.
The inventory shall include a description of the status and condition of the lands and a recommendation of what can or should be done to restore natural conditions on the lands.
The inventory and recommendations shall be completed within two years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Fires, Insects, Disease, and Other Natural Forces.--Fires, insects, disease and other natural destructive forces shall all be considered acts of nature and part of a healthy, functioning, and wild ecosystem.
No further attempts to correct for such acts of nature shall occur on Federal public lands.
Enforcement.-- (1) Purpose and finding.--The purpose of this subsection is to foster the widest possible enforcement of this section.
Congress finds that all people of the United States are injured by violations of these prohibitions on Federal public lands.
Federal enforcement.--The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Federal agencies having jurisdiction over Federal public lands and by the Attorney General of the United States against any person who violates this Act.
Citizen suits.--Any citizen harmed by a violation of this section may enforce this section by bringing an action for declaratory judgment, temporary restraining order, injunction, statutory damages, and other remedies against any alleged violator, including the United States, in any district court of the United States.
Standard of proof.--The standard of proof in all actions brought under this subsection shall be the preponderance of the evidence and the trial shall be de novo.
Damage award.--The court, after determining a violation of this section, shall impose a damage award of not less than $5,000 nor more than 1,000 times the value of the damaged or lost public assets, shall issue one or more injunctions and other equitable relief, and shall award to the plaintiffs reasonable costs of the litigation, including attorney's fees, witness fees, and other necessary expenses.
The court shall have the authority to order seizure and forfeiture of all assets, including corporate assets, belonging to the violator involved in any way in the commission of the violation.
The damage award shall be paid by the violator or violators designated by the court to the United States Treasury.
The damage award shall be paid from the United States Treasury, as provided by Congress under section 1304 of title 31, United States Code, within 40 days after judgment to the person or persons designated to receive it, to be applied in protecting or restoring native biodiversity in or adjoining Federal public lands.
Any award of costs of litigation and any award of attorney fees shall be paid within 40 days after judgment.
Waiver.--The United States, including its agents and employees, waives its sovereign immunity in all respects in all actions under this subsection.
No notice is required to enforce this section.
This Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.