This Act may be cited as the ``Uniting Neighborhoods and Individuals To Eliminate Racial Profiling Act'' or ``UNITE Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The overwhelming majority of Federal, State, and local law enforcement officers throughout the Nation discharge their duties professionally and without bias.
A large majority of individuals subjected to traffic stops and other law enforcement activities based on race, ethnicity, or national origin are found to be law abiding, in which case racial profiling is not an effective means to uncover criminal activity.
Racial profiling violates the equal protection clause of the United States Constitution.
Using race, ethnicity, or national origin as a proxy for criminal suspicion violates the constitutional requirement that police and other government officials accord to all citizens the equal protection of the law.
Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Development Corporation, 429 United States Reports 252 (1977).
Racial profiling fosters discord in communities.
In this Act: (1) Covered grant program.--The term ``covered grant program'' means any grant program administered by the Department of Justice.
Law enforcement agency.--The term ``law enforcement agency'' means a Federal, State, local, or Indian tribal public agency engaged in the prevention, detection, or investigation of violations of criminal, immigration, or customs laws.
Law enforcement agent.--The term ``law enforcement agent'' means any Federal, State, local, or Indian tribal official responsible for enforcing criminal, immigration, or customs laws, including police officers and other agents of Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies.
Racial profiling.--The term ``racial profiling'' means any police initiated action that relies on the race, ethnicity, or national origin rather than the behavior of an individual or information that leads the police to a particular individual who has been identified as being, or having been, engaged in criminal activity.
Racial profiling plan.--The term ``racial profiling plan'' means the plan developed and implemented by a State or local law enforcement agency in accordance with this Act.
Task force.--The term ``Task Force'' means the National Task Force on Racial Profiling established under section 201.
PROHIBITION ON RACIAL PROFILING.
No Federal, State, or local law enforcement agent or agency shall engage in racial profiling.
This Act does not and should not impede the ability of Federal, State, and local law enforcement to protect the country and its people from any threat, be it foreign or domestic, including matters of homeland security and the tracking and identification of terrorists organizations.
TITLE I--PROGRAM TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING BY FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES SEC.
POLICIES TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING.
In General.--Federal law enforcement agencies shall-- (1) maintain adequate policies and procedures designed to eliminate racial profiling; and (2) cease existing practices that encourage racial profiling.
Policies.--The policies and procedures referred to in subsection (a) shall include-- (1) a prohibition on racial profiling; (2) educational training on racial profiling issues as part of Federal law enforcement training; (3) procedures for receiving, investigating, and responding meaningfully to complaints alleging racial profiling by Federal law enforcement agents of the agency; and (4) procedures to discipline Federal law enforcement agents who engage in racial profiling.
TITLE II--PROGRAM TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING BY STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES SEC.
NATIONAL TASK FORCE ON RACIAL PROFILING.
Establishment.--There is established within the Department of Justice, the National Task Force on Racial Profiling.
Duties.-- (1) In general.--The Task Force shall-- (A) establish goals and objectives; (B) form subcommittees to conduct research, host meetings, conferences, and symposiums; (C) establish focus groups to accomplish the goals and objectives outlined by the Task Force.
; and (D) oversee State-based administrative complaint procedures.
Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Task Force shall, based on information from the subcommittees, hearings, and other reliable sources, prepare a comprehensive report that outlines lessons learned and best practices, as well as recommendations for eliminating racial profiling.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Task Force shall consist of-- (A) 1 member appointed by the President, subject to the approval of the Attorney General and the head of the Department of Justice Civil Rights division; (B) 1 member appointed by the Democratic leadership of the House of Representatives and the Senate; (C) 1 member appointed by the Republican leadership of the House of Representatives and the Senate; and (D) 6 members appointed by the members appointed under subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C).
Interest categories.--The 6 members appointed under paragraph (1)(D) shall represent and have expertise in each of the following categories: (A) Law enforcement.
Chairperson.--The member appointed by the President shall serve as the chairperson of the Task Force and shall have a permanent office with the Department of Justice.
Period of appointment.--Members of the Task Force shall serve 2-year terms, with the exception of the chairperson who shall serve a 4-year term.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Task Force shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Racial Profiling Education and Awareness Program.-- (1) In general.--The Task Force shall establish an education and awareness program on racial profiling that includes information regarding the negative effects of racial profiling on individuals and law enforcement.
Purposes of program.--The purposes of the program established under paragraph (1) are to-- (A) encourage State and local law enforcement agencies to cease existing practices that may promote racial profiling; (B) encourage involvement by State and local law enforcement agencies with the community to address the problem of racial profiling; (C) assist State and local law enforcement agencies in developing and maintaining adequate policies and procedures to prevent racial profiling; and (D) assist State and local law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing internal training programs to combat racial profiling and foster enhanced community relations.
Availability.--The program established under paragraph (1) shall be offered-- (A) to State and local law enforcement agencies; and (B) at various regional centers across the country to ensure that all law enforcement agencies have reasonable access to the program.
PLAN TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING BY STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
Plan Required for Grants.--Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act, each State and local law enforcement agency that desires funds under a covered grant program shall include, with its application for funds, certification that such agency is developing and is in the process of implementing a plan-- (1) to maintain adequate policies and procedures designed to eliminate racial profiling; and (2) that meets the requirements of subsection (b).
Plan Requirements.-- (1) In general.--To meet the requirements of this subsection, a plan shall-- (A) strictly prohibit law enforcement agents from engaging in racial profiling; (B) provide information to the public relating to the State-based administrative complaint procedures in section 203; (C) require appropriate action to be taken against any law enforcement agent who, after an investigation, is proven to have engaged in racial profiling in violation of the agency's plan; and (D) include educational training on racial profiling issues as part of law enforcement training.
Implementation of Plan.--Not later than 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, each State and local law enforcement agency that submitted the certification described in subsection (a) shall certify to the Attorney General that the plan implemented by the agency meets the requirements of subsection (b).
Plan Revisions.-- (1) In general.--Any revisions to a racial profiling plan that is developed and implemented by a State or local law enforcement agency in accordance with this title must be submitted to the Attorney General for review.
Review.--The Attorney General may, at the Attorney General's discretion, determine that a State or local law enforcement agency is not in compliance with the requirements of subsection (b).
Compliance.--At any time during the implementation or revision of an agency's racial profiling plan, the Attorney General may, if the Attorney General determines that the agency or the plan has not met the requirements of this section-- (1) make recommendations to the State or local law enforcement agency to assist the agency in developing a plan that complies with this title; or (2) withhold the grant that the agency desires, in whole or in part, until the agency establishes compliance.
STATE-BASED ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
Establishment of Grievance Procedures.--A State that desires funding under a covered grant program shall establish and maintain State-based administrative complaint procedures that meet the requirements of subsection (b).
Requirements.--To meet the requirements of this subsection, complaint procedures shall-- (1) be uniform and nondiscriminatory; (2) allow any person who believes there has been a violation of section 4 to file a complaint; (3) provide that a complaint be sworn in writing, signed by the person filing the complaint, and notarized; (4) allow the State to consolidate complaints filed under paragraph (2); (5) provide that a hearing may be held, on record, at the request of the complainant; (6) provide the appropriate remedy if the State determines that a violation of section 4 has occurred; (7) provide that the State shall dismiss the complaint and publish the results of the procedures if the State determines that no violation of section 4 occurred; (8) provide that the State shall make a final determination with respect to a complaint prior to the expiration of the 90- day period which begins on the date the complaint is filed, unless the complainant consents to a longer period for making such a determination; (9) provide that if the State fails to meet the deadline applicable under paragraph (8), the complaint shall be resolved within 60 days under alternative dispute resolution procedures established pursuant to this section; (10) provide that the record and other materials from any proceedings conducted under the complaint procedures established by this section shall be made available for use under the alternative dispute resolution procedures; and (11) provide a record of all complaints and proceedings to the Task Force.
Involvement of Attorney General.--If the Task Force makes the determination that any State or local law enforcement agency or individual law enforcement agent receives a number of complaints to indicate possible noncompliance with this Act, the complaints shall be referred to the Attorney General for further investigation in accordance with procedures established by the Attorney General.
TITLE III--GRANT PROGRAM TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING SEC.
Grants Authorized.--The Attorney General, through the Bureau of Justice Assistance, may make grants to State and local law enforcement agencies to assist such agencies in developing programs to eliminate racial profiling.
Use of Funds.--Grants awarded pursuant to subsection (a) shall be used by State and local law enforcement agencies to-- (1) develop and implement plans to eliminate racial profiling in accordance with section 202; and (2) establish and maintain administrative complaint procedures for racial profiling complaints in accordance with section 203.
Application.--Each State or local law enforcement agency desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Attorney General at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.
TITLE IV--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS SEC.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.