This Act may be cited as the ``College Campus Alcohol Abuse Prevention and Education Act''.
HIGHER EDUCATION AND DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE PREVENTION.
Specific Programs.--Section 1213 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1145g) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1)(D), by redesignating paragraph (1)(E) as paragraph (1)(I), and by inserting after paragraph (1)(D) the following: ``(E) a prohibition on the distribution of any promotional material that encourages the consumption of alcoholic beverages on campus; ``(F) a prohibition of the distribution of free alcoholic beverages for promotional purposes on the campus; ``(G) a prohibition on sponsorship or public support of any on-campus athletic, musical, cultural, or social program, event, or competition by any alcoholic beverage company or by any group of such companies; ``(H) limiting alcoholic beverage advertisements in the institution of higher education's newspapers and other publications to price and product identification; and''; (2) in subsection (a), by inserting after and below paragraph (2)(B) the following: ``Identification, referral, or treatment of students and employees shall not jeopardize the matriculation status of the students or the employment of the employees.
''; and (3) in subsection (c)(2), by striking ``(a)(1)(E)'' and inserting ``(a)(1)(I)''.
Student and Employee Involvement.--Section 1213(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1145g(b) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Such items shall be developed and adopted with student and employee participation.''.
Waiver of Sanctions.--Section 1213(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1145g(c) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Upon application by an institution of higher education, the Secretary shall grant a waiver of sanctions authorized by subsection (a)(1)(I) to any institution of higher education which demonstrates that it is in the process of developing and implementing a plan required by subsection (a) for up to one year from the date of the enactment of this paragraph.''.
Grant and Contract Authority.--Section 1213 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (2) United States Code 1145g) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e)(1) The Secretary may make grants to institutions of higher education or consortia of such institutions and contracts with such institutions and other organizations to develop, implement, operate, improve, and disseminate programs of prevention, and education (including treatment-referral) to reduce and eliminate the illegal use of drugs and alcohol and their associated violence.
Such contracts may also be used for the support of a higher education center for alcohol and drug abuse prevention which will provide training, technical assistance, evaluation, dissemination and associated services and assistance to the higher education community as defined by the Secretary and the institutions of higher education.
Grants and contracts shall be made available under paragraph (1) on a competitive basis.
An institution of higher education, a consortium of such institutions, or other organizations which desire to receive a grant or contract under paragraph (1) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing or accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require by regulation.
The Secretary shall make every effort to ensure-- ``(A) the equitable participation of private and public institutions of higher education (including community and junior colleges), and ``(B) the equitable geographic participation of such institutions, in grants and contracts under paragraph (1).
In the award of such grants and contracts, the Secretary shall give appropriate consideration to institutions of higher education with limited enrollment.''.
Repeal.--Section 4122 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7132) is repealed.
Awards.--For the purpose of providing models of alcohol and drug abuse prevention and education (including treatment-referral) programs in higher education and to focus national attention on exemplary alcohol and drug abuse prevention efforts, the Secretary of Education shall, on an annual basis, make 10 National Recognition Awards to institutions of higher education that have developed and implemented effective alcohol and drug abuse prevention and education programs.
Such awards shall be made at a ceremony in Washington, D.C. and a document describing the programs of those who receive the awards shall be distributed nationally.
Application.-- (1) In general.--A national recognition award shall be made under subsection (a) to institutions of higher education which have applied for such award.
Such an application shall contain-- (A) a clear description of the goals and objectives of the alcohol and drug abuse programs of the institution applying, (B) a description of program activities that focus on alcohol and other drug policy issues, policy development, modification, or refinement, policy dissemination and implementation, and policy enforcement; (C) a description of activities that encourage student and employee participation and involvement in both activity development and implementation; (D) the objective criteria used to determine the effectiveness of the methods used in such programs and the means used to evaluate and improve the program efforts, (E) a description of special initiatives used to reduce high-risk behavior or increase low risk behavior, or both, and (F) a description of coordination and networking efforts that exist in the community in which the institution is located for purposes of such programs.
Eligibility criteria.--All institutions of higher education which are two- and four-year colleges and universities that have established a drug and alcohol prevention and education program are eligible to apply for a National Recognition Award.
To receive such an Award an institution of higher education must be nominated to receive it.
An institution of higher education may nominate itself or be nominated by others such as professional associations or student organizations.
Application review.--The Secretary of Education shall appoint a committee to review applications submitted under paragraph (1).
The committee may include representatives of Federal departments or agencies whose programs include alcohol and drug abuse prevention and education efforts, directors or heads (or their representatives) of professional associations that focus on prevention efforts, and non-Federal scientists who have backgrounds in social science evaluation and research methodology and in education.
Decisions of the committee shall be made directly to the Secretary without review by any other entity in the Department of Education.
Review criteria.--Specific review criteria shall be developed by the Secretary in conjunction with the appropriate experts.
In reviewing applications under paragraph (3) the committee shall consider-- (A) measures of effectiveness of the program of the applicant that should include changes in the campus alcohol and other drug environment or climate and changes in alcohol and other drug use before and after the initiation of the program; and (B) measures of program institutionalization, including an assessment of needs of the institution, the institution's alcohol and drug policies, staff and faculty development activities, drug prevention criteria, student, faculty, and campus community involvement, and a continuation of the program after the cessation of external funding.
Authorization.--For the implementation of the awards program under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $25,000 for fiscal year 1996, $66,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 and 1998, and $72,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002.