This Act may be cited as the ``Community Foreclosure Assistance Act of 2007''.
ADDITIONAL EMERGENCY CDBG FUNDING.
Appropriation.--There are authorized to be appropriated, and shall be appropriated, $1,000,000,000, to remain available until expended, for assistance to States, metropolitan cities, and urban counties (as those terms are defined in section 102 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5302)) in carrying out the community development block grant program under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5301 et sequentes)-- (1) for necessary expenses related to the impact of housing foreclosures, and other related economic and community development activities; and (2) to provide foreclosure-based rental assistance for individual renters in the form of relocation assistance.
Limitation.-- (1) In general.--Except for counseling services none of the amounts appropriated under subsection (a) may be provided, directly or indirectly, to an individual homeowner for foreclosure prevention purposes, including for refinancing assistance, loans, or any other form of financial assistance.
Such funds may be provided directly to a certified housing counseling service, which shall be considered as a subrecipient of such grant amounts.
Definition.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term ``certified housing counseling service'' means a housing counseling agency approved by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to section 106(d) of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 United States Code 1701x(d)).
INCREASED PUBLIC SERVICES REQUIREMENT CAP.
For purposes of this Act, paragraph (8) of section 105(a) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5305(a)) shall apply to the use of all funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act by substituting-- (1) ``25 per centum'' for ``15 per centum'' each place that term appears; and (2) ``25 percent'' for ``15 percent'' each place that term appears.
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME REQUIREMENT.
At least 50 percent of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act shall benefit primarily persons of low- and moderate-income.
Comprehensive Plan.--None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act shall be used by any State, metropolitan city, or urban county until such time as that State, metropolitan city, or urban county submits to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, for approval by the Secretary, a comprehensive plan detailing the proposed use of all such funds.
Report on Use of Funds.--During the period of time that funds are being expended under this Act, each State, metropolitan city, or urban county receiving funds under this Act shall submit, on a quarterly basis, a report to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development describing and accounting for the use of all such funds expended during the applicable period.
General Waiver.--In administering funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall waive, or specify alternative requirements for, any provision of any statute or regulation that the Secretary administers in connection with the obligation by the Secretary or the use by the recipient of such funds (except for requirements related to fair housing, nondiscrimination, labor standards, and the environment), upon a request by a State, metropolitan city, or urban county that such waiver is required to facilitate the use of such funds, and a finding by the Secretary that such waiver would not be inconsistent with the overall purpose of the statute.
Low and Moderate Income Requirement Waiver.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may waive, upon the request of a State, metropolitan city, or urban county, the 50 percent requirement described under section 4.
Such waiver shall, in the discretion of the Secretary, only be granted if a compelling need is demonstrated.
Public Services Cap.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may waive, upon the request of a State, metropolitan city, or urban county, the public service requirement cap described under section 3.
Such waiver shall, in the discretion of the Secretary, only be granted if a compelling need is demonstrated.
Other Waiver Provisions.-- (1) Publication in the federal register.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall publish in the Federal Register any waiver of any statute or regulation authorized under this section not later than 5 days before the effective date of such waiver.
Review of waiver.--Each waiver granted under this section by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall be reconsidered, and if still necessary reauthorized by the Secretary, not later than 2 years after the date on which such waiver was first published in the Federal Register pursuant to paragraph (1).
Notification of committees.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall notify the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives of any waiver granted or denied under this section not later than 5 days before such waiver is granted or denied.
NONCOMPLIANCE WITH COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
For purposes of this Act, the provisions of section 111 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5311)(relating to noncompliance) shall apply to the use of all funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall-- (1) conduct an audit of the expenditure of all funds appropriated under this Act in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards; and (2) submit a report detailing such audit to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives.
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall report, on a quarterly basis, to the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives on-- (1) the use of funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this Act, including-- (A) the number of households receiving counseling and rental assistance; (B) the outcomes of such assistance activities; (C) the names of those certified housing counseling service providing counseling assistance pursuant to this Act; and (D) such other information as the Secretary may deem appropriate; and (2) all steps taken by the Secretary to prevent fraud and abuse of such funds.