This Act may be cited as the ``After-School Children's Education (ACE) Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Children's activities outside of school have a critical and long lasting impact on school achievement and future success.
Approximately 24,000,000 school-age children are in need of adult supervision while their parents are at work.
Experts estimate that almost 5,000,000 school-age children spend time without adult supervision during a typical week and that these children are more likely to engage in risky behavior such as drug and alcohol abuse, sexual activity, loitering on street corners, and truancy.
The prosperity of the Nation depends upon maximizing and fulfilling the potential of its young people.
Many parents report that they would like to enroll their children in after-school enrichment activities but that they are prevented from doing so by prohibitive costs, transportation difficulties, worries about neighborhood safety, and a shortage of available options.
While there are gaps in the availability of after- school programs, there are many outstanding programs for the Nation's youth, including programs sponsored by the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America, YMCAs, mentoring programs, and athletic and other programs operated by public schools, churches, day care centers, parks, recreation centers, family day care, community organizations, law enforcement agencies, service providers, and for-profit and nonprofit organizations.
Before the United States can meaningfully expand the supply of after-school programs, accurate information must be available regarding the number, type, and appropriateness of after-school programs available, significant areas of unmet need in the quality and availability of after-school programs, barriers which prevent or deter the participation of children in after-school programs, and barriers to improving the quality and availability of after-school programs.
The Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 657A(b)(3), by inserting ``, including after-school programs'' after ``child care''; (2) in section 657B, by striking ``$1,000,000,000'' and inserting ``$1,010,000,000''; and (3) by inserting after section 658G the following new section: ``SEC.
``A State that receives funds to carry out this Act for a fiscal year shall use not less than 1 percent of the amount of such funds, in coordination with child care resource and referral centers to the extent practicable for activities that are designed to improve the quality and availability of after-school programs, including one or more of the following: ``(1) Informational assistance, including assistance to kindergartens, elementary schools, and high schools within the State, for placement of children in kindergarten through high school in age-appropriate, enriching after-school programs.
Coordination of after-school programs, including those funded with Federal or State funds.
Development of innovative, age-appropriate, age- appealing, and enriching after-school programs.
Development of creative funding strategies to help make after-school programs affordable for all parents.''.
NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE FOR AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAMS.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, through the Commissioner on Children, Youth, and Families, and in consultation with the Secretary of Education, the Attorney General, the Secretary of Agriculture, and representatives from State child care agencies and child care resource and referral centers, youth development organizations, State and local education agencies, relevant private foundations, and other relevant organizations, shall establish and maintain a national clearinghouse to provide technical assistance regarding the establishment and operation of after-school programs and models of after-school programs.
The national clearinghouse shall be available to the public, including via Internet, and shall serve as a resource for child care organizations, communities, and individuals seeking to improve the quality and availability of after-school programs.
GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE REPORT.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the General Accounting Office shall transmit to Congress a report containing the following: (1) For each State, a description of the types of after- school programs that are available for students in kindergarten through grade 12, including programs sponsored by the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America, YMCAs, and athletic and other programs operated by public schools and other State and local agencies.
For 15 communities selected to represent a variety of regional, population, and demographic profiles, a detailed analysis of all of the after-school programs that are available for students in kindergarten through grade 12, including programs sponsored by the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America, YMCAs, mentoring programs, athletic programs, and programs operated by public schools, churches, day care centers, parks, recreation centers, family day care, community organizations, law enforcement agencies, service providers, and for-profit and nonprofit organizations.
For each State, a description of significant areas of unmet need in the quality and availability of after-school programs.
For each State, a description of barriers which prevent or deter the participation of children in after-school programs.
For each State, a description of barriers to improving the quality and availability of after-school programs.
A list of activities, other than after-school programs, in which students in kindergarten through grade 12 participate when not in school, including jobs, volunteer opportunities, and other non-school affiliated programs.
An analysis of the value of the activities listed pursuant to paragraph (6) to the well-being and educational development of students in kindergarten through grade 12.