This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Wage Worker Pay Fairness Act of 2001''.
WAGE AREAS TO BE CONFORMED TO PAY LOCALITIES.
Paragraph (1) of section 5343(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(1) the Office of Personnel Management shall define the boundaries of local wage areas for prevailing rate employees so as to be the same as the boundaries of the respective pay localities under section 5304(f) (including as from time to time modified), subject to such exceptions as the Office, with the approval of the Federal Salary Council (described in section 5304(e)), may find to be necessary;''.
AGENCY RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING WAGE RATE SURVEYS.
Paragraph (3) of section 5343(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(3) subject to paragraph (5), and subsections (c)(1)-(3) and (d)-- ``(A) wage surveys under this section shall be conducted by the same agency as is responsible under section 5304(d)(1)(A) for conducting surveys of pay localities; and ``(B) the lead agency for a local wage area shall, for purposes of the prevailing rate employees in that area, analyze wage survey data, and develop and establish appropriate wage schedules and rates;''.
In General.--Subsection (b) of section 5343 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``(b)'' and inserting ``(b)(1)'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(2)(A) Effective as of the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1 of each year, the rates of pay for the regular and special wage schedules shall be adjusted (by the lead agency or by the Office of Personnel Management, as appropriate) by the percentage equal to the overall average percentage adjustment taking effect on that same date, with respect to General Schedule positions within the pay locality corresponding (or, if none corresponds exactly, the pay locality most nearly corresponding, as determined by such agency or Office) to the local wage area involved, under sections 5303 and 5304-5304a.
Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent any adjustment in wage schedules from taking effect in a year, under any other provisions of this section (based on a wage survey or interim survey), to the extent that the adjustment taking effect under subparagraph (A) in such year does not, with respect to the local wage area involved, fully provide for the adjustment required under those other provisions with respect to such year.
No provision of law enacted after the date of the enactment of the Federal Wage Worker Pay Fairness Act of 2001 may be held to supersede, repeal, or modify this paragraph, except to the extent that it does so expressly.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--(1) The first sentence of section 5343(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``rates.''
and inserting ``rates, subject to succeeding provisions of this section.''.
Section 5348 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) No provision of law enacted after the date of the enactment of the Federal Wage Worker Pay Fairness Act of 2001 may be held to supersede, repeal, or modify this section, except to the extent that it does so expressly.''.
RESTORATION OF ``MONRONEY AMENDMENT'' PROTECTIONS.
In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 5343(d) of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(2) When the agency specified in subsection (a)(3)(A) determines that there is a number of comparable positions in private industry insufficient to establish the wage schedules and rates, such agency shall establish the wage schedules and rates to be applicable to prevailing rate employees on the basis of-- ``(A) local private industry rates; and ``(B) rates paid for comparable positions in private industry in the nearest wage area that such agency determines is most similar in the nature of its population, employment, manpower, and industry to the local wage area for which the wage survey is being made.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 5343(d)(1) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``A lead agency, in making a wage survey,'' and inserting ``In making a wage survey, the agency specified in subsection (a)(3)(A)''.
Section 5342(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(4) `pay locality' has the meaning given that term by section 5302.''.
Rates of pay for employees subject to subchapter IV of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, shall be initially adjusted, following the enactment of this Act, under conversion rules prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management in consultation with the Federal Salary Council (described in section 5304(e) of title 5, United States Code).
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on October 1, 2001.
Reporting Requirements.--The Federal Prevailing Rate Advisory Committee (described in section 5347 of title 5, United States Code) shall submit to Congress a written report-- (1) within 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, describing any transfer of functions or duties, and any administrative actions, that will be required in order to implement this Act; and (2) within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, describing-- (A) the extent to which the transfers and actions described under paragraph (1) have occurred; and (B) to the extent that there remain any transfers or actions (described under paragraph (1)) that have not yet occurred, the anticipated timetable for their completion.