This Act may be cited as the ``Marian Anderson Centennial Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) Marian Anderson, one of the world's greatest singers, a champion for civil rights, and a leader in the advancement of global peace, was born on February 27, 1897, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; (2) Marian Anderson, a master of repertoire actress operatic, recital, and American traditional genres, played a vital role in the acceptance of African-American musicians in the classical music world; (3) in 1963, Marian Anderson was given a Presidential Medal of Freedom; (4) in 1974, Congress passed a resolution to have a special gold medal minted in her name; (5) in 1977, Marian Anderson, who was an alternate delegate to the United Nations, received the U.N. Peace Prize; (6) in 1986, Marian Anderson was awarded the National Arts Medal; and (7) 1997 will mark the centennial of the birth of Marian Anderson.
TITLE I--COMMEMORATIVE COINS SEC.
Denominations.--In commemoration of the centennial of the birth of Marian Anderson, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue-- (1) not more than 350,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper; and (2) not more than 350,000 half dollar coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 12.50 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this title shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this title shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this title only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this title shall be emblematic of the many accomplishments of Marian Anderson throughout her prolific life.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this title there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the years ``1897-1997''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Obverse of coin.--The obverse of each coin minted under this title shall bear the likeness of Marian Anderson.
Design Competition.--Before the end of the 3-month period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall conduct an open design competition for the design of the obverse and the reverse of the coins minted under this title.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this title shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this title shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this title.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this title beginning on and after the date of enactment of this Act.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this title after July 31, 1998.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this title shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this title at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this title before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins minted under this title shall include a surcharge of-- (1) $14 per coin for the $1 coin; and (2) $7 per coin for the half dollar coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out this title.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this title from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, the first $2,000,000 of the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this title shall be promptly paid by the Secretary as follows: (1) Smithsonian institution.--50 percent to the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution, for exhibits on African-American art, history, and culture.
Corporation for public broadcasting.--50 percent to the Public Broadcasting Fund established under section 396(k) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 396(k)), for educational programs on African-American art, history, and culture and on the life of Marian Anderson.
Excess Payable to the National Numismatic Collection.--After payment of the amounts required under subsection (a), the Secretary shall pay the remaining surcharges to the National Museum of American History in Washington, D.C., for the support of the National Numismatic Collection at the museum.
Audits.--Each organization that receives any payment from the Secretary under this section shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this title will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this title unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.
TITLE II--CIRCULATING COINS SEC.
AUTHORITY TO REDESIGN HALF DOLLAR CIRCULATING COINS.
Section 5112(d) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the 6th sentence the following: ``At the discretion of the Secretary, half dollar coins minted after December 31, 1996, and before July 31, 1998, may bear the same design as the commemorative coins minted under title I of the Marian Anderson Centennial Commemorative Coin Act, as established under section 103 of that Act.