This Act may be cited as the ``Safeguard the Vote Act''.
Requirement for First-Time Voters To Present Identification.-- Section 6(c)(1) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-4(c)(1)) is amended by striking ``a State may by law require a person to vote in person if'' and inserting ``a State shall by law require a person to vote in person and present a picture identification if''.
Removal of Voters in Response to Undelivered Notices.-- (1) In general.--Section 6(d) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-4(d)) is amended by striking ``may proceed'' and all that follows through the end and inserting the following: ``shall-- ``(1) proceed in accordance with section 8(d); or ``(2) if provided for under State law, remove the name of the registrant from the official list of eligible voters in elections for Federal office provided that reasonable safeguards are available to prevent the removal of an eligible voter.''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 8(a)(3)(C) of such Act (42 United States Code 1973gg-6(a)(3)(C)) is amended by inserting ``or section 6(d)(2)'' after ``paragraph (4)''.
Section 8(c)(2)(B) of such Act (42 United States Code 1973gg-6(c)(2)(B)) is amended by inserting ``or section 6(d)(2)'' after ``subsection (a)''.
Contents of Mail Voter Registration Form.--Section 9(b)(3) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-7(b)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) may include a requirement for notarization or other formal authentication as each State may by law require; and''.
MAINTENANCE OF ACCURATE LIST OF ELIGIBLE VOTERS.
Required Voter Removal Program.--Section 8(a) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-(6)(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) conduct a program to determine whether the number of eligible voters in any jurisdiction is less than the number of eligible voters on the official list for such jurisdiction and, if such determination is made, remove the names of ineligible voters from such list in accordance with paragraph (4).''.
Identification Required.--Section 8(e) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-6(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Any requirement under this section to make an oral or written affirmation regarding the address of a registrant shall include a requirement that such registrant present picture identification as part of such affirmation.''.
Notification of Felony Convictions.--Section 8(g) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-6(g)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(6) The Attorney General shall provide, upon request of any chief State election official, expedited access to applicable records regarding felony convictions of individuals in order to determine if an individual is eligible to vote under any applicable State law.''.
Additional Penalty for Conspiracy.--Section 12(2) of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-(10)(2)) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``process, by'' and inserting ``process''; (2) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``or knowingly and willfully conspires with another person to deprive, defraud, or attempt to deprive or defraud the residents of a State of a fair and impartially conducted election process, by'' before ``the procurement''; and (3) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``by'' before ``the procurement''.
PENALTIES UNDER VOTING RIGHTS ACT.
Increased Penalties.--Subsections (c) and (e)(1) of section 11 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 1973i) are each amended by striking ``$10,000'' and inserting ``$30,000''.
Misrepresentation of Eligibility.--Section 11(c) of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 1973i(c)) is amended by inserting ``or gives false information as to the individual's status as a convicted felon'' after ``voting district''.
VOTER ROLL COORDINATION DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
Demonstration Project Established.--The Federal Election Commission shall establish a demonstration project for the purpose of determining the feasibility and advisability of requiring coordination of the official list of registered voters and certain State records to ensure-- (1) such list is accurate; and (2) that eligible voters are not improperly removed from the official list.
Project.-- (1) In general.--The project conducted under this section shall require a State to maintain accurate records regarding individuals eligible to vote in the project area by coordinating-- (A) State records of-- (i) individuals registered to vote with respect to elections for Federal office through the appropriate State motor vehicle authority under section 5 of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-3); (ii) deaths; and (iii) individuals convicted of a felony; with (B) the official list of the appropriate jurisdiction of individuals registered, and otherwise eligible, to vote in such elections.
Study.--In conjunction with the demonstration project under this subsection, the Federal Election Commission shall conduct a study of-- (A) the current practices and methods of voting jurisdictions used to maintain official lists of registered voters; and (B) reasons for any failure of such practices and methods to prevent voting fraud or inaccurate lists.
Project Area and Duration.-- (1) Project area.--The Federal Election Commission shall implement the project in the voting jurisdictions of St. Louis County, Missouri, and St. Louis City, Missouri.
Duration.--The project conducted under this section shall be implemented for a period ending on the date of the next general election for the office of President and Vice President.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the completion of the demonstration project, the Federal Election Commission shall submit a report to Congress on the demonstration project and study conducted under subsection (b) together with such recommendations as the Federal Election Commission determines appropriate-- (1) regarding resources, technology, and personnel necessary for maintenance of accurate records; and (2) legislative and administrative action, including the feasibility of national standards.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.