SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Senior Executive Service Reform Act of 2003''.
References.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this title an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 5, United States Code.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; references; table of contents.
Amendments relating to basic pay.
Locality pay adjustment limitation.
Expanded Senior Executive Service limited appointment authority.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO BASIC PAY.
Basic Pay for Senior Executive Service Positions.-- (1) Pay range.--Section 5382 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Range in rates of pay for the senior executive service ``Each senior executive is entitled to basic pay at the rate determined for such senior executive under section 5383, except that no rate so determined may be-- ``(1) greater than the rate of basic pay for level III of the Executive Schedule, or ``(2) less than the minimum rate of basic pay payable under section 5376.''.
Setting individual rates.--Subsection (a) of section 5383 is amended to read as follows: ``(a)(1) Subject to section 5382, each appointing authority shall determine the rate of basic pay which shall be paid to each senior executive under such appointing authority.
A determination under this subsection shall, with respect to any senior executive, be made based on such senior executive's experience and capabilities, the responsibilities of the position such senior executive holds, and such other criteria as the Office of Personnel Management may by regulation prescribe.''.
Limitation on adjustments.--Subsection (c) of section 5383 is amended by striking ``Except'' and all that follows through ``title,'' and inserting ``Except as otherwise provided in regulations under section 5385,''.
Basic Pay for Other Positions.--Sections 5372(b)(1)(C), 5372a(b)(1), and 5376(b)(1)(B) are amended by striking ``level IV'' each place it appears and inserting ``level III''.
Coordination Provisions.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of determining the rate of compensation for any position described in paragraph (2), the President may, after the effective date set forth in section 6, continue to adjust rates of basic pay for the Senior Executive Service to the same extent and in the same manner as if the amendments made by this section had not been enacted.
Applicability.--This subsection applies with respect to any position the rate of compensation for which is set, by or under any provision of law enacted before the effective date set forth in section 6, by reference to a level or rate of pay for the Senior Executive Service.
Special rules.--The following special rules shall apply for purposes of carrying out this subsection: (A) Section 5382(b) of title 5, United States Code, as last in effect before the effective date specified in section 6, shall be deemed to have been amended by striking ``level IV'' and inserting ``level III''.
(i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, after the effective date specified in section 6, the President may, on his own initiative, provide for such comparability payments for the Senior Executive Service as he considers necessary in order to carry out the purposes described in paragraph (1).
For purposes of this subparagraph, section 5304(g)(2) of such title 5 shall, to the extent that it relates to the Senior Executive Service, be deemed to have been amended by striking ``level III'' and inserting ``level II''.
Limited effect.--Any adjusted rates of pay and any comparability payments fixed for the Senior Executive Service under this subsection shall not have any force or effect except as provided in paragraph (1) or (3)(B).
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Limitations on pay fixed by administrative action.-- (A) Section 5306.--Section 5306(d) is amended by striking the period and inserting ``, including under section 5372, 5376, or 5383.''.
Section 5373.--Section 5373(a) is amended-- (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (3); (ii) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following: ``(4) section 4802, 5372, 5376, or 5383; or''; and (iii) by redesignating the second paragraph (4) (as added by section 10702(c)(3) of Public Law 107-171 (116 United States Statutes at Large 517)) as paragraph (5).
References to section 5382.-- (A) The analysis for chapter 53 is amended by striking the item relating to section 5382 and inserting the following: ``5382.
Range in rates of pay for the senior executive service.''.
Section 3161(d)(2) is amended by striking ``established'' and inserting ``allowable''.
Sections 4507(e)(1) and 5384(a)(2) are each amended by striking ``5382'' and inserting ``5383''.
LOCALITY PAY ADJUSTMENT LIMITATION.
Paragraph (2) of section 5304(g) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) The applicable maximum under this subsection shall-- ``(A) for any positions under subparagraphs (A)-(E) of subsection (h)(1), be level II of the Executive Schedule; and ``(B) for any positions under subsection (h)(1)(F) which the President may determine, be level III of the Executive Schedule.''.
In General.--Section 6303 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e)(1) Notwithstanding any provision of subsection (a), the rate of accrual of annual leave in the case of an employee under paragraph (2) is one day for each full biweekly pay period.
This subsection applies to an employee in a position paid under section 5376 or 5383, or for an employee in an equivalent category of positions (as determined under regulations of the Office of Personnel Management) for which the minimum rate of basic pay is not less than 120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS- 15 of the General Schedule.''.
Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to pay periods beginning on or after the effective date set forth in section 6.
EXPANDED SENIOR EXECUTIVE SERVICE LIMITED APPOINTMENT AUTHORITY.
Definitions.--Section 3132(a) is amended-- (1) by striking paragraphs (5) and (6), and inserting the following: ``(5) `limited term appointee' means an individual appointed under a nonrenewable appointment to a Senior Executive Service position for a term fixed in accordance with section 3394(d) and the duties of which position will expire at the end of such term; ``(6) `limited emergency appointee' means an individual appointed under a nonrenewable appointment to a Senior Executive Service position, established to meet a bona fide, unanticipated, urgent need, for a term fixed in accordance with section 3394(c);''; and (2) by striking paragraph (8) and inserting the following: ``(8) `career reserved position' means a position which is designated under subsection (b) and which may be filled either by-- ``(A) a career appointee; ``(B) a limited term appointee or limited emergency appointee who-- ``(i) is appointed to such position under section 3394; and ``(ii) immediately before entering such position, was serving under a career or career- conditional appointment outside the Senior Executive Service (or an appointment of equivalent tenure, as determined by the Office); or ``(C) a limited term appointee or limited emergency appointee who is reassigned to such position under section 3395(b); and''.
Duration of Limited Appointments.--Section 3394 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c)(1) A limited emergency appointee may be appointed for a period of not to exceed 1 year.
If the exigencies of the public business so require, such appointment may be extended for not to exceed 1 year.
The authorities under paragraphs (1) and (2) shall be available subject to section 3395(c).
(1) A limited term appointee may be appointed for a period of not to exceed 4 years.
If the exigencies of the public business so require, such appointment may be extended for not to exceed 2 years.
The authorities under paragraphs (1) and (2) shall be available subject to section 3395(c).''.
Reassignment Within the Senior Executive Service.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 3395 is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1)(A) Notwithstanding section 3394(b), a limited emergency appointee may be reassigned to another Senior Executive Service position in the same agency established to meet a bona fide, unanticipated, urgent need, except that the appointee may not serve in 1 or more positions in such agency under such appointment in excess of the term allowable under section 3394(c) (1) and (2).
An individual may not be reassigned under this paragraph to a career reserved position without the prior approval of the exercise of that reassignment authority by the Office of Personnel Management.
(A) Notwithstanding section 3394(b), a limited term appointee may be reassigned to another Senior Executive Service position in the same agency the duties of which will expire at the end of that individual's term, except that the appointee may not serve in 1 or more positions in the agency under such appointment in excess of the term allowable under section 3394(d) (1) and (2).
An individual may not be reassigned under this paragraph to a career reserved position without the prior approval of the exercise of that reassignment authority by the Office of Personnel Management.''.
Limitation on aggregate service.--Section 3395(c) is amended-- (A) by striking ``48 months'' and inserting ``10 years''; and (B) by striking ``36 months'' and inserting ``7 years''.
Reemployment Rights for Certain Appointees in the Senior Executive Service.-- (1) In general.--Section 3594 is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) A limited emergency appointee or limited term appointee who was appointed from a civil service position held under a career or career-conditional appointment (or an appointment of equivalent tenure, as determined by the Office) and who, for reasons other than misconduct, neglect of duty, or malfeasance, is removed from the Senior Executive Service shall be entitled to be placed in a civil service position (other than a Senior Executive Service position) in any agency.''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 3594(d) (as so redesignated by paragraph (1)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``subsections (a) and (b)'' and inserting ``subsections (a), (b), and (c)''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) A limited emergency appointee or limited term appointee described in subsection (c) shall be entitled to the same rights under this subsection as a career appointee described in subsection (a).''.
Applicability; Savings Provision; Transition Rule.-- (1) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to appointments made on or after the effective date specified in section 6.
Savings provisions.--Appointments made prior to the effective date specified in section 6 shall continue to be governed by provisions of title 5, United States Code, applied as if this section had not been enacted.
Transition rule.-- (A) In general.--Service as a limited term appointee or limited emergency appointee performed before the effective date specified in section 6 shall not be taken into account for purposes of applying section 3395(c) of title 5, United States Code, as amended by this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph, the terms ``limited term appointee'' and ``limited emergency appointee'' have the meanings set forth in section 3132(a) of such title 5, as in effect before such effective date.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.