PAY AND ALLOWANCES OF MEMBERS SENTENCED BY A COURT-MARTIAL TO CONFINEMENT AND PUNITIVE DISCHARGE OR DIS- MISSAL.
Termination of Entitlement.--(1) Chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (the Uniform Code of Military Justice), is amended by adding at the end of subchapter VIII the following new section: ``Sec.
Sentences to confinement and punitive discharge or dismissal: termination of pay and allowances ``(a) Termination of Entitlement.--A member of the armed forces sentenced by a court-martial to confinement and to a punishment named in subsection (c) is not entitled to pay and allowances for any period after the sentence is adjudged by the court-martial.
Restoration of Entitlement.--If, in the case of a member sentenced as described in subsection (a), none of the punishments named in subsection (c) are included in the sentence as finally approved, or the sentence to such a punishment is set aside or disapproved, then, effective upon such final approval or upon the setting aside or disapproval of such punishment, as the case may be, the termination of entitlement of the member to pay and allowances under subsection (a) by reason of the sentence adjudged in such case ceases to apply to the member and the member is entitled to the pay and allowances that, under subsection (a), were not paid to the member by reason of that termination of entitlement.
Covered Punishments.--The punishments referred to in subsections (a) and (b) are as follows: ``(A) Dishonorable discharge.
The table of sections at the beginning of subchapter VIII of chapter 47 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 858a (article 58a) the following: ``858b.
Sentences to confinement and punitive discharge or dismissal: termination of pay and allowances.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 857 of title 10, United States Code (article 57 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice), is amended by striking out ``(a) No'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(a) Except as provided in section 858b of this title (article 58b), no''.
(A) Section 804 of title 37, United States Code, is repealed.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 15 of such title is amended by striking out the item relating to section 804.
TRANSITIONAL COMPENSATION FOR SPOUSES, DEPENDENT CHILDREN, AND FORMER SPOUSES OF MEMBERS SENTENCED TO CONFINEMENT AND PUNITIVE DISCHARGE OR DISMISSAL.
Authority To Pay Compensation.--Chapter 53 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1059 the following new section: ``Sec.
Members sentenced to confinement and punitive discharge or dismissal: transitional compensation for spouses, dependent children, and former spouses ``(a) Authority To Pay Compensation.--The Secretary of the executive department concerned may establish a program to pay transitional compensation in accordance with this section to any spouse, dependent child, or former spouse of a member of the armed forces during any period in which the member's entitlement to pay and allowances is terminated under section 858b of this title (article 58b of the Uniform Code of Military Justice).
Need Required.--(1) A person may be paid transitional compensation under this section only if the person demonstrates a need to receive such compensation, as determined under regulations prescribed pursuant to subsection (f).
Section 1059(g)(1) of this title shall apply to eligibility for transitional compensation under this section.
Amount of Compensation.--(1) The amount of the transitional compensation payable to a person under a program established pursuant to this section shall be determined under regulations prescribed pursuant to subsection (f).
The total amount of the transitional compensation paid under this section in the case of a member may not exceed the total amount of the pay and allowances which, except for section 858b of this title (article 58b of the Uniform Code of Military Justice), such member would be entitled to receive during the one-year period beginning on the date of the termination of such member's entitlement to pay and allowances under such section.
Recipients of Payments.--Transitional compensation payable to a person under this section shall be paid directly to that person or to the legal guardian of the person, if any.
Coordination of Benefits.--Transitional compensation in the case of a member of the armed forces may not be paid under this section to a person who is entitled to transitional compensation under section 1059 or 1408(h) of this title by reason of being a spouse, dependent child, or former spouse of such member.
Emergency Transitional Assistance.--Under a program established pursuant to this section, the Secretary of the executive department concerned may pay emergency transitional assistance to a person referred to in subsection (a) for not more than 45 days while the person's application for transitional assistance under the program is pending approval.
Subsections (b) and (d) do not apply to payment of emergency transitional assistance.
Regulations.--The Secretary of the executive department concerned shall prescribe regulations for carrying out any program established by the Secretary under this section.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `Secretary of the executive department concerned' means-- ``(A) the Secretary of Defense, with respect to the armed forces, other than the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy; and ``(B) the Secretary of Transportation, with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy.
The term `dependent child' has the meaning given that term in section 1059(l) of this title.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 53 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1059 the following: ``1059a.
Members sentenced to confinement and punitive discharge or dismissal: transitional compensation for spouses, dependent children, and former spouses.''.
EFFECTIVE DATE AND APPLICABILITY.
Prospective Applicability.--Subject to subsection (b), the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply with respect to pay and allowances for periods after such date.
Savings Provision.--(1) If it is held unconstitutional to apply section 858b of title 10, United States Code (article 58b of the Uniform Code of Military Justice), as added by section 1(a), with respect to an act punishable under the Uniform Code of Military Justice that was committed before the date of the enactment of this Act, then-- (A) with respect to acts punishable under the Uniform Code of Military Justice that were committed before that date, the amendments made by this Act shall be deemed not to have been made; and (B) the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to acts punishable under the Uniform Code of Military Justice that are committed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of paragraph (1), the term ``Uniform Code of Military Justice'' means the provisions of chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code.