This Act may be cited as the ``Servicemembers Mental Health Care Commission Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Since October 2001, approximately 1,640,000 members of the Armed Forces have been deployed as part of Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom.
300,000 members of the Armed Forces are suffering from major depression or post traumatic stress because of service in Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom.
320,000 of the members of the Armed Forces who served in Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom, or 19 percent of such members, have received brain injuries from such service.
Only 43 percent of members of the Armed Forces with a probable traumatic brain injury have reported receiving a medical evaluation for their head injury.
Records of the Department of Veterans Affairs show that 120,000 members of the Armed Forces who are no longer on active duty have been diagnosed with mental health problems, approximately half of whom suffer from post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
In the last year, only 53 percent of those members of the Armed Forces with post traumatic stress disorder or depression have sought professional help from a mental health care provider.
Rates of post traumatic stress disorder and depression are highest among members of the Armed Forces who are women or members of the Reserves.
Efforts to improve access to quality mental health care are integral to supporting and treating both active duty members of the Armed Forces and veterans.
Without quality mental health care, members of the Armed Forces and veterans may experience lower work productivity, which negatively affects their physical health, mental health, and family and social relationships.
Cultural and personal stigmas are factors that contribute to low rates of veterans of Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom who seek mental health care from qualified mental health care providers.
The capacity of mental health care providers and access to such providers must be improved to meet the needs of members of the Armed Forces who are returning from deployment in Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Community-based providers of mental health care are invaluable assets in addressing the needs of such members and should not be overlooked.
Coordination of care among government agencies as well as nongovernmental agencies is integral to the successful treatment of members of the Armed Forces returning from deployment.
COMMISSION ON VETERANS AND MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES WITH POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER, TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY, OR OTHER MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS CAUSED BY SERVICE IN THE ARMED FORCES.
Establishment of Commission.--There is established a commission on veterans and members of the Armed Forces with post traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, or other mental health disorders caused by service in the Armed Forces.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The commission shall be composed of a chair and 11 other members who shall be appointed jointly by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense.
Membership.--The membership of the commission under paragraph (1) shall include at least one of each of the following: (A) Members of the Armed Forces on active duty.
Veterans who are retired from the Armed Forces.
Employees of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Employees of the Department of Defense.
Recognized medical or scientific authorities in fields relevant to the commission, including psychiatry and medical care.
Mental health professionals who are not physicians.
Veterans who have undergone treatment for post traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, or other mental health disorders.
Consideration of recommendations.--In appointing members of the commission, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall consult with nongovernmental organizations that represent veterans, members of the Armed Forces, and families of such veterans and members.
Duties.-- (1) In general.--The commission shall-- (A) oversee the monitoring and treatment of veterans and members of the Armed Forces with post traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, and other mental health disorders caused by service in the Armed Forces; and (B) conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to the long-term adverse consequences of such disorders for such veterans and members, including an analysis of-- (i) the information gathered from rescreening data obtained from post deployment interviews; (ii) treatments that have been shown to be effective in the treatment of post traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, or other mental health disorders caused by service in the Armed Forces; (iii) the effects on the military career of members of the Armed Forces of seeking mental health counseling or care, including effects on duty assignments and promotion potential; and (iv) the continuity and effectiveness of mental health care provided individuals during their transition from receipt of care and services through the Department of Defense to receipt of care and services through the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Recommendations.--The commission shall develop recommendations on the development of initiatives-- (A) to mitigate the adverse consequences studied under paragraph (1)(B); and (B) to reduce cultural and professional stigmas associated with treatment of post traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, or other mental health disorders of veterans and members of the Armed Forces.
Annual reports.--Not later than September 30 each year, the commission shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report containing the following: (A) A detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the commission as a result of its activities under paragraph (1).
The recommendations of the commission developed under paragraph (2).
Powers of the Commission.-- (1) Site visits.--The commission may visit locations where veterans and members of the Armed Forces with post traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, or other mental health disorders caused by service in the Armed Forces receive treatment for such disorders to carry out the oversight and monitoring required by subsection (c)(1)(A).
Information from federal agencies.--The commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the chair of the commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the commission.
Solicitation of testimony.--The commission may request testimony from members of the Armed Forces, veterans, caregivers, and other sources in a manner intended not to interfere with the career development of the individual providing such testimony.
Termination.--The commission shall be terminated jointly by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense, at the joint discretion of the Secretaries.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Fiscal year 2010.--There is authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2010 to carry out this section, $1,000,000.
Subsequent fiscal years.--There is authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year after fiscal year 2010 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section in such fiscal year.
Appropriate Committees of Congress Defined.--In this section, the term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' means-- (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate; and (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives.