This Act may be cited as the ``Pediatric Diabetes Research and Prevention Act''.
PROGRAMS REGARDING DIABETES IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH.
National Registry on Juvenile Diabetes.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall develop a system to collect data on juvenile diabetes, including with respect to incidence and prevalence, and shall establish a national database for such data.
Long-Term Epidemiology Studies on Juvenile Diabetes.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall conduct or support long-term epidemiology studies in which individuals with type 1, or juvenile, diabetes are followed for 10 years or more.
Such studies shall, in order to provide a valuable resource for the purposes specified in paragraph (2), provide for complete characterization of disease manifestations, appropriate medical history, elucidation of environmental factors, delineation of complications, results of usual medical treatment and a variety of other potential valuable (such as samples of blood).
Purposes.--The purposes referred to in paragraph (1) with respect to type 1 diabetes are the following: (A) Delineation of potential environmental triggers thought precipitating or causing type 1 diabetes.
Delineation of those clinical characteristics or lab measures associated with complications of the disease.
Potential study population to enter into clinical trials for prevention and treatment, as well as genetic studies.
Type 2 Diabetes in Youth.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall implement a national public health effort to address type 2 diabetes in youth, including-- (1) enhancing surveillance systems and expanding research to better assess the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in youth and determine the extent to which type 2 diabetes is incorrectly diagnosed as type 1 diabetes among children; and (2) assisting States in establishing coordinated school health programs and physical activity and nutrition demonstration programs to control weight and increase physical activity among youth.
Clinical Trial Infrastructure/Innovative Treatments for Juvenile Diabetes.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall support regional clinical centers for the cure of juvenile diabetes and shall through such centers provide for-- (1) well-characterized population of children appropriate for study; (2) well-trained clinical scientists able to conduct such trials; (3) appropriate clinical settings able to house such studies; and (4) appropriate statistical capability, data, safety and other monitoring capacity.
Development of Vaccine.--The Secretary, acting through the appropriate agencies of the Public Health Service, shall provide for a national effort to develop a vaccine for type 1 diabetes.
Such effort shall provide for a combination of increased efforts in research and development of candidate vaccines, coupled with appropriate ability to conduct large clinical trials in children.
Loan Repayment Program.--Part G of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 288 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 487E the following section: ``loan repayment program for research on diabetes in children ``Sec.
In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, shall establish a program of entering into contracts with qualified health professionals (including graduate students) under which such health professionals agree to conduct research regarding diabetes in children in consideration of the Federal Government agreeing to repay, for each year of such service, not more than $35,000 of the principal and interest of the educational loans of such health professionals.
Adjustments Regarding Cost of Living.--With respect to the limitation established in subsection (a) on the annual amount of repayment that may be made, the Secretary may make such periodic adjustments to the limitation to reflect increases in the cost of living as the Secretary deems necessary.
Applicability of Certain Provisions.--With respect to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established in subpart III of part D of title III, the provisions of such subpart shall, except as inconsistent with subsection (a) of this section, apply to the program established in such subsection (a) in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions apply to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established in such subpart.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `diabetes in children' includes Type 1 diabetes in children and Type 2 diabetes in children.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
Amounts available for carrying out this section shall remain available until the expiration of the second fiscal year beginning after the fiscal year for which the amounts were made available.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.