This Act may be cited as the ``Amtrak Reauthorization Act of 2002''.
Section 24104 of title 49, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Authorization of appropriations ``(a) Capital Expenses.-- ``(1) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation, for the benefit of Amtrak, $800,000,000 for fiscal year 2003 for capital expenditures.
Payment to amtrak.-- ``(A) New capital projects.--The Secretary shall make payments to Amtrak of amounts authorized under paragraph (1) for capital projects not begun before the date of the enactment of the Amtrak Reauthorization Act of 2002 only if the Secretary has received, either in an annual work plan or a supplement thereto, a description of the work to be funded, a work timetable, cost estimates, and a list of other funding sources if the project is not entirely funded by the Federal Government, with an identification for each project as to which business unit described in subsection (e)(1) it is associated with.
The Secretary shall determine, within 30 days after receiving a work plan or supplement, whether each of the capital projects proposed is sufficiently justified.
To the extent that the Secretary determines that a project is justified, the Secretary shall make payments under this subparagraph within 30 days after receipt from Amtrak of a request for funds for the project.
Ongoing capital projects.--In the case of capital projects begun before the date of the enactment of the Amtrak Reauthorization Act of 2002, Amtrak shall transmit to the Secretary within 180 days after such date of enactment a description of the work funded, a work timetable, cost estimates, and a list of other funding sources if the project is not entirely funded by the Federal Government.
The Secretary shall determine, within 30 days after receiving a description of the work funded, whether each of the capital projects proposed is sufficiently justified.
To the extent that the Secretary determines that a project is justified, the Secretary shall make payments under this subparagraph within 30 days after receipt from Amtrak of a request for funds for the project.
The Secretary shall not provide any further funding for a project until the Secretary receives a description required under this subparagraph.
Project oversight.-- ``(A) Notice of changes.--If the scope, timetable, or cost of a project funded under paragraph (2) substantially changes, Amtrak shall notify the Secretary within 30 days after Amtrak learns of the change.
Oversight.--The Secretary shall conduct oversight activities, including inspections as necessary, to ensure appropriate progress of projects funded under paragraph (2).
Operating Expenses.-- ``(1) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, for the benefit of Amtrak, $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2003 for operating expenditures.
Payment to amtrak.--The Secretary shall make payments to Amtrak of amounts authorized under paragraph (1) as follows: ``(A) 50 percent on October 1.
25 percent on January 1.
25 percent on April 1.
Payments under this paragraph may only be made after 30 days have expired after receipt by the Secretary of all documents due under subsection (e).
Excess RRTA.-- ``(1) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, for payment to the Treasury by the Secretary on behalf of Amtrak, for fiscal year 2003 an amount equal to the amount Amtrak is required to pay under section 3221 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is more than the amount needed for anticipated benefits for individuals who retire from Amtrak and for their beneficiaries.
Request for transfer of funds.--The Secretary shall make payments to the Treasury of amounts authorized under paragraph (1) only after the Secretary has received from Amtrak a request for the transfer of such funds, which shall include materials supporting, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, the amount of the request.
Rail Security.--In addition to amounts authorized under subsections (a), (b), and (c), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation for fiscal year 2003-- ``(1) $375,000,000 for grants to finance the cost of enhancements to the security and safety of Amtrak intercity rail passenger service; and ``(2) $400,000,000 for grants for life safety improvements to 6 New York Amtrak tunnels built in 1910, the Baltimore & Potomac Amtrak tunnel built in 1872, and the Washington, D.C. Union Station Amtrak tunnels built in 1904 under the Supreme Court and House and Senate Office Buildings.
Annual Business Plan and Quarterly Assessments.-- ``(1) Business plan.--Not later than September 1, 2002, Amtrak shall transmit to the Secretary a comprehensive business plan for fiscal year 2003, including targets for ridership, revenues, and capital and operating expenses.
The plan shall include a separate accounting of such targets for each of the following business units: ``(A) Northeast Corridor.
Each other long-distance intercity train route, accounted for separately.
Quarterly assessments.--Not later than 30 days before the beginning of each fiscal quarter, Amtrak shall transmit to the Secretary-- ``(A) an assessment of the extent to which each goal identified in the plan transmitted under paragraph (1) has been achieved; ``(B) an explanation of any failure to achieve such a goal; and ``(C) a description of any deviation from the business plan.
The assessment required under subparagraph (A) shall be prepared by an outside financial consultant, which shall not be an entity that has assisted Amtrak in the preparation of a business plan under paragraph (1).
Certification.--The President of Amtrak shall certify each business plan and quarterly assessment transmitted under this subsection, and any other document required by this section to be transmitted to the Secretary.
Availability of Amounts and Early Appropriations.--(1) Amounts appropriated under this section remain available until expended.
Amounts for capital acquisitions and improvements may be appropriated in a fiscal year before the fiscal year in which the amounts will be obligated.
Limitations on Use.--Amounts appropriated under this section may not be used to subsidize operating losses of commuter rail passenger or rail freight transportation.