This Act may be cited as the ``Reduction of Metals in Packaging Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the management of solid waste can pose a wide range of hazards to public health and safety and to the environment; (2) packaging comprises a significant percentage of the overall solid waste stream; (3) the presence of heavy metals in packaging is a concern in light of the likely presence of heavy metals in emissions or ash when packaging is incinerated, or in leachate when packaging is landfilled; (4) lead, mercury, cadmium, and hexavalent chromium, on the basis of available scientific and medical evidence, are of particular concern; (5) it is desirable as a first step in reducing the toxicity of packaging waste to eliminate the addition of these heavy metals to packaging; and (6) the intent of this Act is to achieve this reduction in toxicity without impeding or discouraging the expanded use of postconsumer materials in the production of packaging and components of packaging.
As used in this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Distributor.--The term ``distributor'' means any person who purchases goods from a manufacturer for sale or promotional use.
Incidental presence.--The term ``incidental presence'' means the presence of lead, cadmium, mercury, or hexavalent chromium in a package or packaging component if the substance was not intentionally introduced into the package or packaging component for its own properties or characteristics.
Intentional introduction.-- (A) In general.--The term ``intentional introduction'' means the purposeful introduction of lead, cadmium, mercury, or hexavalent chromium into a package or packaging component with an intent that one or more of the substances be present in the package or packaging component.
Exclusion.--The term does not include-- (i) the background levels of the substances that naturally occur in raw materials or are present as postconsumer additions, and that are not purposefully added to perform as part of a package or packaging component; and (ii) any trace quantities of a processing aid or similar material used to produce a product from which a package or packaging component is manufactured, if the processing aid or similar material is reasonably expected to be consumed or transformed into a nonregulated material during the process.
Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' means any person in the chain of production who makes a package or packaging component for sale or promotional purposes, including an importer of packages or packaging components.
Package or packaging.--The term ``package'' or ``packaging'' means a container that provides a means of marketing, protecting, or handling a product.
The term includes a unit package, an intermediate, and a chipping container as defined in standard D-996 issued by the American Society of Testing and Materials, and unsealed receptacles such as carrying cases, crates, cups, pails, rigid foil, and other trays, wrappers and wrapping films, bags, and tubs.
Packaging component.--The term ``packaging component'' means any individual assembled part of packaging, including any interior or exterior blocking, bracing, cushioning, weatherproofing, exterior strapping, coating, closure, ink, label, adhesive, and stabilizer, except that the term does not include steel strapping.
For the purposes of this section, tin- plated steel that meets the specification under standard A-623 issued by the American Society of Testing and Materials shall be deemed an individual packaging component.
PROHIBITION ON ADDITION OF CERTAIN HEAVY METALS IN PACKAGING.
In General.--Except as provided in section 5, effective 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the intentional introduction of lead, cadmium, mercury, or hexavalent chromium to packaging or any component thereof during manufacturing or distribution by any person is prohibited.
Concentration Levels.--The sum of the concentration levels of lead, cadmium, mercury, and hexavalent chromium present in packaging or any component thereof may not exceed-- (1) 600 parts per million by weight (0.06 percent) on or after the date that is 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act and before the date specified in paragraph (2); (2) 250 parts per million by weight (0.025 percent) on or after the date that is 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act and before the date specified in paragraph (3); and (3) 100 parts per million by weight (0.01 percent) on or after the date that is 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
In General.--The requirements of section 4 shall not apply to packaging and any component thereof-- (1) with a code indicating a date of manufacture of the packaging or component, or date of bottling or manufacturing of distilled spirits and wines, that is prior to the effective date of this Act; or (2) if alternative evidence of a date of manufacture or bottling prior to the effective date of this Act is provided to the satisfaction of the Administrator.
Safety Considerations.-- (1) In general.--The requirements of section 4 shall not apply to packaging and any component thereof to which lead, cadmium, mercury, or hexavalent chromium has been added in the manufacturing, forming, printing, or distribution process-- (A) in order to comply with health or safety requirements of Federal law; or (B) because the addition of one or more of the substances is essential for the protection, safe handling, or functioning of the contents of the packaging, if the Administrator grants an exemption from the requirements of this Act to the manufacturer of the package or packaging component on the basis of either criterion.
Period.--If the Administrator determines that circumstances warrant an exemption from the requirements of this Act, the Administrator may grant an exemption for a period of 2 years.
Renewal.--An exemption under paragraph (2) may, on meeting either criterion under paragraph (1), be renewed every 2 years.
Use of Recycled Materials.--During the 6-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the requirements of section 4 shall not apply to packaging and any component thereof that would not exceed the concentration levels in section (b) but for the addition of recycled materials.
In General.-- (1) Requirement.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the manufacturer or supplier of packaging or any component thereof shall furnish to each purchaser a certificate of compliance stating that the packaging or packaging component is in compliance with the requirements of this Act.
Exemptions.--If the manufacturer or supplier claims an exemption under section 5, the manufacturer or supplier shall state the specific basis on which the exemption is claimed on the certificate of compliance.
Signature.--The certificate of compliance shall be signed by an authorized official of the manufacturing or supplying company.
Retention of certificate by purchaser.--The purchaser shall retain the certificate of compliance for as long as the packaging is in use.
Retention of copy by manufacturer or supplier.--A copy of the certificate of compliance shall be kept on file by the manufacturer or supplier of the packaging or packaging component.
Copies to administrator and public.--A copy of the certificate of compliance shall be furnished to the Administrator on request, and to members of the public in accordance with section 7.
Amended or New Certificate.--If the manufacturer or supplier of packaging or packaging components reformulates or creates a new package or packaging component, the manufacturer or supplier shall provide an amended or new certificate of compliance for the reformulated or new package or packaging component.
Request.--A request from a member of the public for a copy of a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer or supplier of packaging or components thereof shall be-- (1) in writing, with a copy provided to the Administrator; and (2) specific as to the package or packaging component information requested.
Response to Request.--A manufacturer shall respond to a request that meets the requirements of subsection (a) not later than 60 days after receipt of the request.
Whenever on the basis of any information the Administrator determines that any person has violated or is in violation of this Act, the Administrator may issue an order assessing a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $25,000.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed so as to prohibit a State from establishing and enforcing a standard or requirement with respect to toxic metals in packaging that is more stringent than a standard or requirement relating to toxic metals in packaging established or promulgated under this Act.
Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations to carry out this Act.