This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Play in Sport Act of 2002''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the National Commission on Sports and Substance Abuse, sponsored by the National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University, found that most parties involved in Olympic sports agree that doping (the use of banned performance-enhancing substances) is a serious problem for the Olympics and must be eliminated to preserve the integrity of the competition; (2) the use of performance-enhancing substances in sports threatens the health of our athletes, the integrity and meaning of sport, and the health and ethical values of our children; (3) there is currently no set of long-term comprehensive studies on the effects of performance-enhancing substances; (4) according to the Commission referred to in paragraph (1), some problems which must be solved to enable a fair and effective drug testing program include developing highly accurate tests for performance-enhancing substances in the body and establishing and accrediting testing laboratories around the world; (5) the United States Government has recognized the United States Anti-Doping Agency as the official anti-doping agency for Olympic, Pan American, and Paralympic sport in the United States, and provides significant financial support to such Agency; and (6) the National Institute of Standards and Technology is the Federal Government's premier laboratory for the development of standards and testing methodology as well as for developing rigorous testing laboratory accreditation procedures.
RESEARCH FOR TESTING OF PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING SUBSTANCES.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology, in consultation and cooperation with the United States Anti-Doping Agency, shall establish a research program to develop and improve the reliability, validity, and cost-effectiveness of testing for performance-enhancing substances the use of which is prohibited in the Olympic Games.
Such research program shall-- (1) pay particular attention to the development and improvement of tests for the use of steroids, human growth hormone, and insulin-like growth factor; (2) establish methods of ensuring that the ability to test for the use of newly banned performance-enhancing substances is maintained; and (3) develop standard reference materials to ensure the accuracy of measurements.
Development of the agenda for the research program established under this section should be on the basis of the best available technology, regardless of the type of sample specimen used.
All research projects should be evaluated on a peer-reviewed basis.
ACCREDITATION PROCEDURES FOR TESTING LABORATORIES.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology shall provide review and assessment assistance to the United States Anti-Doping Agency with respect to the laboratory accreditation process and testing procedures delineated in the International Olympic Committee's Olympic Movement Anti-Doping Code.
Such assistance shall include-- (1) procedures for accreditation of laboratories; (2) sampling procedures in doping controls; and (3) laboratory analysis procedures.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology shall limit its assistance under this section to areas where it has demonstrated technical competence.
RESEARCH ON LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES OF USE OF PERFORMANCE- ENHANCING SUBSTANCES.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology, in consultation and cooperation with the United States Anti-Doping Agency, shall establish a research program to determine the long-term consequences of use of performance-enhancing substances.
Development of the research agenda should place the highest priority on the most potentially harmful and the most widely used performance-enhancing substances.
Priorities for research shall include-- (1) the health effects of consumption of performance- enhancing substances; and (2) the efficacy and long-term effects of the use of steroids, including precursor substances.
Population studies under this section should not be limited to elite athletes but should include adolescent athletes as well.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the National Institute of Standards and Technology-- (1) for carrying out sections 3 and 4, $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2007; and (2) for carrying out section 5, $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2007.