This Act may be cited as the ``Access for Afghan Women Act of 2001''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Before 1996, women in Afghanistan could exercise their basic human rights and 70 percent of teachers, nurses, doctors, and small business owners in Afghanistan were women.
More than 90 percent of Afghan men and women believe that women should have access to education and work, freedom of expression, legal protection, and participation in government.
Respondents also support the inclusion of women's human rights issues in any peace negotiations with respect to Afghanistan.
Women make up more than 75 percent of the refugees in camps, urban areas, and villages in Afghanistan.
On the Afghanistan border with Pakistan many organizations, including women's organizations, are delivering critical services to refugees and such women's organizations have the knowledge and experience to assist the United States in delivering effective relief aid to women.
The active participation of women in the government, economy, and society of Afghanistan is necessary to ensure lasting peace in the region.
During major conflicts in the region, women have maintained local economies and have led the effort in rebuilding economies after conflicts.
Effective development and reconstruction assistance, including microcredit assistance, takes into account women's roles as economic leaders.
REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO UNITED STATES ACTIVITIES IN CENTRAL ASIAN COUNTRIES.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, activities described in subsections (b) through (e) that are carried out by the United States in Afghanistan and other countries of Central Asia shall comply with the applicable requirements contained in such subsections.
Peace Negotiations To Establish Government of Afghanistan.-- With respect to peace negotiations to establish a future government of Afghanistan, the applicable requirements are the following: (1) Consult with and include representatives of women's organizations and networks from the major ethnic groups in Afghanistan during peace negotiations and post-conflict decisionmaking.
Include the perspectives and advice of organizations with expertise in human rights and women's development in decisionmaking processes relating to peace and the future government of Afghanistan.
Ensure that the full range of human rights of women, as described in the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, are included in any constitution or legal structure of a future government in Afghanistan by including a significant number of women in the drafting of the constitution.
Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development.--With respect to activities relating to post-conflict stability in Afghanistan and other countries of Central Asia, the applicable requirements are the following: (1) Provide financial and programmatic assistance for the efforts of Afghan women's organizations that represent the various ethnic groups.
Promote multi-year women-centered economic development programs, including programs to assist widows and female heads of household.
Increase women's access to and ownership of productive assets such as land, agricultural inputs, and microfinance, and property.
Provide financial assistance for primary, secondary, and higher education for all individuals in Afghanistan.
Provide financial assistance to build health infrastructure and to deliver women-centered health programs, particularly comprehensive and high quality reproductive health and family planning services.
Integrate education and training programs for former combatants with economic development programs to encourage their reintegration into society and to promote post-conflict stability.
Support educational efforts to increase awareness with respect to landmines, facilitate the removal of landmines, and provide services to individuals with disabilities caused by landmines.
Provide assistance to rehabilitate children affected by the conflict, particularly child soldiers.
Relief, Resettlement, and Repatriation of Refugees.--With respect to the relief, resettlement, and repatriation of refugees in Afghanistan and other countries of Central Asia, the applicable requirements are the following: (1)(A) Take all necessary steps to protect women refugees in camps, urban areas, and villages fleeing from the conflict situation in Afghanistan from violence.
Take all necessary steps to ensure that women refugees in camps, urban areas, and villages fleeing from the conflict situation in Afghanistan are directly receiving food aid, shelter, relief supplies, and other services from United States-sponsored programs.
Take all necessary steps to ensure that women refugees in camps, urban areas, and villages are accessing high quality health and medical services, particularly reproductive, maternal, and child health services.
Take all necessary steps to ensure that refugees that choose to return voluntarily to their place of origin can do so in safety, dignity, and with protection of their rights.
United States-sponsored efforts shall not coerce or encourage refugees to return to their places of origin.
Peacekeeping Operations.--With respect to peacekeeping operations in Afghanistan and other countries of Central Asia, the applicable requirements are the following: (1) In preparation for deployment of peacekeeping missions, provide training, guidelines, and materials to military, police, and civilian personnel on the protection, rights, and the particular needs of women, as well as on the importance of involving women in all peacekeeping and peace building measures.
Encourage individuals and organizations that will provide training to consult with women's organizations within and outside of Afghanistan and other countries of Central Asia to develop appropriate training content and materials.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``other countries of Central Asia'' means Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan.
Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall prepare and transmit to Congress a report that contains documentation (including documentation using data disaggregated by gender) of the progress in implementing the requirements of section 3.