This Act may be cited as the ``Gift of Life Congressional Medal Act of 1994''.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall design and strike a bronze medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions, to be determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, to commemorate organ and tissue donors and their families.
In General.--Any organ donor, tissue donor, or the family of any organ or tissue donor, shall be eligible for a medal described in section 2.
Documentation.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall-- (1) establish an application procedure requiring an individual, their family, or an organ or tissue procurement agency acting on behalf of an individual or their family, to submit to the Secretary documentation supporting the eligibility of that individual or their family for receipt of a medal described in section 2; and (2) determine, through the documentation provided, and, if necessary, independent investigation, whether the individual or family is eligible to receive a medal described in section 2.
Delivery to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall deliver medals struck pursuant to this Act to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Delivery to Eligible Recipients.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall arrange for the presentation, through a qualified organ procurement organization, as described in section 371(b)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 273(b)(1)), of medals struck pursuant to this Act to individuals or families that, in accordance with section 3, the Secretary has determined are eligible to receive medals under this Act.
Limitation.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), only 1 medal may be presented to a family under subsection (b).
Exception.--In the case of a family in which more than 1 member is an organ or tissue donor, the Secretary of Health and Human Services may present 1 medal to each such organ or tissue donor.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury may strike and sell duplicates of the medal described in section 2 to any recipient of a medal under section 4(b), under such regulations as the Secretary of the Treasury may issue.
Limitation.--The sale price of a duplicate medal shall be sufficient to cover the cost of such duplicates.
The medals struck pursuant to this Act are national medals for purposes of section 5111 of title 31, United States Code.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury may enter into an agreement with the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network established under section 372 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 274) to solicit donated funds to offset expenditures relating to the issuance of medals authorized under this Act.
Payment of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), all funds received by the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network under subsection (a) shall be promptly paid by the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network to the Secretary of the Treasury.
Limitation.--Not more than 5 percent of any funds received under subsection (a) shall be used to pay administrative costs incurred by the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network as a result of an agreement established under this section.
Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- (1) all amounts received by the Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (b)(1) shall be deposited in the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund, as described in section 5134 of title 31, United States Code; and (2) the Secretary of the Treasury shall charge such fund with all expenditures relating to the issuance of medals authorized under this Act.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall take all actions necessary to ensure that the issuance of medals authorized under section 2 results in no net cost to the Government.
ORGAN AND TISSUE DEFINED.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``organ'' means the human kidney, liver, heart, lung, pancreas, and any other human organ (other than corneas and eyes) specified by regulation of the Secretary of Health and Human Services; and (2) the term ``tissue'' means human tissues, including corneas, eyes, bone marrow, tendons, veins, skin, and heart- valves.