This Act may be cited as the ``Foreign Military Training Responsibility Act''.
FINDING; SENSE OF CONGRESS.
Finding.--Congress finds that the United States provides education and training for approximately 38,000 foreign military personnel, other than military personnel of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries, every year.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) the United States shares a responsibility for actions of those foreign military personnel for which it provides education and training; and (2) therefore the United States should take a serious approach to evaluating the objectives, methods, and results of such education and training, including evaluating and tracking the personnel for which it provides such education and training.
ANNUAL FOREIGN MILITARY TRAINING REPORT.
Contents.--Section 656(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2416(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) United States Government personnel (other than United States military units referred to in paragraph (3)) and non- United States Government personnel, including private contractors, involved in each military training activity.''.
Form.--Section 656(c) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2416(c)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``The report'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the report''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Additional requirement.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), all information relating to the number of foreign military personnel provided training for each military training activity, their units of operation, and the location of the training, pursuant to subsection (b)(1) and all information pursuant to subsection (b)(2) shall be in unclassified form.''.
ANNUAL FOREIGN POLICE TRAINING REPORT.
Section 660 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2420) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e)(1) Not later than January 31 of each year, the Secretary of State, in conjunction with the head of each other appropriate department or agency, shall prepare and submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on all police training, advice, or financial support described in subsection (a) provided during the previous fiscal year and all such training, advice, or support proposed for the current fiscal year.
The report described in paragraph (1) shall include the following: ``(A) For each activity, the foreign policy justification and purpose for the activity, and with respect to police training, the number of personnel provided training and their units of operation, and the location of the training.
For each country, the aggregate number of personnel trained and the aggregate cost of the police training activities.
With respect to United States Government personnel, the operational benefits to the United States derived from each police training activity and the United States Government personnel involved in each activity.
Non-United States Government personnel involved in each police training activity.
(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the report described in paragraph (1) shall be in unclassified form but may include a classified annex.
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), all information relating to the number of personnel provided training for each activity pursuant to paragraph (2)(A) and all information pursuant to paragraph (2)(B) shall be in unclassified form.
All unclassified portions of the report described in paragraph (1) shall be made available to the public on the Internet through the Department of State.
In this subsection, the term `appropriate congressional committees' means-- ``(A) the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives; and ``(B) the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.''.
RECORDS RELATING TO FOREIGN MILITARY AND POLICE TRAINING.
Records.--Chapter 3 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2401 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 660 the following: ``SEC.
RECORDS RELATING TO FOREIGN MILITARY AND POLICE TRAINING.
Records.--The Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of State, and the head of each other appropriate department or agency shall jointly develop and maintain a database containing records on each foreign military participant and each foreign law enforcement participant in education and training activities conducted by the United States Government pursuant to any other provision of law after December 31, 2001.
Contents.--Each record shall include the type of instruction received, the dates of the instruction, whether such instruction was completed successfully, and, to the extent practicable, a record of the participant's subsequent military or law enforcement career, including the participant's current position and location.''.
TASK FORCE ON EDUCATION AND TRAINING FOR MILITARY PERSONNEL OF FOREIGN COUNTRIES.
Establishment.--There is established a task force to conduct an assessment of the kind of education and training that is appropriate for the Department of Defense to provide to military personnel of foreign countries.
Composition.--The task force shall be composed of eight Members of Congress, of whom two each shall be designated by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the minority leader of the House of Representatives, the majority leader of the Senate, and the minority leader of the Senate.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the task force shall submit to Congress a report on its assessment as specified in subsection (a).
The report shall include-- (1) a critical assessment of courses, curriculum, and procedures appropriate for such education and training; (2) an evaluation of the effect of such education and training on the performance of military personnel of foreign countries in the areas of human rights and adherence to democratic principles and the rule of law; (3) an evaluation of compliance by the United States Government with requirements that prohibit the training of military personnel of foreign countries involved in human rights violations; (4) an evaluation of such education and training for military personnel of countries with limited civilian control of the military; and (5) a description of criteria for limiting such education and training for military personnel of countries with limited civilian control of the military.
Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``Member'' includes a Delegate to, or Resident Commissioner, in the Congress.