This Act may be cited as the ``Jackson Multi-Agency Campus Act of 1999''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the management of public land and natural resources and the service of the public in the area of Jackson, Wyoming, are responsibilities shared by-- (A) the Department of Agriculture, including the Forest Service; (B) the Department of the Interior, including-- (i) the National Park Service; and (ii) the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; (C) the Game and Fish Commission of the State of Wyoming; (D) Teton County, Wyoming; (E) the town of Jackson, Wyoming; (F) the Jackson Chamber of Commerce; and (G) the Jackson Hole Historical Society; and (2) it is desirable to locate the administrative offices of several of the agencies and entities specified in paragraph (1) on 1 site to-- (A) facilitate communication between the agencies and entities; (B) reduce costs to the Federal, State, and local governments; and (C) better serve the public.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) authorize the Federal agencies specified in subsection (a) to-- (A) develop and maintain the Project in Jackson, Wyoming, in cooperation with the other agencies and entities specified in subsection (a); and (B) provide resources and enter into such agreements as are necessary for the planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance, and fixture modifications of all elements of the Project; (2) direct the Secretary to convey to the town of Jackson, Wyoming, certain parcels of federally owned land located in Teton County, Wyoming, in exchange for construction of facilities for the Bridger-Teton National Forest by the town of Jackson; (3) direct the Secretary to convey to the Game and Fish Commission of the State of Wyoming certain parcels of federally owned land in the town of Jackson, Wyoming, in exchange for approximately 1.35 acres of land, also located in the town of Jackson, to be used in the construction of the Project; and (4) relinquish certain reversionary interests of the United States in order to facilitate the transactions described in paragraphs (1) through (4).
In this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Game and Fish Commission of the State of Wyoming.
Construction cost.--The term ``construction cost'' means any cost that is-- (A) associated with building improvements to Federal standards and guidelines; and (B) open to a competitive bidding process approved by the Secretary.
Federal parcel.--The term ``Federal parcel'' means the parcel of land, and all appurtenances to the land, comprising approximately 15.3 acres, depicted as ``Bridger-Teton National Forest'' on the Map.
Map.--The term ``Map'' means the map entitled ``Multi- Agency Campus Project Site'', dated March 31, 1999, and on file in the offices of-- (A) the Bridger-Teton National Forest, in the State of Wyoming; and (B) the Chief of the Forest Service.
Master plan.--The term ``master plan'' means the document entitled ``Conceptual Master Plan'', dated July 14, 1998, and on file at the offices of-- (A) the Bridger-Teton National Forest, in the State of Wyoming; and (B) the Chief of the Forest Service.
Project.--The term ``Project'' means the proposed project for construction of a multi-agency campus, to be carried out by the town of Jackson, Wyoming, in cooperation with the other agencies and entities described in section 2(a)(1), to provide, in accordance with the master plan-- (A) administrative facilities for various agencies and entities; and (B) interpretive, educational, and other facilities for visitors to the greater Yellowstone area.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture (including a designee of the Secretary).
State parcel.--The term ``State parcel'' means the parcel of land comprising approximately 3 acres, depicted as ``Wyoming Game and Fish'' on the Map.
Town.--The term ``town'' means the town of Jackson, Wyoming.
MULTI-AGENCY CAMPUS PROJECT, JACKSON, WYOMING.
Construction Offers for Exchange of Property.-- (1) In general.--The town may offer to construct, as part of the Project, an administrative facility for the Bridger- Teton National Forest.
Conveyance.--If the offer described in paragraph (2) is made not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall convey the Federal land described in section 5(a)(1) to the town, in exchange for the completed administrative facility described in this paragraph, in accordance with this Act.
Offer To Convey State Parcel.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may offer to convey a portion of the State parcel, depicted on the Map as ``Parcel Three'', to the United States to be used for construction of an administrative facility for the Bridger-Teton National Forest.
Conveyance.--If the offer described in paragraph (2) is made not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall convey, through a simultaneous conveyance, the Federal land described in section 5(a)(2) to the Commission, in exchange for the portion of the State parcel described in paragraph (2), in accordance with this Act.
CONVEYANCE OF FEDERAL LAND.
In General.--In exchange for the consideration described in section 3, the Secretary shall convey-- (1) to the town, the portion of the Federal parcel, comprising approximately 9.3 acres, depicted on the Map as ``Parcel Two''; and (2) to the Commission, the portion of the Federal parcel comprising approximately 3.2 acres, depicted on the Map as ``Parcel One''.
Reversionary Interests.--As additional consideration for acceptance by the United States of any offer described in section 4, the United States shall relinquish all reversionary interests in the State parcel, as set forth in the deed between the United States and the State of Wyoming, dated February 19, 1957, and recorded on October 2, 1967, in Book 14 of Deeds, Page 382, in the records of Teton County, Wyoming.
EQUAL VALUE OF INTERESTS EXCHANGED.
Valuation of Land To Be Conveyed.-- (1) In general.--The fair market and improvement values of the land to be exchanged under this Act shall be determined-- (A) by appraisals acceptable to the Secretary, utilizing nationally recognized appraisal standards; and (B) in accordance with section 206 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716).
Appraisal report.--Each appraisal report shall be written to Federal standards, as defined in the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions developed by the Interagency Land Acquisition Conference.
No effect on value of reversionary interests.--An appraisal of the State parcel shall not take into consideration any reversionary interest held by the United States in the State parcel as of the date on which the appraisal is conducted.
Value of Federal Land Greater Than Construction Costs.--If the value of the Federal land to be conveyed to the town under section 5(a)(1) is greater than the construction costs to be paid by the town for the administrative facility described in section 4(a), the Secretary shall reduce the acreage of the Federal land conveyed so that the value of the Federal land conveyed to the town closely approximates the construction costs.
Value of Federal Land Less Than Construction Costs.--If the value of the Federal land to be conveyed to the town under section 5(a)(1) is less than the construction costs to be paid by the town for the administrative facility described in section 4(a), the Secretary may convey to the town additional Federal land administered by the Secretary for national forest administrative site purposes in Teton County, Wyoming, so that the total value of the Federal land conveyed to the town closely approximates the construction costs.
Value of Federal Land Equal to Value of State Parcel.-- (1) In general.--The value of any Federal land conveyed to the Commission under section 5(a)(2) shall be equal to the value of the State parcel conveyed to the United States under section 4(b).
Boundaries.--The boundaries of the Federal land and the State parcel may be adjusted to equalize values.
Payment of Cash Equalization.--Notwithstanding subsections (b) through (d), the values of Federal land and the State parcel may be equalized by payment of cash to the Secretary, the Commission, or the town, as appropriate, in accordance with section 206(b) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716(b)), if the values cannot be equalized by adjusting the size of parcels to be conveyed or by conveying additional land, without compromising the design of the Project.
Construction of Federal Facilities.--The construction of facilities on Federal land within the boundaries of the Project shall be-- (1) supervised and managed by the town; and (2) carried out to standards and specifications approved by the Secretary.
Access.--The town (including contractors and subcontractors of the town) shall have access to the Federal land until completion of construction for all purposes related to construction of facilities under this Act.
Administration of Land Acquired by United States.--Land acquired by the United States under this Act shall be governed by all laws applicable to the administration of national forest sites.
Wetland.-- (1) In general.--There shall be no construction of any facility after the date of conveyance of Federal land under this Act within any portion of the Federal parcel delineated on the map as ``wetlands''.
Deeds and conveyance documents.--A deed or other conveyance document executed by the Secretary in carrying out this Act shall contain such reservations as are necessary to preclude development of wetland on any portion of the Federal parcel.