In General.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, develop alternative dispute resolution methods for use by individuals, health information trustees, and other persons in resolving claims under section 161.
Methods.--The methods under subsection (a) shall include at least the following: (1) Arbitration.--The use of arbitration.
Mediation.--The use of mediation.
Early offers of settlement.--The use of a process under which parties make early offers of settlement.
Standards for Establishing Methods.--In developing alternative dispute resolution methods under subsection (a), the Secretary shall ensure that the methods promote the resolution of claims in a manner that-- (1) is affordable for the parties involved; (2) provides for timely resolution of claims; (3) provides for the consistent and fair resolution of claims; and (4) provides for reasonably convenient access to dispute resolution for individuals.
AMENDMENTS TO CRIMINAL LAW.
In General.--Title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 89 the following: ``CHAPTER 90--PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION ``Sec.
Obtaining protected health information under false pretenses.
Monetary gain from obtaining protected health information under false pretenses.
Knowing and unlawful obtaining of protected health information.
Monetary gain from knowing and unlawful obtaining of protected health information.
Knowing and unlawful use or disclosure of protected health information.
Monetary gain from knowing and unlawful sale, transfer, or use of protected health information.
Definitions ``As used in this chapter-- ``(1) the term `health information trustee' has the meaning given such term in section 3(b)(3) of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1994; and ``(2) the term `protected health information has the meaning given such term in section 3(a)(3) of such Act.
Obtaining protected health information under false pretenses ``Whoever under false pretenses-- ``(1) requests or obtains protected health information from a health information trustee; or ``(2) obtains from an individual an authorization for the disclosure of protected health information about the individual maintained by a health information trustee; shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
Monetary gain from obtaining protected health information under false pretenses ``Whoever under false pretenses-- ``(1) requests or obtains protected health information from a health information trustee with the intent to sell, transfer, or use such information for profit or monetary gain; or ``(2) obtains from an individual an authorization for the disclosure of protected health information about the individual maintained by a health information trustee with the intent to sell, transfer, or use such authorization for profit or monetary gain; and knowingly sells, transfers, or uses such information or authorization for profit or monetary gain shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
Knowing and unlawful obtaining of protected health information ``Whoever knowingly obtains protected health information from a health information trustee in violation of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1994, knowing that such obtaining is unlawful, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
Monetary gain from knowing and unlawful obtaining of protected health information ``Whoever knowingly-- ``(1) obtains protected health information from a health information trustee in violation of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1994, knowing that such obtaining is unlawful and with the intent to sell, transfer, or use such information for profit or monetary gain; and ``(2) knowingly sells, transfers, or uses such information for profit or monetary gain; shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
Knowing and unlawful use or disclosure of protected health information ``Whoever knowingly uses or discloses protected health information in violation of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1994, knowing that such use or disclosure is unlawful, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
Monetary gain from knowing and unlawful sale, transfer, or use of protected health information ``Whoever knowingly sells, transfers, or uses protected health information in violation of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1994, knowing that such sale, transfer, or use is unlawful, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 89 the following: ``90.
Protected health information.......................... 1831''.
TITLE II--AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 5, UNITED STATES CODE SEC.
AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 5, UNITED STATES CODE.
New Subsection.--Section 552a of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(w) Medical Exemptions.--The head of an agency that is a health information trustee (as defined in section 3(b)(3) of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1994) shall promulgate rules, in accordance with the requirements (including general notice) of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c), and (e) of section 553 of this title, to exempt a system of records within the agency, to the extent that the system of records contains protected health information (as defined in section 3(a)(3) of such Act), from all provisions of this section except subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), subparagraphs (A) through (C) and (E) through (I) of subsection (e)(4), and subsections (e)(5), (e)(6), (e)(9), (e)(12), (l), (m), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r), and (u).''.
Repeal.--Section 552a(f)(3) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``pertaining to him,'' and all that follows through the semicolon and inserting ``pertaining to the individual;''.
TITLE III--REGULATIONS; EFFECTIVE DATES; APPLICABILITY; AND RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS SEC.
Not later than July 1, 1996, the Secretary shall prescribe regulations to carry out this Act.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act, and the amendments made by this Act, shall take effect on January 1, 1997.
Provisions Effective Immediately.--Any provision of this Act that imposes a duty on the Secretary shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Protected Health Information.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), the provisions of this Act shall apply to any protected health information that exists in a State on or after January 1, 1997, regardless of whether the information existed or was disclosed prior to such date.
Special Purpose Trustees.--The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any special purpose trustee, except with respect to protected health information that is received by such a trustee on or after January 1, 1997.
Authorizations for Disclosures.--An authorization for the disclosure of protected health information about an individual that is executed by the individual before January 1, 1997, and is recognized and valid under State law on December 31, 1996, shall remain valid and shall not be subject to the requirements of section 122 until July 1, 1998, or the occurrence of the date or event (if any) specified in the authorization upon which the authorization expires, whichever occurs earlier.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
State Law.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), this Act shall prevent the establishment, continuing in effect, or enforcement of State law to the extent such law is inconsistent with a provision of this Act, but nothing in this Act shall be construed to indicate an intent on the part of Congress to occupy the field in which its provisions operate to the exclusion of the laws of any State on the same subject matter.
Privileges.--This Act does not preempt or modify State common or statutory law to the extent such law concerns a privilege of a witness or person in a court of the State.
This Act does not supersede or modify Federal common or statutory law to the extent such law concerns a privilege of a witness or person in a court of the United States.
Certain Duties Under State or Federal Law.--This Act shall not be construed to preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of-- (1) any law that provides for the reporting of vital statistics such as birth or death information; (2) any law requiring the reporting of abuse or neglect information about any individual; or (3) subpart II of part E of title XXVI of the Public Health Service Act (relating to notifications of emergency response employees of possible exposure to infectious diseases).
HR 4077 IH--2 HR 4077 IH--3 HR 4077 IH--4 HR 4077 IH--5