This Act may be cited as the ``Crimes Against Children and Elderly Persons Increased Punishment Act''.
ENHANCED PENALTIES FOR VULNERABLE VICTIMS.
Section 240002 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
ENHANCED PENALTIES FOR VULNERABLE VICTIMS.
In General.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend the Federal sentencing guidelines to provide a sentencing enhancement of not less than 5 levels above the offense level otherwise provided for a crime of violence, including those crimes of violence involving the environment, if the crime of violence is against a child, elderly person, or other vulnerable person.
If the crime of violence is also a sex crime against a child, the enhancement provided under the preceding sentence shall be 6 instead of 5 levels.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- ``(1) the term `crime of violence' has the meaning given that term in section 16 of title 18, United States Code; ``(2) the term `child' means a person who is 14 years of age, or younger; ``(3) the term `elderly person' means a person who is 65 years of age or older; and ``(4) the term `vulnerable person' means a person whom the defendant knew or should have known was unusually vulnerable due to age, physical or mental condition, or otherwise particularly susceptible to the criminal conduct, or is a victim of an offense under section 2241(e) of title 18, United States Code.''.
Section 4 may be cited as the ``Amber Hagerman Child Protection Act of 1996''.
INCREASED PENALTIES FOR FEDERAL SEX OFFENSES AGAINST CHILDREN.
Aggravated Sexual Abuse of a Minor.--Section 2241(c) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``whoever in interstate or foreign commerce or'' before ``in the special''; (2) by inserting ``crosses a State line with intent to engage in a sexual act with a person who has not attained the age of 12 years, or'' after ``Whoever''; and (3) by adding at the end of the following: ``If the defendant has previously been convicted of another Federal offense under this subsection or under section 2243(a), or of a State offense that would have been an offense under either such provision had the offense occurred in a Federal prison, unless the death penalty is imposed, the defendant shall be sentenced to life in prison.''.
Sexual Abuse of a Minor.--Section 2243(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``whoever in interstate for foreign commerce or'' before ``in the special''; (2) by inserting ``crosses a State line with intent to engage in a sexual act with a person who, or'' after ``Whoever''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``If the defendant has previously been convicted of another Federal offense under this subsection or under section 2241(c), or of a State offense that would have been an offense under either such provision had the offense occurred in a Federal prison, unless the death penalty is imposed, the defendant shall be sentenced to life in prison.''.
FEDERAL JURISDICTION OVER RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT CASES.
Section 2241 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Punishment for Sexual Predators.--(1) Whoever, in a circumstance described in paragraph (2) of this subsection-- ``(A) violates this section; or ``(B) engages in conduct that would violate this section, if the conduct had occurred in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States, and-- ``(i) that conduct is in interstate or foreign commerce; ``(ii) the person engaging in that conduct crossed a State line with intent to engage in the conduct; or ``(iii) the person engaging in that conduct thereafter engages in conduct that is a violation of section 1073(1) with respect to an offense that consists of the conduct so engaged in; shall be imprisoned for life.
The circumstance referred to in paragraph (1) of this subsection is that the defendant has previously been convicted of another State or Federal offense for conduct which-- ``(A) is an offense under this section or section 2242 of this title; or ``(B) would have been an offense under either of such sections if the offense had occurred in the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the United States.''.
PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO BODY ARMOR.
Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``James Guelff Body Armor Act of 1996''.
Sentencing Enhancement.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend the Federal sentencing guidlines to provide an appropriate sentencing enhancement for any crime of violence against a vulnerable person (which for the purposes of this section shall include a law enforcement officer) as defined in section 240002 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 in which the defendant used body armor.
For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``body armor'' means any product sold or offered for sale as personal protective body covering intended to protect against gunfire, regardless of whether the product is to be worn alone or is sold as a complement to another product or garment; and (2) the term ``law enforcement officer'' means any officer, agent, or employee of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State, authorized by law or by a government agency to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of any violation of criminal law.
AMENDMENT OF SENTENCING GUIDELINES TO PROVIDE FOR ENHANCED PENALTIES FOR A DEFENDANT WHO COMMITS A CRIME WHILE IN POSSESSION OF A FIREARM WITH A LASER SIGHTING DEVICE.
Not later than May 1, 1997, the United States Sentencing Commission shall, pursuant to its authority under section 994 of title 28, United States Code, amend the sentencing guidelines (and, if the Commission considers it appropriate, the policy statements of the Commission) to provide that a defendant convicted of a crime of violence against a child, elderly person, or other vulnerable person (as such terms are defined in section 240002(b) of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994) shall receive an appropriate sentence enhancement if, during the crime-- (1) the defendant possessed a firearm equipped with a laser sighting device; or (2) the defendant possessed a firearm, and the defendant (or another person at the scene of the crime who was aiding in the commission of the crime) possessed a laser sighting device capable of being readily attached to the firearm.
Passed the House of Representatives May 7, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.