This Act may be cited as the ``Public Safety Officer Medal of Valor Act of 1998''.
The President may award, and present in the name of Congress, a Medal of Valor of appropriate design, with ribbons and appurtenances, to a public safety officer who is cited by the Attorney General, on the advice of the Medal of Valor Review Board, for extraordinary valor above and beyond the call of duty.
Board.--There is established a permanent Medal of Valor Review Board (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Board'').
The Board shall-- (1) be composed of 11 members appointed in accordance with subsection (b); and (2) conduct its business in accordance with this Act.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The members of the Board shall be appointed as follows: (A) Two shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Two shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
Two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Three shall be appointed by the President, one of whom shall have substantial experience in firefighting, one of whom shall have substantial experience in law enforcement, and one of whom shall have substantial experience in emergency services.
Persons eligible.--The members of the Board shall be individuals who have knowledge or expertise, whether by experience or training, in the field of public safety.
Term.--The term of a Board member is 4 years.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall not affect the powers of the Board and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Operation of the board.-- (A) Meetings.--The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairman and not less than twice each year.
The initial meeting of the Board shall be conducted not later than 30 days after the appointment of the last member of the Board.
Quorum; voting; rules.--A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum to conduct business, but the Board may establish a lesser quorum for conducting hearings scheduled by the Board.
The Board may establish by majority vote any other rules for the conduct of the Board's business, if such rules are not inconsistent with this Act or other applicable law.
Duties.--The Board shall select candidates as recipients of the Medal of Valor from among those applications received by the National Medal Office.
Not more often than once each year, the Board shall present to the Attorney General the name or names of those it recommends as Medal of Valor recipients.
In a given year, the Board is not required to choose any names, but is limited to a maximum number of 6 recipients.
The Board shall set an annual timetable for fulfilling its duties under this Act.
Hearings.-- (1) In general.--The Board may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, administer such oaths, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Board considers advisable to carry out its duties.
Witness expenses.--Witnesses requested to appear before the Board may be paid the same fees as are paid to witnesses under section 1821 of title 28, United States Code.
The per diem and mileage allowances for witnesses shall be paid from funds appropriated to the Board.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Board may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Board considers necessary to carry out its duties.
Upon the request of the Board, the head of such department or agency may furnish such information to the Board.
Information To Be Kept Confidential.--The Board shall not disclose any information which may compromise an ongoing law enforcement investigation or is otherwise required by law to be kept confidential.
Compensation of Members.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Board shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Board.
All members of the Board who serve as officers or employees of the United States, a State, or a local government, shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for those services.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of service for the Board.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Public safety officer.--The term ``Public Safety Officer'' has the same meaning given that term in section 1204 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Attorney General such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
There is established within the Department of Justice a national medal office.
The office shall staff the Medal of Valor Review Board and establish criteria and procedures for the submission of recommendations of nominees for the Medal of Valor.
Section 15 of the Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1974 is repealed.
The Attorney General shall consult with the Institute of Heraldry within the Department of Defense regarding the design and artistry of the Medal of Valor.
The Attorney General shall also consider suggestions received by the Department of Justice regarding the design of the medal, including those made by persons not employed by the Department.
Passed the House of Representatives September 9, 1998.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.