This Act may be cited as the ``Towing Vessel Safety Act of 1996''.
MINIMUM NAVIGATIONAL SAFETY EQUIPMENT FOR TOWING VESSELS.
In General.--Section 4102 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f)(1) In prescribing regulations for towing vessels, the Secretary shall-- ``(A) consider the characteristics, methods of operation, and nature of the service of towing vessels; ``(B) consult with the Towing Safety Advisory Committee; and ``(C) require, to the extent appropriate, the installation, maintenance, and use of and familiarity with the following equipment on each towing vessel, other than a towing vessel that is used only for towing disabled vessels: ``(i) A radar system.
An electronic position-fixing device.
A sonic depth finder.
A compass or swing meter.
Adequate towing wire and associated equipment.
Up-to-date navigational charts and publications for the areas normally transited by the vessel.
Other safety equipment the Secretary determines to be necessary.
The Secretary shall establish in regulations under this chapter requirements that-- ``(A) any equipment required on a towing vessel under paragraph (1) shall be maintained in effective operating condition; and ``(B) if such equipment on a vessel ceases to operate, the master of the vessel shall exercise due diligence to restore the equipment to effective operating condition, or cause it to be restored to that condition, at the earliest practicable date.''.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Transportation shall issue regulations by not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, prescribing navigational publication and equipment requirements under subsection (f) of section 4102 of title 46, United States Code, as added by subsection (a) of this section.
Expedited Reporting Required.--Section 6101(b) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking ``within 5 days'' and inserting ``by as soon as practicable, but in no case later than within 5 days,''.
Penalty for Failure To Report a Casualty.--Section 6103(a) of title 46, United States Code is amended by striking ``$1,000'' and inserting ``not more than $25,000''.
REPORT ON FEASIBILITY OF ESTABLISHING A DIFFERENTIAL GLOBAL POSITIONING SATELLITE NAVIGATION SYSTEM AND ELECTRONIC CHARTS FOR INLAND WATERWAYS.
Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall submit a report to the Congress on the feasibility of establishing a differential global positioning satellite navigation system and creating electronic charts for the inland waterways of the United States.
PROTECTION OF SEAMEN AGAINST DISCRIMINATION.
Section 2114 of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows: ``(a) An owner, charterer, managing operator, agent, master, or individual in charge of a vessel may not discharge, temporarily remove, or in any manner discriminate against a seaman because the seaman-- ``(1) in good faith has reported or is about to report to the Coast Guard that the seaman believes that a violation of this subtitle, or a regulation issued under this subtitle, has occurred; or ``(2) refuses to violate this subtitle or a regulation issued under this subtitle.
''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) in paragraph (1) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (B) in paragraph (2) by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) an award of cost and reasonable attorney's fees to the prevailing plaintiff.''.
MANNING AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS FOR TOWING VESSELS.
Manning Requirements.--Section 8904 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) A towing vessel, other than a vessel referred to in subsection (b), shall-- ``(1) while being operated, have on board an individual licensed by the Secretary as a master of that type of towing vessel; and ``(2) be operated by an individual licensed by the Secretary to operate that type of towing vessel.''.
Regulations Establishing Licenses for Masters and Operators.-- Section 7101 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j)(1) The Secretary shall prescribe regulations which establish licenses for masters and mates of towing vessels.
Regulations under this subsection shall provide that an individual may be issued a license as a master or mate of a towing vessel only if the individual-- ``(A) demonstrates proficiency in the use of the equipment required pursuant to section 4102(f)(1)(C) of this title; and ``(B) demonstrates proficiency in operating a towing vessel.
Regulations under this subsection may establish standards and procedures under which the Secretary may delegate, to individuals who have experience in the operation of towing vessels and to other qualified persons, the authority to conduct examinations required for the issuance of a license as a master or mate of a towing vessel.''.
Existing Uninspected Towing Vessel Operator License Holders.-- An uninspected towing vessel operator license that is valid on the date of enactment of this Act shall be valid as a master or mate license required under section 8904 of title 46, United States Code, as amended by this section, until otherwise required to be renewed.
The Secretary shall require that an individual applying for a first renewal of such a license as a master or mate license under that section demonstrate proficiency under the requirements of section 7101(j) of title 46, United States Code, as added by this section.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Deadline for Regulations.--The Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall issue regulations under the amendments made by this section by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INSPECTION OF TOWING VESSELS.
In General.--Section 3301 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(14) towing vessels.''.
Exception.--Section 3302 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(n) A towing vessel is not subject to inspection under section 3301(14) of this title if the vessel-- ``(1) is used only for towing disabled vessels; or ``(2) is not used to pull, push, or haul alongside a barge that is subject to inspection under section 3301 of this title.''.
Equipment Requirements.--Section 3306 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) In prescribing regulations for towing vessels, the Secretary shall-- ``(1) consider the characteristics, methods of operation, and nature of the service of towing vessels; ``(2) consult with the Towing Safety Advisory Committee; and ``(3) require, to the extent appropriate, the installation, maintenance, and use of the following equipment on each towing vessel, other than a towing vessel that is used only for towing disabled vessels: ``(A) A radar system.
An electronic position-fixing device.
A sonic depth finder.
A compass or swing meter.
Up-to-date navigational charts and publications for the areas normally transited by the vessel.
Adequate fire fighting equipment.
Other equipment the Secretary determines will minimize the risk of injury to the crew or the risk of a vessel or barge casualty.''.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Transportation shall prescribe regulations implementing this section within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Prohibited Operation of Uninspected Towing Vessel, Generally.-- Section 4106 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking ``$5,000'' and inserting ``$25,000''.
Operation of Uninspected Towing Vessel in Violation of Manning Requirements.--Section 8906 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking ``$1,000'' and inserting ``not more than $25,000''.