This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Library Donation Reform Act of 2009''.
In General.--Section 2112 of title 44, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h)(1) Any Presidential library fundraising organization shall submit on a quarterly basis, in accordance with paragraph (2), information with respect to every contributor who gave the organization a contribution or contributions (whether monetary or in-kind) totaling $200 or more for the quarterly period.
For purposes of paragraph (1)-- ``(A) the entities to which information shall be submitted under that paragraph are the Administration, the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate; ``(B) the dates by which information shall be submitted under that paragraph are April 15, July 15, October 15, and January 15 of each year and of the following year (for the fourth quarterly filing); ``(C) the requirement to submit information under that paragraph shall continue until the later of the following occurs: ``(i) The Archivist has accepted, taken title to, or entered into an agreement to use any land or facility for the archival depository.
The President whose archives are contained in the depository no longer holds the Office of President and a period of four years has expired (beginning on the date the President left the Office).
In this subsection: ``(A) The term `Presidential library fundraising organization' means an organization that is established for the purpose of raising funds for creating, maintaining, expanding, or conducting activities at-- ``(i) a Presidential archival depository; or ``(ii) any facilities relating to a Presidential archival depository.
The term `information' means the following: ``(i) The amount or value of each contribution made by a contributor referred to in paragraph (1) in the quarter covered by the submission.
The source of each such contribution, and the address of the entity or individual that is the source of the contribution.
If the source of such a contribution is an individual, the occupation of the individual.
The date of each such contribution.
The Archivist shall make available to the public through the Internet (or a successor technology readily available to the public) as soon as is practicable after each quarterly filing any information that is submitted under paragraph (1).
The information shall be made available without a fee or other access charge, in a searchable, sortable, and downloadable database.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person who makes a contribution described in paragraph (1) to knowingly and willfully submit false material information or omit material information with respect to the contribution to an organization described in such paragraph.
The penalties described in section 1001 of title 18, United States Code, shall apply with respect to a violation of subparagraph (A) in the same manner as a violation described in such section.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any Presidential library fundraising organization to knowingly and willfully submit false material information or omit material information under paragraph (1).
The penalties described in section 1001 of title 18, United States Code, shall apply with respect to a violation of subparagraph (A) in the same manner as a violation described in such section.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and willfully-- ``(i) make a contribution described in paragraph (1) in the name of another person; ``(ii) permit his or her name to be used to effect a contribution described in paragraph (1); or ``(iii) accept a contribution described in paragraph (1) that is made by one person in the name of another person.
The penalties set forth in section 309(d) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(d)) shall apply to a violation of subparagraph (A) in the same manner as if such violation were a violation of section 316(b)(3) of such Act (2 United States Code 441b(b)(3)).
The Archivist shall promulgate regulations for the purpose of carrying out this subsection.''.
Applicability.--Section 2112(h) of title 44, United States Code (as added by subsection (a))-- (1) shall apply to an organization established for the purpose of raising funds for creating, maintaining, expanding, or conducting activities at a Presidential archival depository or any facilities relating to a Presidential archival depository before, on or after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) shall only apply with respect to contributions (whether monetary or in-kind) made after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives January 7, 2009.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.