This Act may be cited as the ``Technology Retraining And Investment Now Act of 2004'' or the ``TRAIN Act of 2004''.
Findings.--The Congress hereby finds: (1) The value added by workers in the United States and in other countries is increasingly a function of the aggregate knowledge acquired by workers through the aggregate educational and training investments of both governments and businesses.
The aggregate investment by governments of many of the United States's trading partners in the education and training of knowledge workers in those countries has exceeded the aggregate per-worker investment by Federal, State, and local governments in the United States.
The disparity is evidenced by the declining educational performance of students in the United States compared to their counterparts in other countries.
In an increasingly global and competitive marketplace it is becoming increasingly difficult for United States-based businesses to fund worker education and training that is provided at no cost for similar workers in other countries by their governments.
The current global workforce environment creates increasing competitive pressures on domestic companies to utilize highly educated knowledge workers in other countries.
It is in the interest of the United States government, national security, the preservation of a strong middle class, and the welfare of our Nation's workers to reverse this trend in a fashion that is consistent with trade obligations and the ability of domestic companies to compete globally.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to encourage businesses and individuals to support the educational development of knowledge workers in the United States by providing incentives for information and communications technology education and training investments, for workers requiring the use of those skills in professions such as information or communications technology, engineering, manufacturing and other fields, and for other purposes.
CREDIT FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM EXPENSES.
Allowance of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 50 percent of information and communications technology education and training program expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer for the benefit of-- ``(A) in the case of a taxpayer engaged in a trade or business, an employee of the taxpayer, or ``(B) in the case of a taxpayer who is an individual not so engaged, such individual.
Coordination of credits.--Credit shall be allowable to the employer with respect to an employee only to the extent that the employee assigns some or all of the limitation applicable to such employee under subsection (b) to such employer.
Limitations.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of expenses with respect to any individual which may be taken into account under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed $8,000.
Increase in credit amount for participation in certain programs and for certain individuals.--Paragraph (1) shall be applied by substituting `$10,000' for `$8,000' in the case of expenses-- ``(A) with respect to a program operated-- ``(i) in an empowerment zone or enterprise community designated under part I of subchapter U or a renewal community designated under part I of subchapter X, ``(ii) in a school district in which at least 50 percent of the students attending schools in such district are eligible for free or reduced-cost lunches under the school lunch program established under the National School Lunch Act, ``(iii) in an area designated as a disaster area by the Secretary of Agriculture or by the President under the Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in the taxable year or the 4 preceding taxable years, ``(iv) in a rural enterprise community designated under section 766 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999, ``(v) in an area designated by the Secretary of Agriculture as a Rural Economic Area Partnership Zone, ``(vi) in an area over which an Indian tribal government (as defined in section 7701(a)(40)) has jurisdiction, or ``(vii) by an employer who has 200 or fewer employees for each business day in each of 20 or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year, or ``(B) in the case of an individual with a disability.
Information Technology Education and Training Program Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `information technology education and training program expenses' means expenses paid or incurred by reason of the participation of the taxpayer (or any employee of the taxpayer) in any information and communications technology education and training program.
Such expenses shall include expenses paid in connection with-- ``(A) course work, ``(B) certification testing, ``(C) programs carried out under the Act of August 16, 1937 (50 United States Statutes at Large 664, chapter 663; 29 United States Code 50 et seq) which are registered by the Department of Labor, and ``(D) other expenses that are essential to assessing skill acquisition.
Information technology education and training program.--The term `information technology education and training program' means a training program in information and communications technology workplace disciplines or other skill sets which is provided in the United States by an accredited college, university, private career school, postsecondary educational institution, a commercial information technology provider, or an employer-owned information technology training organization.
Commercial information technology training provider.--The term `commercial information technology training provider' means a private sector organization providing an information and communications technology education and training program.
Employer-owned information technology training organization.--The term `employer-owned information technology training organization' means a private sector organization that provides information technology training to its employees using internal training development and delivery personnel.
The training programs must use industry-recognized training disciplines and evaluation methods, comparable to institutional and commercial training providers.
Denial of Double Benefit.-- ``(1) Disallowance of other credits and deductions.--No deduction or credit shall be allowed under any other provision of this chapter for expenses taken into account in determining the credit under this section.
Reduction for hope and lifetime learning credits.-- The amount taken into account under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the information technology education and training program expenses taken into account in determining the credits under section 25A.
Certain Rules Made Applicable.--For purposes of this section, rules similar to the rules of section 45A(e)(2) and subsections (c), (d), and (e) of section 52 shall apply.
Application With Other Credits.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- (1) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under the subpart A and the previous sections of this subpart, over (2) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Information and communications technology education and training program expenses.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.
In General.--Section 25A(f)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to eligible educational institution) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Eligible educational institution.--The term `eligible educational institution' means-- ``(A) an institution-- ``(i) which is described in section 101(b) or 102(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965, and ``(ii) which is eligible to participate in a program under title IV of such Act, or ``(B) a commercial information and communications technology training provider (as defined in section 30B(c)(3)).''
Conforming Amendment.--The second sentence of section 221(e)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``section 25A(f)(2)'' and inserting ``section 25A(f)(2)(A)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.