This Act may be cited as the ``NDRF Ship Disposal Act of 1993''.
DISPOSAL OF NATIONAL DEFENSE RESERVE FLEET VESSELS.
Disposal Requirement.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law (other than paragraph (3)) and before January 1, 1999, the Secretary of Transportation shall dispose of all vessels that are in the National Defense Reserve Fleet on the date of the enactment of this Act and that-- (A) are not assigned to the Ready Reserve Force component of that fleet; and (B) are not specifically authorized or required by statute to be used for a particular purpose.
Notification of secretary of the navy.--The Secretary shall notify the Secretary of the Navy of the intent of the Secretary to dispose of a vessel under this section, by not later than 90 days before the date of that disposal.
Limitations on disposal requirement.-- (A) Retention for national defense purposes.--The Secretary shall not dispose of a vessel under this section if the Secretary of the Navy certifies to the Secretary within 30 days after receiving notification of the intent of the Secretary to dispose of the vessel, that-- (i) the vessel is militarily useful, and (ii) retention of the vessel in the National Defense Reserve Fleet is necessary for national defense purposes.
Use by state or federal agency.--The Secretary is authorized to not dispose of a vessel otherwise required to be disposed of under this section if the Secretary certifies to the Congress that the vessel is needed for use by a State or Federal governmental agency.
Recertification required after one year.-- Notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B), the Secretary-- (i) may dispose of a vessel after the one- year period beginning on the date on which the Secretary of the Navy makes a certification described in subparagraph (A) with respect to the vessel, unless the Secretary of the Navy makes a subsequent certification under that subparagraph with respect to the vessel; and (ii) shall dispose of a vessel after the one-year period beginning on the date the Secretary makes a certification described in subparagraph (B) with respect to the vessel, unless the Secretary makes a subsequent certification under that subparagraph with respect to the vessel.
Endangered species act.--This section shall not be construed as superseding, or authorizing any activity prohibited by, the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).
Method of disposal.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the Secretary shall dispose of vessels pursuant to this section-- (A) in accordance with section 508 or 510(i) of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936 (46 App.
United States Code 1158, 1160(i)); and (B) in the case of vessels disposed of after 3 months after the effective date of this section, in accordance with the plan submitted by the Secretary under subsection (b).
Vessel Disposal Plan.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall submit to the Congress a plan for disposing of vessels pursuant to this section, by not later than 3 months after the effective date of this section.
Contents.--The plan submitted under this subsection shall include-- (A) procedures to be followed in disposing of vessels, including procedures for notifying the Secretary of the Navy pursuant to subsection (a)(2); (B) standards developed by the Secretary for-- (i) identifying vessels to be disposed of, (ii) establishing the priority for disposing of each vessel so identified, and (iii) making certifications under subsection (a)(3)(B); (C) standards developed by the Secretary of the Navy for making certifications under subsection (a)(3)(A); and (D) a preliminary schedule for vessel disposals which indicates the number of vessels, or percentage of the total number of vessels required to be disposed of, that will be disposed of each year.
Use of Vessels for Artificial Reef Program.-- (1) Identification and application by state.--The Secretary may select not more than 15 of the vessels required to be disposed of under this section, for which any State may apply for use as an offshore artificial reef in accordance with the Act entitled ``An Act to authorize appropriations for fiscal year 1973 for certain programs of the Department of Commerce and for other purposes'', approved August 22, 1972 (16 United States Code 1220 et sequentes).
Requirement to transfer.--The Secretary shall transfer, in accordance with the Act referred to in paragraph (1), a vessel identified under paragraph (1) to a State which fulfills the requirements for that transfer under that Act.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) National defense reserve fleet.--The term ``National Defense Reserve Fleet'' means that fleet maintained under section 11 of the Merchant Ship Sales Act of 1946 (50 App.
United States Code 1744).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on January 1, 1994.