SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Cervidae Tuberculosis Protection Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
Emergency cervidae tuberculosis protection.- Sec.
Deposit and investment of premiums received.
Authority to borrow funds from the Commodity Credit Corporation.
Emergency limitations on the movement of cervidae in interstate commerce.
It is the purpose of this Act to provide for a voluntary national cervidae tuberculosis insurance program.
Congress hereby finds that the commercial raising of cervidae in the United States either involves interstate commerce or affects interstate commerce.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Cervidae.--The term ``cervidae'' means any member of the family of animals possessing antlers that are shed annually, such as an elk, a deer, and a reindeer, except that such term shall include the antlerless water deer.
Commerce.--The term ``commerce'' means transport-- (A) between any State, Territory, or possession, or the District of Columbia, and any place outside thereof; (B) between points within the same State, Territory, or possession, or the District of Columbia, but through any place outside thereof; or (C) within any Territory, possession, or the District of Columbia.
Destruction.--The term ``destruction'' means the slaughter of cervidae by a method approved by the Secretary.
Exposed.--The term ``exposed'', with respect to tuberculosis, means any cervidae that is found, in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe-- (A) to be part of a herd containing one or more infected cervidae; (B) to have moved from such a herd before the infection in the herd is disclosed, but after the herd became infected; or (C) to have been exposed to tuberculosis by virtue of being nursed by a tuberculosis infected dam.
Herd.--The term ``herd'' means-- (A) any group of cervidae maintained in a common area for any purpose; or (B) two or more groups of cervidae under common ownership that are geographically separated but that have an interchange or movement of cervidae.
Infected.--The term ``infected'', with respect to tuberculosis, means any cervidae in which tuberculosis has been determined to exist pursuant to regulations established by the Secretary.
Insurance program.--The term ``insurance program'' means the program of insurance established by the Secretary under section 5.
Owner.--The term ``owner'' means any person who has a legal or rightful title to cervidae and is engaged in the business of buying, raising, or selling cervidae in interstate commerce in the United States.
Person.--The term ``person'' includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, and other legal entities.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands of the United States, American Samoa, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
Tuberculosis.--The term ``tuberculosis'' means the contagious, infectious, and communicable disease caused by Mycobacterium bovis.
Delegation.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall administer this Act through the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service of the Department of Agriculture.
Advisory Board.-- (1) Purpose of board.--The Secretary shall consult with the advisory board appointed pursuant to paragraph (2) whenever the Secretary is establishing policy for the insurance program or otherwise administering the insurance program.
Composition of board.--The advisory board shall consist of five members selected by the Secretary.
Three members (including at least one elk producer and one deer producer) shall be selected by the Secretary from a list of nine candidates presented to the Secretary by domestic cervidae producers who participate in the insurance program.
These candidates must also be cervidae producers who participate in the insurance program.
One member shall be selected by the Secretary from among employees of the Department of Agriculture.
One member shall be selected by the Secretary in such manner as the Secretary may determine.
Terms.--The members of the advisory board shall serve two-year terms; except that the Secretary may appoint two of the members initially appointed to the advisory board to serve a one-year term.
Chairperson.-- (A) In general.--At the last meeting of the advisory board for each year, the members of the advisory board shall select one member to serve as the chairperson of the advisory board for the next year.
The chairperson shall serve a one year term and shall be responsible for the establishment of procedures for the operation of the advisory board.
Special rule.--For the year in which the advisory board is first established, the members of the advisory board shall select a chairperson at the first meeting of the advisory board.
The chairperson selected pursuant to this subparagraph shall serve as chairperson for the remainder of that year.
Termination.--The advisory board shall terminate at the end of the 10-year period specified in section 13.
EMERGENCY CERVIDAE TUBERCULOSIS PROTECTION.- (a) Insurance Program Authorized.--If the Secretary determines that sufficient actuarial data are available and that establishment of an insurance program is warranted, the Secretary may establish a voluntary national insurance program to compensate participating owners for the destruction of any cervidae found to be infected with or exposed to tuberculosis, as provided in this Act.
Participation Required for Indemnity Payments.--Indemnity payments shall not be provided under this Act to any owner who does not participate in the insurance program.
In order to participate, the owner must agree to insure the entire herd of the owner.
A herd shall not be eligible for coverage under the insurance program if the herd is under active investigation regarding infection with or exposure to tuberculosis, including traceback or quarantine for tuberculosis.
Effective Date of Coverage.--Coverage under the insurance program shall become effective upon the payment by the owner of-- (1) the premium established by the Secretary for participation in section 6; or (2) such portion of the premium as the Secretary may require to initiate coverage.
Compensation for Destruction of Insured Cervidae.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), indemnity payments for the destruction of insured cervidae shall be paid at rates established by the Secretary for the insurance program, but not greater than 80 percent of the declared market value of healthy cervidae at the time of the destruction of the cervidae.
The amount of compensation shall be reduced by the salvage value and any other moneys received by an owner for the destroyed cervidae.
Limitation.--The amount of compensation provided for the destruction of insured cervidae may not exceed the actual fair market value of healthy cervidae, as determined by the Secretary, at the time of the destruction of the cervidae.
Coverage shall not be retroactive.
Rates.--Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary shall establish premiums for insurance coverage under this Act at such rates as the Secretary determines to be actuarially sufficient to cover claims under the insurance program and to establish a reasonable reserve against unforeseen losses in order to guarantee that the insurance program will be self-funding before the end of-- (1) the 10-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act; or (2) such earlier termination date as the Secretary may establish for the insurance program.
Maximum Premium.--The Secretary may not establish a premium under this Act for an owner in excess of two percent annually of the declared market value of the insured herd, as declared by the owner.
Time for Payment.--Premiums shall be paid at such time or times as the Secretary shall require.
Denial or Reduction of Claims.-- (1) Limitation.--If the Secretary denies or reduces an insurance claim under the insurance program, the Secretary shall mail a notice of the denial or reduction to the claimant.
Appeal.--Not later than six months after the date the notice is mailed, the claimant may bring an administrative appeal before the Secretary to review the denial or reduction of the claim.
Hearing.--If a claimant files an appeal, the Secretary shall conduct a hearing on the record on the denial or reduction of the claim.
Final order.--The denial or reduction of the claim shall be treated as a final order that is reviewable under chapter 158 of title 28, United States Code.
DEPOSIT AND INVESTMENT OF PREMIUMS RECEIVED.
In General.--Premiums received under the insurance program that are not immediately required to be expended may be-- (1) deposited in the Treasury of the United States or in any bank approved by the Secretary of the Treasury, subject to withdrawal by the Secretary of Agriculture at any time; or (2) with approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, invested in obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States.
Federal Reserve Banks.--Subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Banks shall act as depositories, custodians, and fiscal agents of the Secretary of Agriculture in the performance of the powers of the Secretary of Agriculture under this Act.
Repayment of Borrowed Funds.--At the end of the 10-year period specified in section 13, the Secretary shall repay, out of funds remaining for the insurance program, the Commodity Credit Corporation for all funds borrowed under section 10.
Rebate of Unused Funds.--Any funds remaining after making the repayment required under subsection (c) shall be rebated to policy holders on a pro rated basis according to the premium paid.
In order to ensure the efficient execution of this Act, the provisions (including penalties) of sections 6, 8, 9, and 10 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 46, 48, 49, and 50, respectively), shall apply to the jurisdiction, powers, and duties of the Secretary in enforcing this Act and to any person subject to Act, whether or not a corporation.
The Secretary is authorized to issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
AUTHORITY TO BORROW FUNDS FROM THE COMMODITY CREDIT CORPORATION.
During the 10-year period specified in section 13, the Secretary may borrow, under such terms as determined by the Secretary, funds available to the Commodity Credit Corporation in an amount not to exceed $7,000,000 to carry out the insurance program.
EMERGENCY LIMITATIONS ON THE MOVEMENT OF CERVIDAE IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
Because of the risk of spreading tuberculosis among cervidae and other uninfected livestock, the movement or sale of cervidae in interstate commerce shall be contingent upon proof of insurance obtained under this Act or a waiver signed by the owner releasing the Federal Government from liability for indemnity for the destruction of cervidae exposed to or infected with tuberculosis.
The sections of this Act and subdivisions of sections are declared to be separable, and in the event any one or more of the sections or parts of the same of this Act be held to be unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of other sections or parts of sections of this Act.
The insurance program authorized by this section shall terminate at the end of the 10-year period beginning on the date the Secretary first offers insurance under the program.
Any insurance policy provided under the program that is still in effect upon the termination of the program shall remain in effect for the remainder of the term of the policy, except that no policy may be renewed after the termination date of the program.