Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to establish a National Science Scholars Program to recognize student excellence and achievement in the physical, life, and computer sciences, mathematics, and engineering; (2) to provide financial assistance to students under paragraph (1) to continue their postsecondary education in such fields of study at sustained high levels of performance; (3) to contribute to strengthening the leadership of the United States in such fields; (4) to strengthen the United States mathematics, science, and engineering base by offering opportunities to pursue postsecondary education in life, physical, and computer sciences, mathematics, and engineering; (5) to encourage role models in scientific, mathematics, and engineering fields for young people; (6) to strengthen the United States mathematics, scientific, and engineering potential by encouraging equal participation of women with men in mathematics, scientific, and engineering fields; and (7) to attract talented students to teaching careers in mathematics and science in elementary and secondary schools.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $4,500,000 for fiscal year 1997 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years for awards to National Science Scholars.
Program Authority.--The Secretary is authorized, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, to carry out a program of awarding scholarships to students for the study of the physical, life, or computer sciences, mathematics, or engineering, who-- (1) are selected by the President; (2) have demonstrated outstanding academic achievement in the physical, life, or computer sciences, mathematics, or engineering; and (3) show promise of continued outstanding academic performance in such field of study.
Period of Awards.-- (1) Period of initial award.--A student who satisfies the requirements of section 4(a) may receive a scholarship, for a period of 1 academic year, for the first year of undergraduate study at an institution of higher education.
Continuation awards.--A student who satisfies the requirements of section 4(b) may receive additional scholarships, each awarded for a period of 1 academic year, in order to complete his or her undergraduate course of study.
A student may receive additional scholarships for not more than 3 academic years of undergraduate study, except that, in the case of a student who is enrolled in an undergraduate course of study that requires attendance for 5 academic years, the student may receive additional scholarships for not more than 4 academic years of undergraduate study.
Use at Any Institution Permitted.--A student awarded a scholarship under this Act may attend any institution of higher education.
National Science Scholars.--Students awarded scholarships under this Act shall be known as ``National Science Scholars''.
Selection Criteria for Initial Awards.-- (1) Selection criteria.--The Director shall develop and submit to the Secretary proposed criteria to be used in the selection of National Science Scholars for initial year awards under section 2(b)(1).
Such criteria shall provide for the selection of such scholars on the basis of potential to successfully complete a postsecondary program in the physical, life, or computer sciences, mathematics, or engineering, and on the basis of motivation to pursue a career in such fields.
In addition, consideration may be given to the financial need of the individual, and to promoting participation by minorities and individuals with disabilities.
The Director shall determine proposed criteria for measuring the potential and motivation of nominees.
Publication.--The Secretary and the Director shall agree to, and jointly publish in the Federal Register, appropriate selection criteria.
Selection Process for Initial Awards.-- (1) Nominating committee.--Each State desiring to qualify its students for selection as National Science Scholars shall establish a nominating committee.
Such committee shall be appointed by the chief State school officer or by an existing grant agency or panel designated by such officer, and shall be approved by the Secretary.
The nominating committee shall be a broad-based committee composed of educators, scientists, mathematicians, and engineers, who shall serve as volunteers without compensation.
Nominations.--The nominating committee in each State shall submit to the President the nominations of at least four individuals from each congressional district in the State, at least half of whom are female.
Such selections shall be ranked in order of priority.
Selection.--The President, after consultation with the Secretary and the Director, shall select two National Science Scholars for each academic year from each congressional district, at least one of whom shall be female.
Announcement and award of scholarships.--The selection process shall be completed, and the announcement of the selection of National Science Scholars shall be made by the President prior to January 1st of each fiscal year.
The Secretary shall notify each Member of Congress of selections made from such Member's district and State before the public announcement by the President.
Presentation of scholarships may be made in a public ceremony.
Congressional district.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``congressional district'' includes the part or all of a State (within the meaning of section 1201(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965) represented by a Member or Delegate of the House of Representatives, and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Continuation Awards.--The Secretary shall award additional scholarships under section 2(b)(2) to recipients of initial awards under section 2(b)(1) who the Secretary determines meet the requirements of section 4(b).
Disbursal of Scholarship Proceeds.--Scholarship proceeds shall be disbursed on behalf of students who receive scholarships under this Act to the institutions of higher education at which the students are enrolled.
No scholarship proceeds shall be disbursed on behalf of a student until the student is enrolled at an institution of higher education.
Special Rule.--The Director and the Secretary shall encourage the support and assistance of civic groups, the business community, professional associations, institutions of higher education, and others in providing scholarship assistance to National Science Scholarship finalists.
Requirements for Initial Award.--To be eligible to receive a scholarship under section 2(b)(1), a student shall-- (1) be scheduled to graduate from a public or private secondary school, or to obtain the equivalent of a certificate of graduation (as recognized by the State in which the student resides), during the school year in which the award is made; (2) be a citizen or national of the United States or the entities set forth in section 3(b)(5), or be an alien lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence; (3) have demonstrated outstanding academic achievement in secondary school in physical, life, or computer sciences, mathematics, or engineering; (4) have been accepted for enrollment at an institution of higher education as a full-time undergraduate student (as determined by the institution); and (5) have declared a major in 1 of the physical, life, or computer sciences, mathematics, or engineering, or provided a written statement to the State of his or her intent to major in 1 of these fields of study, if it is the policy of the institution at which the student has been accepted for enrollment that students not declare a major until a later point in their course of study.
Requirements for Continuation Awards.--A student who has received a scholarship under section 2(b)(1) may receive a scholarship for a subsequent academic year of undergraduate education under section 2(b)(2) if the student-- (1) maintains a high level of academic achievement, as determined in accordance with the regulations of the Secretary; (2) continues to major in, or provides a statement to the State as described in subsection (a)(5) of his or her continuing intent to major in, one of the physical, life, or computer sciences, mathematics, or engineering; and (3) continues to be enrolled at an institution of higher education as a full-time undergraduate student (as determined by the institution).
Waiver of Full-Time Attendance Requirement.--The Secretary may waive the full-time attendance requirements in this section in unusual circumstances.
Failure To Meet Eligibility Requirements.--In the event that the student fails to meet the requirements of this section, the student's eligibility to receive further scholarships (or scholarship proceeds) under this Act shall be suspended in accordance with the regulations of the Secretary.
Reinstatement of Eligibility.--The Secretary shall determine circumstances under which eligibility of a scholarship recipient under this Act may be reinstated if the recipient seeks to re-enter school after an interruption of schooling for personal reasons, including, but not limited to, pregnancy, child-rearing, and other family responsibilities.
Notification of Secondary Schools.--The Secretary shall notify all public and private secondary schools and all institutions of higher education in each State annually of the availability of scholarships under this Act.
Amount of Award.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), the amount of a scholarship awarded under this Act for any academic year shall be $5,000.
Relation to Cost of Attendance.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), the amount of a scholarship awarded under this Act shall be reduced by the amount that the scholarship exceeds the student's cost of attendance, as defined in section 472 of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
A scholarship awarded under this Act shall not be reduced on the basis of the student's receipt of other forms of Federal student financial assistance, but shall be taken into account in determining the eligibility of the student for those other forms of Federal student financial assistance.
Adjustments for Insufficient Appropriations.--In the event that funds available in a fiscal year are insufficient to fully fund all awards under this Act, the amount paid to each student shall be reduced proportionately.
SUMMER EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR SCHOLARS.
Priority for Summer Employment.--To the extent that they are otherwise qualified, students receiving scholarships under this Act shall be given priority consideration for federally financed summer employment in federally funded research and development centers, that, to the maximum extent practicable, complements and reinforces the educational program of these students.
Federal Agency Cooperation.--Federal agencies shall cooperate fully with the Secretary and participate actively in providing appropriate summer employment opportunities for such students.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``Director'' shall refer to the Director of the National Science Foundation; (2) the term ``elementary school'' has the same meaning given that term in section 14101(14) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965; (3) the term ``institution of higher education'' has the same meaning given that term in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965; (4) the term ``minorities'' refers to members of those racial and ethnic groups underrepresented in mathematics, science and engineering, including American Indians, Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Alaskans, or Native Pacific Islanders; (5) the term ``scholarship'' refers to a financial award made to a student which enables a student to pursue a desired course of study at an institution of higher education; (6) the term ``secondary school'' has the same meaning given that term in section 14101(25) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965; and (7) the term ``Secretary'' refers to the Secretary of the Department of Education.