This Act may be cited as the ``Food and Medicine for the World Act of 1999''.
REQUIREMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL OF ANY NEW UNILATERAL AGRICULTURAL SANCTION.
Definitions.-- (1) Agricultural commodity.--The term ``agricultural commodity'' has the meaning given the term in section 402 of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 (7 United States Code 1732).
Agricultural program.--The term ``agricultural program'' means-- (A) any program administered through the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 (Public Law 480; 7 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); (B) any program administered through section 416 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 United States Code 1431); (C) any commercial sale of agricultural commodities or agricultural products, including plant nutrient materials; or (D) any export financing (including credits or credit guarantees) for agricultural commodities or agricultural products.
New unilateral agricultural sanction.--The term ``new unilateral agricultural sanction'' means any prohibition, restriction, or condition on carrying out an agricultural program with respect to a foreign country or foreign entity that is imposed by the United States on or after the date of enactment of this Act for reasons of foreign policy or national security, except in a case in which the United States imposes the measure pursuant to a multilateral regime and the other member countries of that regime have agreed to impose substantially equivalent measures.
New unilateral sanction with respect to medicine, medical supplies, or medical equipment.--The term ``new unilateral sanction with respect to medicine, medical supplies, or medical equipment'' means any prohibition, restriction, or condition on trade in, or the provision of assistance consisting of, medicine, medical supplies, or medical equipment with respect to a foreign country or foreign entity that is imposed by the United States on or after the date of enactment of this Act for reasons of foreign policy or national security, except in a case in which the United States imposes the measure pursuant to a multilateral regime and the other member countries of that regime have agreed to impose substantially equivalent measures.
Session day of congress.--The term ``session day of Congress'' means any day on which a House of Congress is in session.
Restriction.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject to subsection (c), the President may not impose a new unilateral agricultural sanction against a foreign country, or a new unilateral sanction with respect to medicine, medical supplies, or medical equipment against a foreign country, unless-- (1) not less than 60 days before the sanction is proposed to be imposed, the President submits a report to Congress that-- (A) describes the activity proposed to be prohibited, restricted, or conditioned; and (B) describes the actions by the foreign country that justify the sanction; and (2) Congress enacts a joint resolution stating the approval of Congress for the report submitted under paragraph (1).
Exception.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), the President may impose a sanction described in that subsection-- (1) against a foreign country with respect to which-- (A) Congress has enacted a declaration of war; or (B) the President has proclaimed a state of national emergency; or (2) to the extent that the sanction would prohibit, restrict, or condition the provision or use of any commodity, product, medicine, supply, or equipment that is controlled on the United States Munitions List under section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act or the Commerce Control List under the Export Administration Act of 1979.
Congressional Priority Procedures.-- (1) Joint resolution defined.--For the purpose of subsection (b)(2), ``joint resolution'' means only a joint resolution introduced within 10 session days of Congress after the date on which the report of the President under subsection (b)(1) is received by Congress, the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress approves the report of the President pursuant to section 2(b)(1) of the Food and Medicine for the World Act of 1999, transmitted on ______________.
'', with the blank completed with the appropriate date.
Referral of report.--The report described in subsection (b)(1) shall be referred to the appropriate committee or committees of the House of Representatives and to the appropriate committee or committees of the Senate.
Referral of joint resolution to committee.--A joint resolution introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives.
A joint resolution introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
Such a joint resolution may not be reported before the eighth session day of Congress after its introduction.
Discharge from committee.--If the committee of either House to which a joint resolution is referred has not reported the joint resolution (or an identical joint resolution) at the end of 30 session days of Congress after its introduction, the committee shall be discharged from further consideration of the joint resolution and the joint resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House in which it was introduced.
Floor consideration.-- (A) Motion to proceed.--When the committee to which a joint resolution is referred has reported, or has been deemed to be discharged (under paragraph (4)) from further consideration of, a joint resolution, notwithstanding any rule or precedent of the Senate, including Rule 22, it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution, and all points of order against the joint resolution (and against consideration of the joint resolution) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution is agreed to, the joint resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate on the joint resolution.--Debate on the joint resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than ten hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the joint resolution.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
An amendment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the joint resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the joint resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Vote on final passage.--Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on a joint resolution, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the joint resolution shall occur.
Appeals of rulings.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a joint resolution described in paragraph (1) shall be decided without debate.
Treatment of other house's joint resolution.--If, before the passage by one House of Congress of a joint resolution of that House, that House receives from the other House a joint resolution, then the following procedures shall apply: (A) Referral of joint resolutions of sending house.--The joint resolution of the sending House shall not be referred to a committee in the receiving House.
Procedures in receiving house.--With respect to a joint resolution of the House receiving the joint resolution-- (i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no joint resolution had been received from the sending House; but (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the joint resolution of the sending House.
Disposition of joint resolutions of receiving house.--Upon disposition of the joint resolution received from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider the joint resolution originated in the receiving House.
Procedures after action by both the house and senate.-- If the House receiving a joint resolution from the other House after the receiving House has disposed of a joint resolution originated in that House, the action of the receiving House with regard to the disposition of the joint resolution originated in that House shall be deemed to be the action of the receiving House with regard to the joint resolution originated in the other House.
Status of procedures.--This subsection is enacted by Congress-- (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a joint resolution described in paragraph (1), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.