This Act may be cited as the ``Agriculture Export Enhancement Act of 1998''.
In this Act: (1) Agreement on agriculture.--The term ``Agreement on Agriculture'' means the Agreement described in section 101(d)(2) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act.
Agreement on the application of sanitary; and phytosanitary measures.--The term ``Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures'' means the Agreement described in section 101(d)(3) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act.
Uruguay Round Agreements.-- The term ``Uruguay Round Agreements'' has the meaning given such term in section 2(7) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (19 United States Code 3501(7).
World trade organization.--The term ``World Trade Organization'' means the organization established pursuant to the WTO Agreement.
WTO agreement.--The term ``WTO Agreement'' means the Agreement Establishing The World Trade Organization entered into on April 15, 1994.
WTO and wto member.--The terms ``WTO'' and ``WTO member'' have the meanings given those terms in section 2 of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (19 United States Code 3501).
PRINCIPAL AGRICULTURAL TRADE NEGOTIATING OBJECTIVES.
The principle agricultural trade negotiating objectives of the United States with respect to the WTO Agreement on Agriculture shall include the following: (1) Elimination of tariffs on agricultural products.--The United States shall negotiate a specific date after which tariffs imposed on agricultural products shall be eliminated by WTO members and the United States shall negotiate the immediate elimination or substantial reduction of the tariffs imposed on the following products by certain WTO members: (A) Tariffs imposed on meat products by Japan.
Tariffs imposed on meat products by South Korea.
Tariffs imposed on grains, livestock, and meat products by the Philippines.
Tariffs imposed on wheat by South Africa.
Tariffs imposed on milling wheat, corn, and sorghum by Turkey.
Elimination of export and other trade-distorting subsidies.--The United States shall negotiate a specific date after which all export and other trade-distorting subsidies shall be eliminated by WTO members and the United States shall negotiate the elimination of the following subsidies provided by the certain WTO members: (A) Export subsidies on wheat, wheat flour, beef, and poultry provided by the European Union.
Domestic subsidies on pork and feed grains provided by the European Union.
Elimination of the unfair or trade-distorting activities of state trading enterprises.-- (A) In general.--The United States shall negotiate the elimination of the exclusive right of state trading enterprises to import agricultural products in the case of members of the WTO and shall negotiate the elimination of the ability of state trading enterprises to use their exclusive authority over the export of agricultural products to distort trade and international prices.
Specific reforms.--The United States shall negotiate the following specific reforms with respect to the activities of state trading enterprises: (i) Ensure that Australia adheres to its commitment to end the export monopoly of the Australia Wheat Board no later than January 1, 1999.
Ensure that Canada eliminates the discretionary pricing practices of the Canadian Wheat Board.
Elimination of unjustified sanitary and phytosanitary restrictions on imports of united states agricultural products.--The United States shall negotiate the elimination of the following sanitary and phytosanitary restrictions on imports of United States agricultural products to the extent that the restrictions are inconsistent with the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures: (A) Australia's quarantine and health restrictions on imports of livestock and poultry.
Australia's prohibition on poultry imports in the absence of WTO-required risk assessments.
Australia's ban on cooked pork.
Australia's requirement that most feed grains be steam-treated or processed in an alternative satisfactory manner at the port of entry.
Chile's refusal to permit United States beef in consumer cuts to enter the market without being graded to Chilean standards.
Egypt's refusal to adhere to the standard international practice of allowing producers to determine the shelf life of their product.
The European Union's failure to require labeling only for health or safety reasons.
The failure of the European Union's Specified Risk Material regulations to recognize regional disease differences in animal disease status and to account for available scientific information and advice relating to the control of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and other transmissible spongiform encephalopathies in products of animal origin.
The failure of the European Union to implement the requirements of the WTO with respect to the European Union's ban on growth promoting hormones in meat production.
The European Union's lengthy and unpredictable approval process for agricultural products that contain genetically modified organisms.
Greece's ban on the import of United States wheat.
India's sanitary and phytosanitary restrictions on imports of United States wheat.
Israel's ban on imports of non-kosher meat and meat products.
South Korea's excessive labeling requirements.
South Korea's failure to base its standards and testing procedures on scientific risk assessment.
Poland's zero tolerance policy on weed seeds.
Turkey's ban on cattle and beef imports.
ACCESSION OF COUNTRIES WITH STATE TRADING ENTERPRISES TO GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE AND WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION.
Section 1106 of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 (19 United States Code 2905) is amended-- (1) by striking ``major foreign country'' each place it appears and inserting ``foreign country''; (2) in subsection (a), by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows: ``(1) whether state trading enterprises produce or procure a significant share of-- ``(A) the goods exported from such foreign country; ``(B) the goods imported into such foreign country; or ``(C) the goods produced domestically in such foreign country; and''; and (3) in subsection (b)(2)(A)-- (A) by amending clause (i) to read as follows: ``(i) will make purchases and sales in international trade based solely on commercial considerations (including price, quality, availability, marketability, and transportation), and''; and (B) in clause (ii), by striking ``, in accordance with customary practice,''.
ACCESSION OF CHINA TO THE WTO.
The United States shall not agree to the accession of the People's Republic of China to the WTO until the President certifies to Congress the following: (1) The People's Republic of China evenly applies phytosanitary and veterinary import quarantine standards that are based upon modern laboratory techniques.
The People's Republic of China agrees to eliminate the restrictive import licensing requirements it imposes on pork products.
The People's Republic of China agrees to permit the unrestricted importation of meat products.
THE ACCESSION OF RUSSIA TO THE WTO.
The United States shall not agree to the accession of Russia to the WTO until the President certifies to Congress the following: (1) Russia agrees to change the Russian Veterinary Department requirements in a manner that brings the requirements into conformity with the WTO's Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
In particular the requirements must be more transparent and based on sound science.
Russia agrees to change other sanitary and phytosanitary requirements that violate the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, especially the requirements governing the import of planting seeds and meat products.