This Act may be cited as the ``Line Item Veto Act''.
LINE ITEM VETO AUTHORITY.
In General.--Notwithstanding the provisions of part B of title X of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974, and subject to the provisions of this section, the President may rescind all or part of any discretionary budget authority or veto any targeted tax benefit which is subject to the terms of this Act if the President-- (1) determines that-- (A) such rescission or veto would help reduce the Federal budget deficit; (B) such rescission or veto will not impair any essential Government functions; and (C) such rescission or veto will not harm the national interest; and (2) notifies the Congress of such rescission or veto by a special message not later than twenty calendar days (not including Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays) after the date of enactment of a regular or supplemental appropriation Act or a joint resolution making continuing appropriations providing such budget authority or a revenue Act containing a targeted tax benefit.
The President shall submit a separate rescission message for each appropriation Act and for each revenue Act under this paragraph.
LINE ITEM VETO EFFECTIVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED.
(1) Any amount of budget authority rescinded under this Act as set forth in a special message by the President shall be deemed canceled unless, during the period described in subsection (b), a rescission/receipts disapproval bill making available all of the amount rescinded is enacted into law.
Any provision of law vetoed under this Act as set forth in a special message from the President shall be deemed repealed unless, during the period described in subsection (b), a rescission/receipts disapproval bill restoring that provision is enacted into law.
The period referred to in subsection (a) is-- (1) a congressional review period of twenty calendar days of session during which Congress must complete action on the rescission/receipts disapproval bill and present such bill to the President for approval or disapproval; (2) after the period provided in paragraph (1), an additional ten days (not including Sundays) during which the President may exercise his authority to sign or veto the rescission/receipts disapproval bill; and (3) if the President vetoes the rescission/receipts disapproval bill during the period provided in paragraph (2), an additional five calendar days of session after the date of the veto.
If a special message is transmitted by the President under this Act and the last session of the Congress adjourns sine die before the expiration of the period described in subsection (b), the rescission or veto, as the case may be, shall not take effect.
The message shall be deemed to have been retransmitted on the first day of the succeeding Congress and the review period referred to in subsection (b) (with respect to such message) shall run beginning after such first day.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``rescission/receipts disapproval bill'' means a bill or joint resolution which-- (A) only disapproves a rescission of discretionary budget authority, in whole, rescinded, or (B) only disapproves a veto of any targeted tax benefit, in a special message transmitted by the President under this Act.
The term ``calendar days of session'' shall mean only those days on which both Houses of Congress are in session.
The term ``targeted tax benefit'' means any provision of a revenue Act which the President determines would provide a Federal tax benefit to five or fewer taxpayers.
CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF LINE ITEM VETOES.
Presidential Special Message.--Whenever the President rescinds any budget authority as provided in this Act or vetoes any provision of law as provided in this Act, the President shall transmit to both Houses of Congress a special message specifying-- (1) the amount of budget authority rescinded or the provision vetoed; (2) any account, department, or establishment of the Government to which such budget authority is available for obligation, and the specific project or governmental functions involved; (3) the reasons and justifications for the determination to rescind budget authority or veto any provision pursuant to this Act; (4) to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal, economic, and budgetary effect of the rescission or veto; and (5) all actions, circumstances, and considerations relating to or bearing upon the rescission or veto and the decision to effect the rescission or veto, and to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated effect of the rescission upon the objects, purposes, and programs for which the budget authority is provided.
Transmission of Messages to House and Senate.-- (1) Each special message transmitted under this Act shall be transmitted to the House of Representatives and the Senate on the same day, and shall be delivered to the Clerk of the House of Representatives if the House is not in session, and to the Secretary of the Senate if the Senate is not in session.
Each special message so transmitted shall be referred to the appropriate committees of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
Each such message shall be printed as a document of each House.
Any special message transmitted under this Act shall be printed in the first issue of the Federal Register published after such transmittal.
Referral of Rescission/Receipts Disapproval Bills.--Any rescission/receipts disapproval bill introduced with respect to a special message shall be referred to the appropriate committees of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be.
Consideration in the Senate.-- (1) An rescission/receipts disapproval bill received in the Senate from the House shall be considered in the Senate pursuant to the provision of this Act.
Debate in the Senate on any rescission/receipts disapproval bill and debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than ten hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Debate in the Senate on any debatable motions or appeal in connection with such bill shall be limited to one hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by the mover and the manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from the time under their control on the passage of the bill, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
A motion to further limit debate is not debatable.
A motion to recommit (except a motion to recommit with instructions to report back within a specified number of days not to exceed one, not counting any day on which the Senate is not in session) is not in order.
Points of Order.-- (1) It shall not be in order in the Senate or the House of Representatives to consider any rescission/receipts disapproval bill that relates to any matter other than the rescission of budget authority or veto of the provision of the law transmitted by the President under this Act.
It shall not be in order in the Senate or the House of Representatives to consider any amendment to a rescission/ receipts disapproval bill.
Paragraphs (1) and (2) may be waived or suspended in the Senate only by a vote of three-fifths of the members duly chosen and sworn.