This Act may be cited as the ``Welfare to Work Act of 1994''.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the lack of entry level jobs which lead to permanent gainful employment is a significant impediment to the ability of welfare recipients to enter the workforce; (2) even the healthiest economy would be hard-pressed to create the requisite number of entry level jobs necessary to provide permanent employment to a significant percentage of AFDC recipients; (3) funds which are currently spent for AFDC payments would have greater economic value if exchanged for work; (4) ``make work'' government workfare programs to require work to exchange for AFDC payments are no substitute for experience in the private sector, which develops valuable skills and can lead to permanent, gainful employment; and (5) in order to break the cycle of welfare, maximize the economic value of AFDC payments by exchanging them for work, provide AFDC recipients with a pathway to permanent, gainful employment, and support the efforts to business to hire AFDC recipients, a one-year tax credit should be extended to businesses for wages paid to employees whose employment results in a termination of AFDC eligibility.
REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR HIRING AFDC RECIPIENTS.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
EMPLOYMENT OF AFDC RECIPIENTS.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(1) 50 percent of qualified first-year wages to the extent such wages do not exceed $6,000, plus ``(2) 25 percent of such wages to the extent such wages exceed $6,000 but do not exceed $12,000.
Qualified First-Year Wages.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified first-year wages' means, with respect to any individual, qualified wages attributable to services rendered during the 1-year period beginning with the day the individual begins work for the employer.
Limitation if credit allowed to other employer.--The 1-year period referred to in paragraph (1) shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the aggregate of the prior periods the individual rendered services for other employers to the extent the wages for such periods were taken into account as qualified first-year wages by any other employer and such periods exceeded 12 months in the aggregate.
Qualified wages.--The term `qualified wages' means wages paid or incurred by the employer during the taxable year to qualified former AFDC recipients.
Wages.--Except as provided in subsection (d)(4), the term `wages' has the meaning given such term by section 51(d) (determined without regard to paragraph (4) thereof).
Qualified Former AFDC Recipient.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified former AFDC recipient' means any individual if such individual is certified by the designated local agency (as defined in section 51(d)(15))-- ``(1) as being a member of a family with respect to which benefits were being paid under a State plan approved under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act immediately before such individual's employment with the employer, and ``(2) whose wages from the employer are sufficient to render such family ineligible for such benefits.
Such term shall not include any individual who is a member of a targeted group (as defined in section 51(d)).
Prohibition on Replacing Existing Workers For Purposes of Obtaining Credit.--No credit shall be allowed by this section for wages paid to a qualified former AFDC recipient who replaces an employee whose performance is satisfactory and who is terminated without cause.
Certain Definitions and Special Rules To Apply.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (d)(16), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), and (k) of section 51, and section 52, shall apply for purposes of this section.''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (a) of section 280C of such Code (relating to certain expenses for which credits allowable) is amended by inserting ``35(a),'' before ``45(a)''.
Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``or from section 35 of such Code''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new item: ``Sec.
Employment of AFDC recipients.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to individuals who begin work for the employer after the date of the enactment of this Act.