This Act may be cited as the ``Court of Federal Claims Administration Act of 1994''.
Section 172(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: ``If a judge is not reappointed, such judge may continue in office until a successor is appointed and takes office.''.
SERVICE ON TERRITORIAL COURTS.
Section 174 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(c) Upon request by or on behalf of a territorial court and with the concurrence of the chief judge of the Court of Federal Claims and the chief judge of the judicial circuit involved based upon a finding of need, judges of the Court of Federal Claims shall have authority to conduct proceedings in the district courts of territories to the same extent as duly appointed judges of those courts.''.
RESIDENCE OF RETIRED JUDGES.
Section 175 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(c) Retired judges of the Court of Federal Claims are not subject to restrictions as to residence.
The place where a retired judge maintains the actual abode in which such judge customarily lives shall be deemed to be the judge's official duty station for the purposes of section 456 of this title.''.
Section 331 of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting in the first sentence of the first undesignated paragraph ``the chief judge of the United States Court of Federal Claims,'' after ``Court of International Trade,''; (2) by inserting in the first sentence of the third undesignated paragraph ``the chief judge of the United States Court of Federal Claims,'' after ``the chief judge of the Court of International Trade,''; and (3) by inserting in the first sentence of the third undesignated paragraph ``or United States Court of Federal Claims,'' after ``any other judge of the Court of International Trade,''.
COURT OF FEDERAL CLAIMS JUDICIAL CONFERENCE.
In General.--Chapter 15 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
Judicial Conference of the Court of Federal Claims ``(a) The chief judge of the Court of Federal Claims is authorized to summon annually the judges of such court to a judicial conference, at a time and place that such chief judge designates, for the purpose of considering the business of such court and improvements in the administration of justice in such court.
The Court of Federal Claims shall provide by its rules or by general order for representation and active participation at such conference by members of the bar.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--The table of sections of chapter 15 is amended by adding the following new item: ``336.
Judicial Conference of the Court of Federal Claims.''.
RECALL OF JUDGES ON DISABILITY STATUS.
Section 797(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(2) Any judge of the Court of Federal Claims receiving an annuity pursuant to section 178(c) of this title (relating to disability) who, in the estimation of the chief judge, has recovered sufficiently to render judicial service, shall be known and designated as a senior judge and may perform duties as a judge when recalled pursuant to subsection (b) of this section.''.
Section 1491(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by inserting ``for monetary relief'' after ``any claim against the United States''; and (B) by striking out ``or for liquidated or unliquidated damages''; (2) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by inserting ``(A) In any case within its jurisdiction, the Court of Federal Claims shall have the power to grant injunctive and declaratory relief when appropriate.''
after ``(2)''; (B) by striking out the last sentence; and (C) by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(B) The Court of Federal Claims shall have jurisdiction to render judgment upon any claim by or against, or dispute with, a contractor arising under section 10(a)(1) of the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 United States Code 609(a)(1)), including a dispute concerning termination of a contract, rights in tangible or intangible property, compliance with cost accounting standards, and other nonmonetary disputes on which a decision of the contracting officer has been issued under section 6 of that Act (41 United States Code 605).
''; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs: ``(4) In cases otherwise within its jurisdiction, the Court of Federal Claims shall also have ancillary jurisdiction, concurrent with the courts designated in section 1346(b) of this title, to render judgment upon any related tort claim authorized by section 2674 of this title.
In cases within the jurisdiction of the Court of Federal Claims which constitute judicial review of agency action, the provisions of section 706 of title 5 shall apply.''.
Section 178 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(m) For the purposes of applying section 3121(i)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and section 209(h) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 409(h)), the annuity of a Court of Federal Claims judge on senior status after age 65 shall be deemed to be an amount paid under section 371(b) of this title for performing services under the provisions of section 294 of this title.''.
In General.--Chapter 7 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding after section 178 the following new section: ``Sec.
Court of Federal Claims judges as officers of the United States ``(a) For the purpose of applying the provisions of title 5, a judge of the United States Court of Federal Claims shall be deemed to be an ``officer'' as defined under section 2104(a) of title 5.
For the purpose of applying chapter 87 of title 5, a judge of the United States Court of Federal Claims who is retired under section 178 of this title shall be deemed to be a judge of the United States as defined under section 8701(a)(5)(ii) of title 5.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 7 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``179.
Court of Federal Claims judges as officers of the United States.''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.