This Act may be cited as ``The Separate Enrollment and Line Item Veto Act of 1999''.
Appropriations Legislation.-- (1) In general.--The Committee on Appropriations of either the House or the Senate shall not report an appropriation measure that fails to contain such level of detail on the allocation of an item of appropriation proposed by that House as is set forth in the committee report accompanying such bill.
Point of order.--If an appropriation measure is reported to the House or Senate that fails to contain the level of detail on the allocation of an item of appropriation as required in paragraph (1), it shall not be in order in that House to consider such measure.
If a point of order under this paragraph is sustained, the measure shall be recommitted to the Committee on Appropriations of that House.
Authorization Legislation.-- (1) In general.--A committee of either the House or the Senate shall not report an authorization measure that contains new direct spending or new targeted tax benefits unless such measure presents each new direct spending or new targeted tax benefit as a separate item and the accompanying committee report for that measure shall contain such level of detail as is necessary to clearly identify the allocation of new direct spending or new targeted tax benefits.
Point of order.--If an authorization measure is reported to the House or Senate that fails to comply with paragraph (1), it shall not be in order in that House to consider such measure.
If a point of order under this paragraph is sustained, the measure shall be recommitted to the committee of jurisdiction of that House.
Conference Reports.-- (1) Appropriations.--A committee of conference to which is committed an appropriations measure shall not file a conference report in either House that fails to contain the level of detail on the allocation of an item of appropriation as is set forth in the statement of managers accompanying that report.
Authorizations.--A committee of conference to which is committed an authorization measure shall not file a conference report in either House unless such measure presents each direct spending or targeted tax benefit as a separate item and the statement of managers accompanying that report clearly identifies each such item.
Point of order.--If a conference report is presented to the House or Senate that fails to comply with either paragraph (1) or (2), it shall not be in order in that House to consider such conference report.
If a point of order under this paragraph is sustained in the House to first consider the conference report, the measure shall be deemed recommitted to the committee of conference.
Any provision of section 2 may be waived or suspended in the House or Senate only by an affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members of that House duly chosen and sworn.
An affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members duly chosen and sworn shall be required to sustain an appeal of the ruling of the Chair on a point of order raised under that section.
In General.-- (1) Enrollment.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when any appropriation or authorization measure first passes both Houses of Congress in the same form, the Secretary of the Senate (in the case of a measure originating in the Senate) or the Clerk of the House of Representatives (in the case of a measure originating in the House of Representatives) shall disaggregate the items as referenced in section 5(4) and assign each item a new bill number.
After disaggregation each item shall be treated as a separate bill to be considered under the following subsections.
The remainder of the bill not so disaggregated shall constitute a separate bill and shall be considered with the other disaggregated bills pursuant to subsection (b).
Form.--A bill that is required to be disaggregated into separate bills pursuant to paragraph (1)-- (A) shall be disaggregated without substantive revision; and (B) shall bear the designation of the measure of which it was an item prior to such disaggregation, together with such other designation as may be necessary to distinguish such measure from other measures disaggregated pursuant to paragraph (1) with respect to the same measure.
Procedure.--The new bills resulting from the disaggregation described in subsection (a)(1) shall be immediately placed on the appropriate calendar in the House of origination, and upon passage, placed on the appropriate calendar in the other House.
They shall be the next order of business in each House and they shall be considered and voted on en bloc and shall not be subject to amendment.
A motion to proceed to the bills shall be nondebatable.
Debate in the House of Representatives or the Senate on the bill shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, which shall be divided equally between the majority leader and the minority leader.
A motion further to limit debate is not debatable.
A motion to recommit the bills is not in order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the bills are agreed to or disagreed to.
In this Act: (1) Appropriation measure.--The term ``appropriation measure'' means any general or special appropriation bill or any bill or joint resolution making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations.
Authorization measure.--The term ``authorization measure'' means any measure other than an appropriations measure that contains a provision providing direct spending or targeted tax benefits.
Direct spending.--The term ``direct spending'' shall have the same meaning given to such term in section 250(c)(8) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
Item.--The term ``item'' means-- (A) with respect to an appropriations measure-- (i) any numbered section, (ii) any unnumbered paragraph, or (iii) any allocation or suballocation of an appropriation, made in compliance with section 2(a), contained in a numbered section or an unnumbered paragraph but shall not include a provision which does not appropriate funds, direct the President to expend funds for any specific project, or create an express or implied obligation to expend funds and-- (I) rescinds or cancels existing budget authority; (II) only limits, conditions, or otherwise restricts the President's authority to spend otherwise appropriated funds; or (III) conditions on an item of appropriation not involving a positive allocation of funds by explicitly prohibiting the use of any funds; and (B) with respect to an authorization measure-- (i) any numbered section, or (ii) any unnumbered paragraph, that contains new direct spending or a new targeted tax benefit presented and identified in conformance with section 2(b).
The term ``targeted tax benefit'' means any provision-- (A) estimated by the Joint Committee on Taxation as losing revenue for any one of the three following periods-- (i) the first fiscal year covered by the most recently adopted concurrent resolution on the budget; (ii) the period of the 5 fiscal years covered by the most recently adopted concurrent resolution on the budget; or (iii) the period of the 5 fiscal years following the first 5 years covered by the most recently adopted concurrent resolution on the budget; and (B) having the practical effect of providing more favorable tax treatment to a particular taxpayer or limited group of taxpayers when compared with other similarly situated taxpayers.
Expedited Review.-- (1) Member of congress.--Any Member of Congress may bring an action, in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, for declaratory judgment and injunctive relief on the ground that a provision of this Act violates the Constitution.
Intervention by houses.--A copy of any complaint in an action brought under paragraph (1) shall be promptly delivered to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives, and each House of Congress shall have the right to intervene in such action.
Panel.--Any action brought under paragraph (1) shall be heard and determined by a three-judge court in accordance with section 2284 of title 28, United States Code.
Authority of houses.--Nothing in this section or in any other law shall infringe upon the right of the House of Representatives or the Senate to intervene in an action brought under paragraph (1) without the necessity of adopting a resolution to authorize such intervention.
Appeal to Supreme Court.--Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, any order of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia which is issued pursuant to an action brought under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) shall be reviewable by appeal directly to the Supreme Court of the United States.
Any such appeal shall be taken by a notice of appeal filed within 10 days after such order is entered; and the jurisdictional statement shall be filed within 30 days after such order is entered.
No stay of an order issued pursuant to an action brought under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) shall be issued by a single Justice of the Supreme Court.
Expedited Consideration.--It shall be the duty of the District Court for the District of Columbia and the Supreme Court of the United States to advance on the docket and to expedite to the greatest possible extent the disposition of any matter brought under subsection (a).
Severability.--If any provision of this Act, or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act and the application of the provisions of such Act to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.
TREATMENT OF EMERGENCY SPENDING.
Emergency Appropriations.--Section 251(b)(2)(D)(i) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``However, OMB shall not adjust any discretionary spending limit under this clause for any statute that designates appropriations as emergency requirements if that statute contains an appropriation for any other matter, event, or occurrence, but that statute may contain rescissions of budget authority.''.
Emergency Legislation.--Section 252(e) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``However, OMB shall not designate any such amounts of new budget authority, outlays, or receipts as emergency requirements in the report required under subsection (d) if that statute contains any other provisions that are not so designated, but that statute may contain provisions that reduce direct spending.''.
New Point of Order.--Part A of title IV of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``point of order regarding emergencies ``Sec.
It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or joint resolution, or amendment thereto or conference report thereon, containing an emergency designation for purposes of section 251(b)(2)(D) or 252(e) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 if it also provides an appropriation or direct spending for any other item or contains any other matter, but that bill or joint resolution, amendment, or conference report may contain rescissions of budget authority or reductions of direct spending, or that amendment may reduce for that emergency.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 406 the following new item: ``Sec.
Point of order regarding emergencies.''.
SAVINGS FROM RESCISSION BILLS USED FOR DEFICIT REDUCTION.
In General.--Not later than 45 days of continuous session after the President vetoes an appropriations measure or an authorization measure, the President shall-- (1) with respect to appropriations measures, reduce the discretionary spending limits under section 601 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 for the budget year and each outyear by the amount by which the measure would have increased the deficit in each respective year; and (2) with respect to a repeal of direct spending, or a targeted tax benefit, reduce the balances for the budget year and each outyear under section 252(b) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 by the amount by which the measure would have increased the deficit in each respective year.
Exceptions.-- (1) In general.--This section shall not apply if the vetoed appropriations measure or authorization measure becomes law, over the objections of the President, before the President orders the reduction required by subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2).
Restoration of limits.--If the vetoed appropriations measure or authorization measure becomes law, over the objections of the President, after the President has ordered the reductions required by subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2), then the President shall restore the discretionary spending limits under section 601 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 or the balances under section 252(b) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 to reflect the positions existing before the reduction ordered by the President in compliance with subsection (a).
EVALUATION AND SUNSET OF TAX EXPENDITURES.
Legislation for Sunsetting Tax Expenditures.--The President shall submit legislation for the periodic review, reauthorization, and sunset of tax expenditures with his fiscal year 2000 budget.
Budget Contents and Submission to Congress.--Section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding after paragraph (30) the following: ``(31) beginning with fiscal year 2002, a Federal Government performance plan for measuring the overall effectiveness of tax expenditures, including a schedule for periodically assessing the effects of specific tax expenditures in achieving performance goals.''.
Pilot Projects.--Section 1118(c) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by-- (1) striking ``and'' after the semicolon in paragraph (2); (2) redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4); and (3) adding after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) describe the framework to be utilized by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Comptroller General of the United States, and the Joint Committee on Taxation, for undertaking periodic analyses of the effects of tax expenditures in achieving performance goals and the relationship between tax expenditures and spending programs; and''.
Congressional Budget Act.--Part A of title IV of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``tax expenditures ``Sec.
It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report that contains a tax expenditure unless the bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report provides that the tax expenditure will terminate not later than 10 years after the date of enactment of the tax expenditure.''.
If any provision of this Act, or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act and the application of the provisions of such Act to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.
The provisions of this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall apply to measures passed by the Congress beginning with the date of the enactment of this Act and ending on September 30, 2004.