PILOT PROGRAM ON ASSISTING VETERANS ORGANIZATIONS IN FACILITATING COMMUNITY REINTEGRATION OF VETERANS.
Program Required.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall carry out a pilot program to demonstrate and assess the feasibility and advisability of delivering community reintegration support and services to veterans by assisting veterans organizations in developing and promoting peer support programs for veterans.
Designation.--The pilot program required by paragraph (1) shall be known as the ``Heroes Helping Heroes Program''.
Duration of Program.--The pilot program shall be carried out during the three-year period beginning on October 1, 2007.
Selection of Pilot Program Participants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall select not more than 20 eligible entities to participate in the pilot program.
Application.--Each eligible entity seeking to participate in the pilot program shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary shall require.
Selection.--The Secretary shall select participants in the pilot program from among the applicants under paragraph (1) that the Secretary determines-- (A)(i) have existing peer support programs that can be expanded or enhanced, and resources, for the delivery of community reintegration support and services to veterans (including mentoring programs, self-help groups, and Internet and other electronic- based peer support resources) that are suitable for the pilot program; or (ii) have the capacity, including the skill and resources necessary, to develop and maintain new peer support programs for the delivery of community reintegration support and services (including mentoring programs, self-help groups, and Internet and other electronic-based peer support resources) that are suitable for the pilot program; and (B) have a plan to continue such peer support programs after the pilot program ends.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants to pilot program participants to develop and promote peer support programs that deliver community reintegration support and services for veterans.
Amount.--The Secretary shall ensure that the average amount of the grant awarded under paragraph (1) to a pilot program participant is not more than $300,000 and not less than $100,000 per fiscal year.
Matching funds.--A recipient of a grant under paragraph (1) shall contribute towards the development and promotion of peer support programs that deliver community reintegration support and services to veterans an amount equal to not less than ten percent of the grant awarded to such recipient.
Duration.--The duration of any grant awarded under paragraph (1) may not exceed three years.
Use of Funds.--A grant awarded to a pilot program participant pursuant to subsection (d) shall be used by the pilot program participant for costs and expenses connected with the development and promotion of peer support programs that deliver community reintegration support and services to veterans, including costs and expenses of the following: (1) Program staff or a coordinator of volunteers, but not more than 50 percent of such grant award may be used for such purpose in any fiscal year of such pilot program.
Consultation services, but not more than 20 percent of such grant award may be used for such purpose in any fiscal year of such pilot program.
Program operations, including costs and expenses relating to the following: (A) Advertising and recruiting.
Training of volunteers, veterans, and staff.
Incentives, such as food and awards.
Overhead expenses, but not more than ten percent of such grant award may be used for such purposes.
Technical Assistance.--In addition to the award of grants under subsection (d), the Secretary shall provide technical assistance to pilot program participants to assist them in developing and promoting peer support programs that deliver community reintegration support and services to veterans.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means-- (A) a veterans service organization; (B) a not-for-profit organization-- (i) the primary mission of which is to assist veterans; (ii) that has been in continuous operation for at least 12 months; and (iii) is not a veterans service organization; or (C) a partnership between an organization described in subparagraph (A) or (B) and an organization that is not described in subparagraph (A) or (B).
Pilot program participant.--The term ``pilot program participant'' means an eligible entity that is selected by the Secretary, in accordance with subsection (c), to participate in the pilot program under this section.
Veterans service organization.--The term ``veterans service organization'' means any organization recognized by the Secretary for the representation of veterans under section 5902 of title 38, United States Code.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Veterans Affairs to carry out this section, $4,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2008, 2009, and 2010.