This Act may be cited as the ``Community Safety and Empowerment Act of 1993''.
Establishment.--There is established in the executive office of the President a Federal Coordinating Council on Community Safety and Empowerment (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Federal Coordinating Council'') in the Executive Office of the President composed of the following members: (1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The Secretary of Education.
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
The Secretary of Labor.
The Attorney General of the United States.
The President shall appoint the chairman of the Federal Coordinating Council.
Duties.--The Council shall-- (1) promulgate rules establishing standards and procedures for receiving grants under section 3; (2) make grants under section 3; and (3) conduct annual reviews under section 6.
Staff.--The Council shall hire sufficient staff in accordance with title 5, United States Code.
AUTHORITY TO MAKE GRANTS.
Purposes.--The Federal Coordinating Council shall make grants to public and nonprofit private entities to carry out 1 or more of the following projects to improve the health, education, and safety of the residents of economically distressed communities: (1) Projects to prevent gangs and to combat the influence gangs have on the youth in the community.
Projects to assist first-time juvenile offenders to avoid future offenses.
Projects to prevent other forms of juvenile delinquency.
Projects to prevent the abuse of alcohol and other drugs.
Projects to provide child care for the children of parents who are attending school, or would like to attend school.
Physical fitness, exercise, sports, and preventative health care projects for youth.
Projects to promote community service, community action, and problem solving, and a sense of civic responsibility among youth.
Projects to provide parents with information about the social, psychological, and physical development of their children and with non-financial support for their roles in promoting the positive development of their children.
Projects to help youth enjoy and appreciate learning, particularly projects that emphasize writing, reading, mathematics, science, and humanities.
Projects that prepare at-risk youth for adulthood, including continuing education, completing high school, employment, parenthood, and civic participation.
Projects to prevent or remedy neglect, abuse, or exploitation of youth and adults unable to protect their own interests.
Projects to preserve, rehabilitate, or reunite families, particularly projects that emphasize fatherhood and reunite fathers with children.
Projects to assist residents in achieving or maintaining economic self-sufficiency, including entrepreneurism.
Distribution of Grant.--A grant made under this section shall be distributed to a grantee in 1 or more annual installments of not less than $25,000 each during a period not to exceed 3 years.
Agreement.--The Federal Coordinating Council may make a grant under section 3 only if the applicant involved agrees to make available (either directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward the cost of the project for which the grant is requested.
The amount of the non-Federal contributions shall be not less than-- (1) 25 percent of the cost of the project for the 1st year in which all or part of the grant is distributed; and (2) 50 percent of the cost of the project in any subsequent year in which any part of the grant is distributed.
Exception.--The Federal Coordinating Council may waive the matching requirements for applicants who meet certain criteria established by the Council.
Types of Contributions.--The non-Federal contributions required in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including buildings, equipment, or services, except that services assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal Government may not be included in determining the amount of non-Federal contributions.
To be eligible to receive a grant under section 3, a public entity or a nonprofit private entity shall submit to the Federal Coordinating Council an application that contains-- (1) information demonstrating that the applicant has used the resources in the community in planning the project for which the grant is requested; (2) information demonstrating that the project is supported by individuals or organizations in the community that are not directly involved with the project, which may include universities, medical facilities, and other private and public entities; (3) an assurance that the applicant will use other resources in the community in carrying out the project, which may include local businesses, universities, medical facilities, and other private and public entities; and (4) such other information and assurances as the Federal Coordinating Council may require by rule.
Content.--After each year in which any part of a grant made under section 3 is distributed, the Federal Coordinating Council may conduct a review of the project for which the grant is made.
The review shall include an assessment of whether the grantee is complying with the assurances contained in the application for the grant.
Consequences of Failure to Comply.--If the Federal Coordinating Council finds that a grantee is not complying with the assurances contained in the application for the grant, the Federal Coordinating Council shall suspend distribution of the grant until the grantee provides sufficient documentation to satisfy the Federal Coordinating Council that it will comply with the assurances contained in the application.
The grant shall be terminated if the grantee does not provide the documentation within 1 year after the grant is suspended.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Economically distressed community.--The term ``economically distressed community'' means a community-- (A) in which a high percentage of residents are members of low-income families with children; and (B) in which there is pervasive poverty, unemployment, and general economic distress.
Council.--The term the ``Council'' means the Federal Coordinating Council on Community Safety and Empowerment.
There is authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for each of 3 fiscal years beginning with fiscal year 1994 to carry out this Act.