Title III of the Elementary and Secondary Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6001 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART F--GETTING OUR GIRLS READY FOR THE 21ST CENTURY (GO GIRL) ``SEC.
``Congress finds the following: ``(1) Women have historically been underrepresented in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology occupations.
Female students take fewer high-level mathematics and science courses in high school than male students.
Female students take far fewer advanced computer classes than male students take and tend to take only basic data entry and word processing classes.
Female students earn fewer baccalaureate, masters, and doctoral degrees in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology than male students.
Early career exploration is key to choosing a career.
Teachers' attitudes, methods of teaching, and classroom atmosphere affect female student's interest in nontraditional fields.
Stereotypes about appropriate careers for females, a lack of female role models, and a lack of basic career information significantly deters girls' interest in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology careers.
Females consistently rate themselves significantly lower than males in computer ability.
In the coming years, 65 percent of the economy will be based on information-technology.
Limited access is a hurdle faced by females seeking jobs in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology.
Common recruitment and hiring practices make extensive use of traditional networks that often overlook females.
In General.--From funds provided under section 3605, the Secretary is authorized to provide grants to and enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with local educational agencies on behalf of elementary and secondary schools to encourage the ongoing interest of girls in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology and to prepare girls to pursue undergraduate and graduate degrees and careers in science, mathematics, engineering, or technology.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant, enter into a contract, or cooperative agreement under this part, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--The application referred to in paragraph (1) shall contain, at a minimum, the following: ``(A) A specific program description, including the content of the program and the research and models used to design the program.
A description of the collaboration between elementary and secondary schools to fulfill goals of the program.
An explanation regarding the recruitment and selection of participants.
A description of the instructional and motivational activities planned to be used.
Selection.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this part shall select elementary schools to provide services that-- ``(1) encourage girls in grades 4 through 8 to enjoy and pursue studies in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology; ``(2) acquaint girls in grades 4 through 8 with careers in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology; and ``(3) educate the parents of girls in grades 4 through 8 about the difficulties faced by girls to maintain an interest and desire to achieve in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology and enlist the help of the parents in overcoming these difficulties.
Services.--Services provided under this section shall include one or more of the following: ``(1) Tutoring in reading, science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Mentoring relationships, both in-person and through the Internet.
Paying the costs of female students and their teachers attending events and academic programs in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Providing after-school activities designed to encourage the interest of girls in grades 4 and higher in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Summer programs designed to encourage interest, and develop skills, in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Purchasing software designed for girls, or designed to encourage girls' interest in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Offering Field trips to locations that educate and encourage girls' interest in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Offering Field trips to locations that acquaint girls with careers in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Purchasing and disseminating information to parents of girls in grades 4 and higher that will help parents to encourage their daughters' interest in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Selection.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this part shall select secondary schools to provide services that-- ``(1) encourage girls in grades 9 and higher to major in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology of a institution of higher education; ``(2) provide academic advice and assistance in high school course selection; ``(3) encourage girls in grades 9 and higher to plan for careers in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology; and ``(4) educate the parents of girls in grades 9 and higher about the difficulties faced by girls to maintain an interest in and desire to, achieve in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology, and enlist the help of the parents in overcoming these difficulties.
Services.--Services provided under this section shall include one or more of the following: ``(1) Tutoring in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Mentoring relationships, both in-person and through the Internet.
Paying the costs of female students and their teachers attending events and academic programs in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Paying up to 50 percent of the cost of an internship in science, mathematics, engineering, or technology for female students.
Providing After-school activities designed to encourage the interest of girls in grades 9 and higher in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology, including the cost of that portion of a staff salary to supervise these activities.
Providing Summer programs designed to encourage interest, and develop skills, in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Purchasing software designed for girls, or designed to encourage girls' interest in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Offering Field trips to locations that educate and encourage girls' interest in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Offering Field trips to locations that acquaint girls with careers in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
Visiting institutions of higher education to acquaint girls with college-level programs in science, mathematics, engineering, or technology, and meeting with educators and female college students who will encourage them to pursue degrees in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.
``There are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years to carry out this part.