This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security Account Number Anti- Fraud Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to reduce the use of fraudulent social security documents for employment purposes.
SOCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNT NUMBER ANTI-FRAUD PROGRAM.
Section 205 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 405) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Verification of Employee Social Security Account Numbers ``(u)(1)(A) Not later than 10 years after the date of the enactment of the Social Security Account Number Anti-Fraud Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization and the Secretary of Labor, shall establish a program under which-- ``(i) each American employer, either by telephone through use of a toll-free telephone number or by other electronic device-- ``(I) shall transmit the social security account number and name of each new employee of the employer, and any other information concerning the employee that the Secretary requires by regulation, to the Secretary within 30 days after the commencement of employment of the employee; and ``(II) may transmit the social security account number and name of any employee of the employer to whom subclause (I) does not apply, and any other information concerning the employee that the Secretary requires by regulation, to the Secretary; and ``(ii) notwithstanding any provision of section 552a of title 5, United States Code, the Secretary shall, upon receiving the information transmitted under clause (i), instantaneously notify the employer that there is or is not a discrepancy concerning the information, by sending a communication to the same electronic device through which the information was transmitted to the Secretary.
(i) The Secretary shall give each employer a verification number for each employee social security account number that the employer transmits under the program established under this paragraph.
The Secretary shall maintain, for at least the amount of time during which prosecution for crimes relating to fraudulent use of a social security account number would be allowable under applicable statutes of limitations, records of all contacts that occur under subparagraph (A) or (D) between the Secretary and an employer.
The Secretary shall establish guidelines to describe the characteristics that constitute a discrepancy concerning a social security account number transmitted to the Secretary under the program established under this paragraph.
Under the guidelines, a discrepancy concerning a social security account number shall be indicated if any of the following factors is present regarding the number: ``(i) An invalid social security account number.
A social security account number submitted for verification under the program with a name that does not belong to the correct holder of the social security account number.
Unusually frequent use of a social security account number.
Use of a social security account number in geographically distant locations within a relatively short period of time.
Any other factor that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
If a discrepancy concerning the social security account number of an employee is indicated under the program established under this paragraph-- ``(i) the Secretary shall notify the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, within 24 hours after the discrepancy is indicated, of-- ``(I) the fact that a discrepancy has been indicated regarding the employee; and ``(II) the nature of the discrepancy; ``(ii) the Secretary may not, pursuant to this subsection, notify the employer of the nature of the discrepancy; ``(iii) an employer notified of the discrepancy under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall notify the employee that a discrepancy has been indicated within 14 days after the employer receives the notification; ``(iv) the employee shall contact an office of the Social Security Administration within 14 days after being notified of the discrepancy under clause (iii); ``(v) the Secretary shall notify the employee of the nature of the discrepancy, upon a written request by the employee or a request made by the employee in person at an office of the Social Security Administration; ``(vi) the Secretary shall notify the employee, the current employer of the employee, and the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, in writing, of the resolution or confirmation of the discrepancy, within 30 days after the employee contacts the Social Security Administration under clause (iv); ``(vii) the current employer of the employee shall reverify the social security account number through the program established under this paragraph within 10 days after the Secretary notifies the employer, under clause (vi), that the discrepancy has been resolved; and ``(viii) unless the Secretary notifies the employer, under clause (vi), that the discrepancy has been confirmed, the employer may not take any action to penalize the employee based on the discrepancy.
(i) The Secretary may not charge a fee to any employer or employee in connection with the utilization of the program established under this paragraph.
No employer may charge a fee to-- ``(I) an employee of the employer in connection with the utilization of the program; or ``(II) a job applicant in connection with, or anticipation of, utilization of the program.
The Secretary may by regulation exempt any employer from the obligation to use the program established under paragraph (1) regarding any employee whose employment with the employer includes only the performance of services described in subparagraph (B) or (C) of section 209(a)(6) for remuneration described in such subparagraph.
(A) Failure by an employer to comply with paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be considered to be a violation of section 274A(a)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Naturalization Act (8 United States Code 1324a(a)(1)(A)), for purposes of section 274A(e) of such Act, as modified by subparagraph (B).
For purposes of subparagraph (A), section 274A(e) of the Immigration and Naturalization Act (8 United States Code 1324a(e)) shall be applied by substituting the term `employee' for the term `unauthorized alien' in clause (i) of section 274A(e)(4)(A) of such Act, and for the term `alien' in clauses (ii) and (iii) of such section.
(A) Any person or business who knowingly and willfully requests or obtains any record, or information, from or under the program established under paragraph (1) under false pretenses shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine as provided in title 18, United States Code.
The penalties described in section 552a(i) of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to an activity that is subject to a penalty under subparagraph (A).
For purposes of this subsection: ``(A) The term `American employer' has the meaning given the term in section 210(e), as such section may from time to time be amended, except that the terms `State' and `United States' within such section shall have the meaning given the term `United States' in subparagraph (D) of this paragraph.
The term `employee' has the meaning given the term in section 210(j), as such section may from time to time be amended, and does not include a job applicant.
The term `new employee' means an employee who commences an employment more than 10 years after the date of the enactment of the Social Security Account Number Anti-Fraud Act.
The term `United States' has the meaning given the term in section 101(38) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as such section may from time to time be amended.''.
IMPLEMENTATION OF SOCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNT NUMBER ANTI-FRAUD PROGRAM.
Establishment of Program.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall implement the Social Security Account Number Anti-Fraud Program on a partial and interim basis, as provided in this section.
Initial Period.--The Secretary shall make the Social Security Account Number Anti-Fraud Program available for the 18-month period beginning 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act to each employer that participates in Phase II of the Telephone Verification System administered by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
If fewer than 200 of the employers agree to participate in the program, the Secretary may make the program available to additional employers in the States of California, Florida, Illinois, New York, and Texas until the program is available to 200 employers.
Report on Initial Implementation.--Not later than 15 months after the beginning of the 18-month period described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report that contains-- (1) an evaluation of the effectiveness of the Social Security Account Number Anti-Fraud Program as the program is implemented under subsections (a) and (b) of this section; and (2) a description of any cooperation between the Social Security Administration and the Immigration and Naturalization Service regarding the program.
5-Year Expansion.-- (1) Requirement regarding new employees.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the expiration of the 18-month period described in subsection (b), each employer in the States of California, Florida, Illinois, New York, and Texas shall use the Social Security Account Number Anti-Fraud Program to verify, within 30 days after the commencement of the employment of the employee, the social security account number of each new employee of the employer.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not be construed to require an employer to verify the social security account number of an employee if, under regulations issued under section 205(u)(2) of the Social Security Act (as added by this Act), the employer is not required to verify the social security account number of the employee.
Availability regarding other employees.--Not later than 5 years after the expiration of the 18-month period described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall make the Social Security Account Number Anti-Fraud Program available to each employer in the States of California, Florida, Illinois, New York, and Texas.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``employee'' has the meaning given the term in section 210(j) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 410(j)), as such section may from time to time be amended, and does not include a job applicant.
The term ``new employee'' means an employee who commences an employment more than 5 years after the expiration of the 18-month period described in subsection (b).
The term ``Social Security Account Number Anti-Fraud Program'' means the program established under subsection (u) of section 205 of the Social Security Act (as added by this Act), but does not include paragraph (1)(A)(i)(I) or (3) of such subsection.