This Act may be cited as the ``Historically Women's Public Colleges or Universities Historic Building Restoration and Preservation Act''.
In this Act: (1) Historically women's public college or university.--The term ``historically women's public college or university'' means a public institution of higher education created in the United States between 1836 and 1908 to provide industrial education for women, including the institutions listed in clauses (i) though (viii) of section 3(d)(2)(A).
Historic building or structure.--The term ``historic building or structure'' means a building or structure listed (or eligible to be listed) on the National Register of Historic Places, designated as a National Historic Landmark, or located within a designated historic district.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
PRESERVATION AND RESTORATION GRANTS FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AT HISTORICALLY WOMEN'S PUBLIC COLLEGES OR UNIVERSITIES.
Authority To Make Grants.-- (1) In general.--From amounts made available under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall award grants in accordance with this section to historically women's public colleges or universities for the preservation and restoration of historic buildings and structures on their campuses.
Source of funding.--Grants under paragraph (1) shall be awarded from amounts appropriated to carry out the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes) for fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Grant Conditions.--Grants made under subsection (a) shall be subject to the condition that the grantee agree, for the period of time specified by the Secretary, that-- (1) no alteration will be made in the property with respect to which the grant is made without the concurrence of the Secretary; and (2) reasonable public access to the property for which the grant is made will be permitted by the grantee for interpretive and educational purposes.
Matching Requirement for Buildings and Structures Listed on the National Register of Historic Places.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the Secretary may obligate funds made available under this section for a grant with respect to a building or structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, designated as a National Historic Landmark, or located within a designated historic district, only if the grantee agrees to provide for activities under the grant, from funds derived from non-Federal sources, an amount equal to 50 percent of the costs of the program to be funded under the grant with the Secretary providing 50 percent of such costs under the grant.
In-kind contributions.--In addition to cash outlays and payments, in-kind contributions of property or personnel services by non-Federal interests may be used for the non- Federal share of costs required by paragraph (1).
Funding Provisions.-- (1) Amounts to be made available.--Not more than $16,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006 may be made available under this section.
Allocations for fiscal year 2002.-- (A) In general.--Of the amounts made available under this section for fiscal year 2002, there shall be available only for grants under subsection (a) $2,000,000 for each of the following: (i) Mississippi University for Women in Colombus, Mississippi.
Georgia College and State University in Milledgeville, Georgia.
University of North Carolina in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Winthrop University in Rock Hill, South Carolina.
University of Montevallo in Montevallo, Alabama.
Texas Woman's University in Denton, Texas.
University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma in Chickasha, Oklahoma.
Wesleyan College in Macon, Georgia.
Less than $16,000,000 available.--If less than $16,000,000 is made available under this section for fiscal year 2002, then the amount made available to each of the institutions listed in subparagraph (A) shall be reduced by the same amount.
Allocations for fiscal years 2003-2006.--Any funds which are made available during fiscal years 2003 through 2006 under subsection (a)(2) shall be distributed by the Secretary in accordance with the provisions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2) to those grantees named in paragraph (2)(A) which remain eligible and desire to participate, on a uniform basis, in such fiscal years.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.