This Act may be cited as the ``Regulatory Review Sunshine Act of 1993''.
For purposes of this Act, the term-- (1) ``agency'' means an agency as defined under section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code, and section 552(f) of title 5, United States Code; (2) ``regulatory review'' means the evaluation, review, oversight, supervision, or coordination of agency rulemaking activity by a reviewing entity directed by the President or his designee to conduct such review on an ongoing basis; (3) ``reviewing entity'' means any agency, or other establishment in the executive branch of the Federal Government established by the President, which engages, in whole or in part in regulatory review; (4) ``review action'' means any action, including but not limited to a recommendation or direction, regarding an agency rulemaking activity taken by a reviewing entity; and (5) ``rulemaking activity'' means any activity involving a rulemaking as defined under section 551(5) of title 5, United States Code, and includes activity involving a schedule or plan for rulemaking, strategy statements, guidelines, policy manuals, grant and loan procedures, advance notices of proposed rulemaking, press releases and other documents announcing or implementing regulatory policy that affects the public.
DISCLOSURE BY A REVIEWING ENTITY.
Public Access.--A reviewing entity shall establish procedures, consistent with subsection (b), to provide public access to information concerning each agency rulemaking activity under its review.
Such information shall include a copy of-- (1) all written communications, regardless of format, including drafts of all proposals and associated analyses, between the reviewing entity and the rulemaking agency; (2) all written communications, regardless of format, between the reviewing entity and any person not employed by the Federal Government relating to the substance of an agency rulemaking activity; (3) a record, including the date, participants, and substance, of all oral communications relating to the substance of an agency rulemaking activity, including meetings, between the reviewing entity and any person not employed by the Federal Government; (4) a written explanation as required by section 4(c) and the date of any significant review action; and (5) any notice of any extensions of review under section 6.
Procedures.--Information described under subsection (a) shall be made available to the public upon request-- (1) within 14 days of conclusion of review; (2) in a manner consistent with the requirements of section 552(a) of title 5, United States Code; and (3) for review, and copying, in a publicly accessible reading room during normal business hours.
DISCLOSURE TO A RULEMAKING AGENCY BY A REVIEWING ENTITY.
Written Communications.--A reviewing entity shall transmit to the rulemaking agency, on a timely basis, copies of any written communications between the reviewing entity and any person not employed by the Federal Government concerning the substance of a rulemaking activity of that agency.
Oral Communications.--A reviewing entity shall disclose to the rulemaking agency, on a timely basis, all oral communications, including meetings, between any person not employed by the Federal Government and the reviewing entity concerning the substance of a rulemaking activity of that agency.
The reviewing entity shall-- (1) advise the rulemaking agency of the date, participants, and substance of such communications; and (2) invite the rulemaking agency head or designee to all scheduled meetings involving such communications.
Explanation of Significant Review Action.--A reviewing entity shall, in a timely manner, provide the rulemaking agency with a written explanation of any significant review action taken by the reviewing entity concerning an agency rulemaking activity.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE BY A RULEMAKING AGENCY.
Status of Review.--A rulemaking agency shall upon request identify a rulemaking activity, the date upon which it was submitted to a reviewing entity for review, and any notice of any extensions of review under section 6.
Explanations.--For each proposed and final rule, a rulemaking agency shall explain in its rulemaking notice any significant changes made to such rule as a consequence of regulatory review.
Record.--A rulemaking agency shall place in the appropriate rulemaking record all of the documents received from a reviewing entity as required under section 4.
TIME LIMITS FOR REVIEW.
Time Limits.--Within 60 days after the receipt of a rulemaking activity submitted to a reviewing entity for review, the reviewing entity shall conclude review of the rulemaking activity.
The reviewing entity may, for good cause explained to the rulemaking agency extend the time for review for 30 days.
Resolution of Outstanding Issues.--If the President, or such other person or entity as the President may designate, reviews for resolution an issue arising out of a regulatory review-- (1) the applicable time limits described under subsection (a) may be extended, although any such issue shall be resolved as promptly as practicable; and (2) any such review shall be subject to the requirements of this Act, except for section 6(a).
Extensions.--A reviewing entity shall notify the rulemaking agency of an extension beyond 60 days and provide public notice, pursuant to sections 3 and 7.
The rulemaking agency shall promptly publish a notice of any such extension in the Federal Register, and shall give public notice pursuant to section 5.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTING OF REGULATORY REVIEW.
Publication of Accounting.--The Office of Management and Budget shall prepare and make available to the public a monthly and an annual accounting of regulatory review conducted by any and all reviewing entities.
Such accounting shall include a list of all rulemaking activities submitted to a reviewing entity for review, under review by a reviewing entity, or for which a review action was taken by a reviewing entity during the reporting period.
Information Included in Accounting.--The monthly accounting required under subsection (a) shall be prepared and made available to the public within 10 working days of the end of each month and shall include the name and type of each rulemaking activity reviewed, the reviewing entity, the rulemaking agency, the date of submission, the status of review, notice of any extensions of review under section 6, any review action, the date of such action, and the authority for review.
Federal Register Publication.--Each rulemaking agency shall publish in the Federal Register within 10 working days of the end of each month a list of all rulemaking activities undergoing regulatory review during the preceding month.
Such list shall include the name and type of each rulemaking activity, the reviewing entity, the date of submission, any review action taken during the reporting period, and the date of any such action.
Oral communications with the President, the Vice President, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the heads of executive departments as defined under section 101 of title 5, United States Code, are not covered by this Act.
Authorization.--Nothing in this Act authorizes a reviewing entity to-- (1) review a rulemaking activity; or (2) direct an agency to make a decision with regard to a rulemaking activity unless specifically authorized by law.
Alterations.--Nothing in this Act alters in any manner-- (1) rulemaking authority vested by law in the head of an agency; (2) any legally mandated criteria for rulemaking; or (3) the application of any statutory or judicial deadline or the authority of an agency to undertake rulemaking activity in an emergency situation.