This Act may be cited as the ``Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims Act of 1999''.
AUTHORITY TO PRESCRIBE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Section 7254 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) The Court may prescribe rules and regulations to carry out this chapter.''.
RECALL OF RETIRED JUDGES.
Authority To Recall Retired Judges.--Chapter 72 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 7256 the following new section: ``Sec.
Recall of retired judges ``(a)(1) A retired judge of the Court may be recalled for further service on the Court in accordance with this section.
To be eligible to be recalled for such service, a retired judge must at the time of the judge's retirement provide to the chief judge of the Court (or, in the case of the chief judge, to the clerk of the Court) notice in writing that the retired judge is available for further service on the Court in accordance with this section and is willing to be recalled under this section.
Such a notice provided by a retired judge is irrevocable.
For the purposes of this section-- ``(A) a retired judge is a judge of the Court of Veterans Appeals who retires from the Court under section 7296 of this title or under chapter 83 or 84 of title 5; and ``(B) a recall-eligible retired judge is a retired judge who has provided a notice under paragraph (1).
(1) The chief judge may recall for further service on the court a recall-eligible retired judge in accordance with this section.
Such a recall shall be made upon written certification by the chief judge that substantial service is expected to be performed by the retired judge for such period, not to exceed 90 days (or the equivalent), as determined by the chief judge to be necessary to meet the needs of the Court.
A recall-eligible retired judge may not be recalled for more than 90 days (or the equivalent) during any calendar year without the judge's consent or for more than a total of 180 days (or the equivalent) during any calendar year.
If a recall-eligible retired judge is recalled by the chief judge in accordance with this section and (other than in the case of a judge who has previously during that calendar year served at least 90 days (or the equivalent) of recalled service on the court) declines (other than by reason of disability) to perform the service to which recalled, the chief judge shall remove that retired judge from the status of a recall-eligible judge.
A recall-eligible retired judge who becomes permanently disabled and as a result of that disability is unable to perform further service on the court shall be removed from the status of a recall-eligible judge.
Determination of such a disability shall be made in the same manner as is applicable to judges of the United States under section 371 of title 28.
A retired judge who is recalled under this section may exercise all of the powers and duties of the office of a judge in active service.
(1) The pay of a recall-eligible retired judge who retired under section 7296 of this title is specified in subsection (c) of that section.
A judge who is recalled under this section who retired under chapter 83 or 84 of title 5 shall be paid, during the period for which the judge serves in recall status, pay at the rate of pay in effect under section 7253(e) of this title for a judge performing active service, less the amount of the judge's annuity under the applicable provisions of chapter 83 or 84 of title 5.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (d), a judge who is recalled under this section who retired under chapter 83 or 84 of title 5 shall be considered to be a reemployed annuitant under that chapter.
Nothing in this section affects the right of a judge who retired under chapter 83 or 84 of title 5 to serve as a reemployed annuitant in accordance with the provisions of title 5.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7256 the following new item: ``7257.
Recall of retired judges.''.
CALCULATION OF YEARS OF SERVICE AS A JUDGE.
Section 7296(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) For purposes of calculating the years of service of an individual under this subsection and subsection (c), only those years of service as a judge of the Court shall be credited.
In determining the number of years of such service, that portion of the aggregate number of years of such service that is a fractional part of one year shall be disregarded if less than 183 days and shall be credited as a full year if 183 days or more.''.
In General.--Subsection (c)(1) of section 7296 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``at the rate of pay in effect at the time of retirement.''
and inserting the following: ``as follows: ``(A) In the case of a judge who is a recall-eligible retired judge under section 7257 of this title or who was a recall-eligible retired judge under that section and was removed from recall status under subsection (b)(4) of that section by reason of disability, the retired pay of the judge shall be the pay of a judge of the court (or of the chief judge, if the individual retired from service as chief judge).
In the case of a judge who at the time of retirement did not provide notice under section 7257 of this title of availability for service in a recalled status, the retired pay of the judge shall be the rate of pay applicable to that judge at the time of retirement.
In the case of a judge who was a recall-eligible retired judge under section 7257 of this title and was removed from recall status under subsection (b)(3) of that section, the retired pay of the judge shall be the pay of the judge at the time of the removal from recall status.''.
Cost-of-Living Adjustments.--Subsection (f) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3)(A) A cost-of-living adjustment provided by law in annuities payable under civil service retirement laws shall apply to retired pay under this section only in the case of retired pay computed under paragraph (2) of subsection (c).
(i) If such a cost-of-living adjustment would (but for this subparagraph) result in the retired pay of a retired chief judge being in excess of the annual rate of pay in effect for the chief judge of the court as provided in section 7253(e)(1) of this title, such adjustment may be made in the retired pay of that retired chief judge only in such amount as results in the retired pay of the retired chief judge being equal to that annual rate of pay (as in effect on the effective date of such adjustment).
If such a cost-of-living adjustment would (but for this subparagraph) result in the retired pay of a retired judge (other than a retired chief judge) being in excess of the annual rate of pay in effect for judges of the court as provided in section 7253(e)(2) of this title, such adjustment may be made only in such amount as results in the retired pay of the retired judge being equal to that annual rate of pay (as in effect on the effective date of such adjustment).''.
Coordination With Military Retired Pay.--Subsection (f) of such section is further amended by adding after paragraph (3), as added by subsection (b), the following new paragraph: ``(4) Notwithstanding subsection (c) of section 5532 of title 5, if a regular or reserve member of a uniformed service who is receiving retired or retainer pay becomes a judge of the court, or becomes eligible therefor while a judge of the court, such retired or retainer pay shall not be paid during the judge's regular active service on the court, but shall be resumed or commenced without reduction upon retirement as a judge.''.
LIMITATION ON ACTIVITIES OF RETIRED JUDGES.
In General.--Chapter 72 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Limitation on activities of retired judges ``If a retired judge of the Court in the practice of law represents (or supervises or directs the representation of) a client in making any claim relating to veterans' benefits against the United States or any agency thereof, the retired judge shall forfeit all rights to retired pay under section 7296 of this title or under chapter 83 or 84 of title 5 for the period beginning on the date on which the representation begins and ending one year after the date on which the representation ends.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``7299.
Limitation on activities of retired judges.''.
EARLY RETIREMENT AUTHORITY FOR CURRENT JUDGES IN ORDER TO PROVIDE FOR STAGGERED TERMS OF JUDGES.
Retirement Authorized.--One eligible judge may retire in accordance with this section with respect to each year beginning in 1999 and ending in 2003.
Eligible Judges.--For purposes of this section, an eligible judge is an associate judge of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims who-- (1) has at least 10 years of service creditable under section 7296 of title 38, United States Code; (2) has made an election to receive retired pay under section 7296 of such title; (3) has at least 20 years of service described in section 7297(l) of such title; and (4) is at least 55 years of age.
Multiple Eligible Judges.--If for any year specified in subsection (a) more than one eligible judge provides notice in accordance with subsection (d), the judge who has the greatest seniority as a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims shall be the judge who is eligible to retire in accordance with this section in that year.
Notice.--An eligible judge who desires to retire in accordance with this section with respect to any year covered by subsection (a) shall provide to the President and the chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims written notice to that effect not later than April 1 of that year, except that in the case of an eligible judge desiring to retire with respect to 1999, such notice shall be provided not later than November 1, 1999, or 15 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever is later.
Such a notice shall specify the retirement date in accordance with subsection (e).
Notice provided under this subsection shall be irrevocable.
Date of Retirement.--A judge who is eligible to retire in accordance with this section shall be retired during the fiscal year in which notice is provided pursuant to subsection (d), but not earlier than 90 days after the date on which that notice is provided, except that a judge retired in accordance with this section with respect to 1999 shall be retired not earlier than 90 days, and not later than 120 days, after the date on which notice is provided pursuant to subsection (d).
Applicable Provisions.--Except as provided in subsection (g), a judge retired in accordance with this section shall be considered for all purposes to be retired under section 7296(b)(1) of title 38, United States Code.
Rate of Retired Pay.--The rate of retired pay for a judge retiring in accordance with this section is-- (1) the rate applicable to that judge under section 7296(c)(1) of title 38, United States Code, multiplied by (2) the fraction (not in excess of 1) in which-- (A) the numerator is the sum of: (i) the number of years of service of the judge as a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims creditable under section 7296 of such title; and (ii) the age of the judge; and (B) the denominator is 80.
Adjustments in Retired Pay for Judges Available for Recall.-- Subject to section 7296(f)(3)(B) of title 38, United States Code, an adjustment provided by law in annuities payable under civil service retirement laws shall apply to retired pay under this section in the case of a judge who is a recall-eligible retired judge under section 7257 of title 38, United States Code, or who was a recall-eligible retired judge under that section and was removed from recall status under subsection (b)(4) of that section by reason of disability.
Duty of Actuary.--Section 7298(e)(2) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (D); and (2) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph: ``(C) For purposes of subparagraph (B), the term `present value' includes a value determined by an actuary with respect to a payment that may be made under subsection (b) from the retirement fund within the contemplation of law.