This Act may be cited as the ``Prison Work and Victim Restitution Act of 1996''.
Congress finds that-- (1) work is inherently American and honorable; (2) work is of fundamental importance to any orderly society which reveres such common values as responsibility, independence, and respect for others; (3) in order to reduce recidivism, provide restitution to victims, reparations to communities, and promote the values of responsibility, independence, and respect for others, the Federal Government should enact policies which expand work, educational, and life skills opportunities for prisoners incarcerated in Federal and State penal institutions; (4) American taxpayers are justified to expect that prisoners reimburse the United States Treasury for the cost of their incarceration, and in addition, that prisoners should make monetary restitution to a fund which benefits the victims of crime; (5) prisoners should be prohibited from engaging in certain types of activities which are not healthy and conducive to their successful rehabilitation and restitution; (6) prisoners should not have access to certain amenities which are unnecessary, enhance leisure activities, or do not promote successful rehabilitation; (7) prisoners should not be guaranteed the same wage and working conditions guaranteed to hard working, law abiding Americans; (8) existing Federal laws limit prisoners from engaging in work, and do not impose mandatory work requirements for prisoners; and (9) existing barriers to prisoner labor should be removed and Federal laws should be strengthened to ensure that prisoners, their victims, taxpayers, and society in general reap the maximum benefits and positive values associated with work.
WORK REQUIREMENT FOR FEDERAL PRISONERS.
Work Requirement.--Section 2905 of the Crime Control Act of 1990 (18 United States Code 4121 note) is amended by adding at the end of subsection (a) the following: ``Subject to this section, such inmates shall engage in work for not less than 50 hours weekly.
In addition inmates shall engage job-training and educational and life skills preparation study.
In the event that opportunities otherwise provided by law for inmates to work are not sufficient to meet the requirements of the preceding sentence, notwithstanding any other provision of law, the services of prisoners may also be made available to nonprofit entities to carry out any of their business or other functions.
Each authority of the United States that makes grants to nonprofit entities shall take appropriate action to inform such entities of the availability of inmates for this purpose.
The Attorney General shall make rules governing the provision of services by inmates to such entities and the payment of any wages or other compensation for such services.''.
Use of Prison Labor by Private Entities.-- (1) Section 4125(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, to for-profit American entities either located in a foreign country or considering moving to a foreign country by reason of high domestic labor costs for work for those entities'' after ``Congress''.
The Attorney General may provide incentives to American entities either located in a foreign country or considering moving to a foreign country by reason of high domestic labor costs, such as the use of space and facilities in Federal prisons at a free or reduced rate.
The Attorney General shall make rules governing the provision of services by prisoners to private for-profit entities under this subsection and the amendment made by this subsection.
Such rules shall govern the wages and other proceeds paid by entities for those services.
Use of Revenues From Prison Labor.-- (1) There is established in the Treasury a Fund (hereinafter in this subsection referred to as the ``Fund''.
All proceeds and wages, less any taxes or withholding required by Federal or State law, from prison labor shall be placed in the Fund.
The Fund shall be used, under guidelines established by the Attorney General, as follows: (A) One third shall be used to offset the costs of prisoner incarceration.
One third shall be used for victim restitution.
One tenth to be held in a non-interest bearing account for the individual prisoner, to be paid on release from prison, but if the prisoner will not be eligible for release, then this portion shall be immediately available for use under subparagraph (B).
The remainder to States for programs to benefit the dependents of prisoners, but only to those States the Attorney General determines have substantially the same prison work requirements and prison conditions as established for Federal prisoners.
PRISONERS UNDER THE FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT OF 1938 AND THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT OF 1970.
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938.--Section 3(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 203(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) The term `employee' does not include a prisoner confined in a Federal or State prison, in a prison of a political subdivision of a State, or in a prison maintained for the Federal Government, a State government, or political subdivision government.''.
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.--Section 3(6) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 652(6)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The term `employee' does not include a prisoner confined in a Federal or State prison, in a prison of a political subdivision of a State, or in a prison maintained for the Federal Government, a State government, or political subdivision government.''.
The Bureau of Prisoners shall ensure that Federal prisoners-- (1) do not smoke, use or possess any type of tobacco; (2) do not possess, view or read pornographic or sexually explicit materials; (3) are subject to regular and random testing for drugs and illegal substances; (4) do not possess microwave ovens, hot plates, toaster ovens, or televisions (unless provided by the prison for group viewing), or VCRs; (5) do not possess, or listen to, music which contains lyrics that are violent, sexually explicit, vulgar, glamorize gang membership or activities, demean women or disrespect law enforcement; (6) do not view cable television which is not educational in nature; and (7) do not engage in sexual activity.
Section 1761(c)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``--one of not more than 50''.