This Act may be cited as the ``Aviation Bilateral Accountability Act of 1999''.
Section 40105 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Congressional Review.-- ``(1) In general.--A civil aviation agreement that is entered into under this section after the date of enactment of this subsection shall enter into force with respect to the United States only if-- ``(A) the Secretary involved transmits to Congress a document containing a copy of the final text of the agreement, together with an explanation of the agreement; and ``(B)(i) a disapproval resolution is not introduced in either House of Congress on or before the last day of a 20-day period of continuous session of Congress following the date on which Congress receives the agreement under subparagraph (A); ``(ii) if a disapproval resolution is introduced in either House, the disapproval resolution is not enacted on or before the last day of a 90-day period of continuous session of Congress following the date on which Congress receives the agreement under subparagraph (A) and is not vetoed by the President; or ``(iii) if the President vetoes the disapproval resolution, both Houses of Congress do not vote to override the veto on or before the later of the last day of the 90-day period referred to in clause (ii) or the last day of a 30-day period of continuous session of Congress following the date Congress receives the veto message from the President.
Computing number of days.--For purposes of paragraphs (1) and (6), the continuity of a session of Congress is broken only by an adjournment of the Congress sine die, and the number of days on which either House is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain are excluded in the computation of the period specified.
Rules of house of representatives and senate.--This subsection is enacted by Congress-- ``(A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such these provisions are deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of disapproval resolutions described in paragraph (4); and they supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and ``(B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Disapproval resolution defined.--The term `disapproval resolution' means only a joint resolution of the two Houses of Congress, the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: `That Congress disapproves the civil aviation agreement between the United States and ________________ transmitted by ________________ to the Congress on ________________.
', the first blank space being filled with the name of the country involved, the second blank space being filled with the title of the Secretary involved, and the third blank space being filled with the appropriate date.
Referral.--A disapproval resolution introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and a disapproval resolution introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
Automatic discharge.--If the committee of either House to which a disapproval resolution has been referred has not reported the resolution on or before the 45th day after its introduction, the committee shall be automatically discharged from further consideration of the resolution.
Amendments prohibited.--No amendment to a disapproval resolution shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate; and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in order in either House, nor shall it be in order in either House for the Presiding Officer to entertain a request to suspend the application of this paragraph by unanimous consent.
Prior action by other house.--If prior to the passage by one House of a disapproval resolution of that House, that House receives the same disapproval resolution from the other House, then-- ``(A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no disapproval resolution had been received from the other House; but ``(B) any vote on final passage shall be on the disapproval resolution of the other House.
Floor consideration in the house.-- ``(A) Motion to proceed.--A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of a disapproval resolution that has been reported by the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure or received by the other House shall be highly privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate.--Debate in the House of Representatives on a disapproval resolution shall be limited to not more than 5 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable.
It shall not be in order to move to recommit a disapproval resolution or to move to reconsider the vote by which a disapproval resolution is agreed to or disagreed to.
Motions to postpone.--Motions to postpone, made in the House of Representatives with respect to the consideration of a disapproval resolution, and motions to proceed to the consideration of other business, shall be decided without debate.
Appeals.--All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to a disapproval resolution shall be decided without debate.
Applicability of other rules.--Except to the extent specifically provided in the preceding provisions of this subsection, consideration of a disapproval resolution shall be governed by the Rules of the House of Representatives applicable to other bills and resolutions in similar circumstances.
Floor consideration in the senate.-- ``(A) Motion to proceed.--A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of a disapproval resolution that has been reported by the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation or received by the other House shall be privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate.--Debate in the Senate on a disapproval resolution, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Appeals.--Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection with a disapproval resolution shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the resolution, except that in the event the manager of the resolution is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of a disapproval resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
Motion to limit debate; motion to recommit.-- A motion in the Senate to further limit debate is not debatable.
A motion to recommit a disapproval resolution is not in order.