This Act may be cited as the ``National Senior Citizen Hall of Fame Act of 1996''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the senior population (65 and older) of the United States is projected to be 35,000,000 by the year 2000 (which would equal 13 percent of the population); (2) the total population of the United States is projected to exceed 300,000,000 by the year 2000; (3) the senior population is projected to be 40,000,000 by the year 2010 (which would equal 13.3 percent of the population); (4) the senior population will accelerate significantly with the entry of baby-boomers into the senior population so that by the year 2030, the senior population will increase to 70,000,000; (5) the minority population is projected to represent 25 percent of the elderly population by the year 2030 (including Hispanic Americans, African Americans, Native Americans, Native Alaskans, Asian Americans, and Pacific Islanders); (6) the older population is getting larger, in 1993 the 75- 84 age group (10,800,000 individuals) was 14 times larger than in 1900, and the 85 plus age group was 27 times larger; (7) 5,500 individuals per day in the United States celebrate their 65th birthday; (8) the matured judgment, the keen insight, the historical retrospect, the forth right vision, and the gifted leadership of the aging, are invaluable to the national life of the United States; (9) older Americans embrace the national patriotism, the solidarity of the American heritage, and the allegiance in love and devotion to the United States, and is transmitting these noble virtues to future generations; and (10) the American dream is that all people are created equal in a nation where righteousness, mercy, and justice are the cornerstones of democracy.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) encourage and authorize the establishment of a National Senior Citizen Hall of Fame Commission; (2) encourage the establishment of a Senior Citizen Hall of Fame in the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the territorial possessions; (3) through the Commission and the State Senior Citizen Halls of Fame, bestow the honor, recognition, and memorial upon deserving citizens for outstanding achievements, services, and contributions to the lives of older Americans; and (4) utilize the Alabama Senior Citizens Hall of Fame, its constitution, and bylaws with respect to such entity as a model in establishing State Senior Citizens Hall of Fame.
Establishment.--There is established a Commission to be known as the National Senior Citizen Hall of Fame Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of not more than 56 members of whom one shall be appointed by the Citizen Hall of Fame of each State.
Date.--The initial appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made not later than January 1, 1997.
Definition.--As used in paragraph (1), the term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for an annual 1-year term commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which a majority of the members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold meetings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall act to bestow honor and recognition upon deserving citizens for their outstanding accomplishments, service, and contributions to the lives of older Americans.
The Commission may provide commendations, certificates of merit, or other forms of awards to bestow such an honor as the Commission determines appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Meetings.--The Commission may hold such meetings and sit and act at such times and places as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Task Forces.--The Commission may establish such committees and task forces as the Commission determines necessary to carry out its business and achieve the objectives of the Commission.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to enable the Commission to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.