CORRECTION PERIOD FOR CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING SECURITIES AND COMMODITIES.
Amendment of Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.-- Section 408(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1108(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(14)(A) Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), a transaction described in section 406(a) in connection with the acquisition, holding, or disposition of any security or commodity, if the transaction is corrected before the end of the correction period.
Subparagraph (A) does not apply to any transaction between a plan and a plan sponsor or its affiliates that involves the acquisition or sale of an employer security (as defined in section 407(d)(1)) or the acquisition, sale, or lease of employer real property (as defined in section 407(d)(2)).
In the case of any fiduciary or other party in interest (or any other person knowingly participating in such transaction), subparagraph (A) does not apply to any transaction if, at the time the transaction occurs, such fiduciary or party in interest (or other person) knew that the transaction would (without regard to this paragraph) constitute a violation of section 406(a).
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `correction period' means, in connection with a fiduciary or party in interest (or other person knowingly participating in the transaction), the 14-day period beginning on the date on which such fiduciary or party in interest (or other person) discovers, or reasonably should have discovered, that the transaction would (without regard to this paragraph) constitute a violation of section 406(a).
For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) The term `security' has the meaning given such term by section 475(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (without regard to subparagraph (F)(iii) and the last sentence thereof).
The term `commodity' has the meaning given such term by section 475(e)(2) of such Code (without regard to subparagraph (D)(iii) thereof).''.
Amendment of Internal Revenue Code of 1986.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (d) of section 4975 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exemptions) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (14), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(16) except as provided in subsection (f)(7), a transaction described in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D) of subsection (c)(1) in connection with the acquisition, holding, or disposition of any security or commodity, if the transaction is corrected before the end of the correction period.''.
Special rules relating to correction period.-- Subsection (f) of section 4975 of such Code (relating to other definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Correction period.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of subsection (d)(16), the term `correction period' means the 14-day period beginning on the date on which the disqualified person discovers, or reasonably should have discovered, that the transaction would (without regard to this paragraph and subsection (d)(16)) constitute a prohibited transaction.
Exceptions.-- ``(i) Employer securities.--Subsection (d)(16) does not apply to any transaction between a plan and a plan sponsor or its affiliates that involves the acquisition or sale of an employer security (as defined in section 407(d)(1)) or the acquisition, sale, or lease of employer real property (as defined in section 407(d)(2)).
Knowing prohibited transaction.--In the case of any disqualified person, subsection (d)(16) does not apply to a transaction if, at the time the transaction is entered into, the disqualified person knew that the transaction would (without regard to this paragraph) constitute a prohibited transaction.
Abatement of tax where there is a correction.--If a transaction is not treated as a prohibited transaction by reason of subsection (d)(16), then no tax under subsection (a) and (b) shall be assessed with respect to such transaction, and if assessed the assessment shall be abated, and if collected shall be credited or refunded as an overpayment.
Securities and commodities defined.--For purposes of this paragraph and subsection (d)(16)-- ``(i) Security.--The term `security' has the meaning given such term by section 475(c)(2) (without regard to subparagraph (F)(iii) and the last sentence thereof).
Commodity.--The term `commodity' has the meaning given such term by section 475(e)(2) (without regard to subparagraph (D)(iii) thereof).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to any transaction which the fiduciary or disqualified person discovers, or reasonably should have discovered, after the date of the enactment of this Act constitutes a prohibited transaction.