This Act may be cited as the ``National Park Service Employee Housing Program Act of 1994''.
REQUIREMENTS REGARDING PROVISION OF HOUSING TO EMPLOYEES.
The Secretary of the Interior (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall, in accordance with this Act and section 5911 of title 5, United States Code-- (1) provide housing to employees of the National Park Service only when and where such housing is necessary and justified; and (2) ensure that such housing, if necessary and justified, is available and adequate.
REVIEW AND REVISION OF HOUSING CRITERIA.
In General.--Upon the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall review and revise the existing criteria under which housing is provided to employees of the National Park Service.
The review and revision shall include consideration of the following criteria: (1) Required occupancy (whether and under what circumstances the Park Service requires, as a condition of employment, that an employee live at a particular site or in a specific geographic area).
For each instance in which occupancy is required, full consideration shall be given to the concept of adequate response time.
Availability and adequacy of non-Federal housing in the geographic area, including consideration of the degree of isolation (the time and distance that separate other potential housing from the workplace of a Park Service employee).
Category of employment (seasonal or permanent).
Any other factor that the Secretary considers appropriate.
Submission of Report.--A report detailing the results of the revisions required by subsection (a) shall be submitted to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The report shall include justifications for keeping, or for changing, each of the criteria or factors used by the Department of the Interior with regard to the provision of housing to employees of the National Park Service.
REVIEW OF CONDITION OF AND COSTS RELATING TO HOUSING.
In General.--Using the revised criteria developed under section 3, the Secretary shall undertake a review, for each unit of the National Park System, of existing government-owned housing provided to employees of the National Park Service.
The review shall include an assessment of the physical condition of such housing and the suitability of such housing to effectively carry out the missions of the Department of the Interior and the National Park Service.
For each unit of such housing, the Secretary shall determine whether the unit is needed and justified.
The review shall include estimates of the cost of bringing each such unit that is needed and justified into usable condition that meets all applicable legal housing requirements or, if the unit is determined to be obsolete but is still warranted to carry out the missions of the Department of the Interior and the National Park Service, the cost of replacing the unit.
Submission of Report and Proposed Plan.--The Secretary shall submit a report detailing the results of the review required by subsection (a), and a proposed plan to meet the housing needs of employees of the National Park Service, to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ALTERNATIVES TO MEET HOUSING NEEDS.
Authorization for Housing Agreements.--For those units of the National Park Service for which the review required by section 4 has been completed, the Secretary is authorized to enter into housing agreements with housing entities under which such housing entities may develop, construct, rehabilitate, or manage housing, located on or off public lands, for rent or lease to National Park Service employees who meet the housing eligibility criteria developed by the Secretary pursuant to this Act.
In entering such housing agreements, the Secretary may guarantee to such entities a reasonable rate of occupancy of rental units.
The authority granted by this subsection is in addition to the authorities of the Secretary to acquire or construct housing for employees of the National Park Service using appropriated funds.
Limitation on Placement of Housing.--Housing made available on public lands pursuant to subsection (a) shall be located only in areas designated for administrative use.
Prohibition of Aquisition Without Consent.--No private lands, or interests therein, located outside the boundaries of a Federally administered area may be acquired pursuant to this Act without the consent of the owner thereof.
Study Regarding Housing Allowances.--The Secretary shall undertake a study to determine the feasibility of providing eligible employees of the National Park Service with housing allowances rather than government housing.
If the Secretary finds, pursuant to the study, that the provision of such allowances would be beneficial to the Federal Government, the Secretary is authorized to institute a program for the provision of the allowances, subject to the availability of funds.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``housing entity'' means an individual who, or a public or private corporation or organization that, the Secretary finds is qualified to provide and capable of providing housing.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.