SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Insurance Claims Privacy Protection Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Limitations on disclosure of claims information to law enforcement agencies.
Separation of the functions of a crime bureau from the functions of an insurance data support organization.
Coordination with State law.
The Congress finds that-- (1) property and casualty insurers annually collect information pertaining to the claims filed by millions of policyholders and other individuals; (2) this information is generally provided to industry organizations for the purpose of assisting insurers to quickly pay a claim or, alternatively, to determine whether a pattern of claim filings exists that warrants further investigation; (3) there is a legitimate need for insurers to pool claims information among themselves and to work with law enforcement agencies in order to assure the integrity of the claims decisionmaking process; (4) while the insurance industry has historically taken strong and effective measures to prevent the improper disclosure of personal claims information to law enforcement agencies, it is now preparing to eliminate those protections and provide individual claims information on innocent individuals, as well as their doctors and lawyers, to law enforcement agencies; (5) although insurance is generally regulated by the individual States pursuant to the Act of March 9, 1945 (referred to as the ``McCarran-Ferguson Act''), and despite the fact that the National Association of Insurance Commissioners has proposed model privacy legislation which has been adopted in certain States and addresses the provision of individual information to law enforcement agencies, the Association's model legislation has not been enacted in most of the States and has not prevented the insurance industry from proceeding with its current plans; (6) the unfettered disclosure of personal claims information by insurers to law enforcement agencies on innocent individuals violates fundamental principles of individual privacy and may result in intimidating individuals in exercising their rights to file claims; and (7) in the absence of effective State regulation, a uniform rule, established through congressional enactment, is the only method for assuring the protection of personal privacy rights.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to protect the personal privacy rights of insurance customers and claimants by making certain that property and casualty insurers do not improperly provide personal information about innocent insurance claimants to law enforcement agencies; (2) to establish clear rules for separating the operation of an insurance crime bureau from the operation of an insurance data support organization in order to prevent the inappropriate use of insurance claims information; and (3) to establish strong and effective remedies for violations of this Act.
As used in this Act: (1) All claims database.--The term ``all claims database'' means any data collection system, electronic or manual, which obtains information about property and casualty insurance claims without regard to whether there is a reasonable belief that any specific claimant has engaged in any illegal or fraudulent act.
Crime bureau.--The term ``crime bureau'' means any nongovernmental organization which, in whole or in part, (A) investigates potentially illegal or fraudulent acts with regard to property and casualty insurance claims, or (B) shares information about such claims with any law enforcement agency, absent a subpoena or court order; except that the term does not include the activities of a property and casualty insurer.
Insurance claims data support organization.--The term ``insurance claims data support organization'' means any nongovernmental organization which regularly engages, in whole or in part, in the practice of assembling or collecting claims information about persons for the primary purpose of providing information to property and casualty insurers, self-insurers, or the administrators of an insurance program; except that the term does not include the activities of a property and casualty insurer.
Property and casualty insurance.--The term ``property and casualty insurance'' means every line of insurance, except life insurance and health insurance, and includes, but is not limited to, automobile insurance, homeowners insurance, and workers' compensation insurance.
Property and casualty insurer.--The term ``property and casualty insurer'' means any person engaged in the business of insurance who provides property and casualty insurance, either directly or through agents or brokers.
LIMITATIONS ON DISCLOSURE OF CLAIMS INFORMATION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
Disclosure by Property and Casualty Insurer and Crime Bureau.-- No property and casualty insurer or crime bureau may disclose to a law enforcement agency any information pertaining to a claim unless it is doing so-- (1) to protect the interests of the insurer or crime bureau in preventing or prosecuting the perpetuation of fraud upon it; or (2) if the insurer or crime bureau reasonably believes that illegal activities have been conducted by the individual.
Disclosure by Data Support Organization.--No insurance data support organization may disclose to a law enforcement agency any information pertaining to a claim unless it is doing so-- (1) to protect the interests of the organization in preventing or prosecuting the perpetuation of fraud upon it; or (2) to respond to a subpoena or court order.
SEPARATION OF THE FUNCTIONS OF A CRIME BUREAU FROM THE FUNCTIONS OF AN INSURANCE DATA SUPPORT ORGANIZATION.
In General.--An insurance data support organization may establish and operate an all claims data base and may establish a system for providing claims information to a crime bureau for the purpose of detecting fraudulent or other illegal activities pertaining to specific claims or to specific categories of claims where fraudulent or other illegal activities are reasonably believed to have occurred; but an insurance data support organization may not engage in the activities of a crime bureau.
Crime Bureau.--A crime bureau may engage in activities designed to prevent, suppress, and prosecute fraud, including, when otherwise authorized by law, the conduct of appropriate investigations of claimants and collaborative activities with law enforcement agencies; but a crime bureau may not operate an all claims data base or collect claims information, either directly or indirectly, that may result in the establishment or operation of such a data base.
COORDINATION WITH STATE LAW.
In General.--Nothing in this Act shall be read as prohibiting any State from enacting legislation establishing more stringent protections than are provided in this Act for the privacy of information contained in property and casualty insurance claims.
State Certification.--Without regard to the provisions of section 8, any State may certify to the Attorney General of the United States that it has established, through law or regulation, the same protections and enforcement procedures that are incorporated in this Act.
Upon approval of that certification by the Attorney General, and publication of that certification in the Federal Register, enforcement of this Act shall be solely pursuant to that certification.
The Attorney General may revoke a certification for any material breach of its provisions.
Injunction.--Any violation of this Act may be enjoined in any Federal district court without regard to any jurisdictional amount otherwise required.
Such an injunctive action may be brought by the Attorney General or by any private party.
Civil Penalty.--Any violation of this Act may also be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $10,000.