This Act may be cited as the ``Nazi and Japanese War Crimes Disclosure Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) In 1999, Congress adopted the Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act (Public Law 105-246) requiring the executive branch to identify any still-classified records in its custody relating to Nazi war crimes, war criminals, persecution, and looted assets and to declassify and release these records to the American public.
Under terms of that legislation, the President established the Nazi War Criminal Records Interagency Working Group to carry out the functions required in the legislation.
In its first year, the Interagency Working Group screened more than 600,000,000 pages of material relating to Nazi war crimes and has declassified 1,500,000 pages and opened them to the public at the National Archives.
While the Interagency Working Group has worked diligently to screen materials and declassify millions of pages of material, the limited resources in both staff and funding available to the Interagency Working Group threatens their ability to complete the functions required by the Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act.
Already, significant new information about the Holocaust has been revealed in the more than 400,000 Office of Strategic Services records released by the Interagency Working Group at the National Archives on June 26, 2000.
However, further revelations depend on adequate staff support and funding for the Interagency Working Group.
The remarkable progress that has been made by the Interagency Working Group has been achieved even though the Congress has not appropriated funds for the support of the Interagency Working Group or for the activities carried out by the various agencies which hold the records.
Without the resources to review the materials being released, it will be years before we truly understand the significance of what is contained in the declassified materials.
The Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act charged the Interagency Working Group with reviewing all records that pertain to World War II, under the direction of, or in association with the Nazi Government of Germany, any government occupied by the military of the Nazi Government, and any government that was an ally of the Nazi Government, which includes the Japanese Government's records.
After the end of World War II, the United States returned more than 18,000,000 pages of captured Japanese records to the Japanese Government at their request.
In order to complete the Congressional directives of the Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act, the Interagency Working Group should review the materials that were returned to Japan.
Therefore, the full cooperation of the Japanese Government to assist the Interagency Working Group in reviewing all of the World War II records is desired to insure that these historic records can be reviewed, released, or otherwise made available to the public in a timely and efficient manner.
The Interagency Working Group has been working diligently to expedite their charge under the Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act, but the original authorization for three years will not allow for the completion of the momentous tasks outlined in the legislation, specifically in terms of completing the review of the records pertaining to the Japanese government.
EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY OF NAZI WAR CRIMINAL RECORDS INTERAGENCY WORKING GROUP.
Extension of Authority.--Section 2(b)(1) of the Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act (Pub.
Law 105-246; 5 United States Code 552 note) is amended by striking ``3 years'' and inserting ``5 years''.
Records Included.--Section 3(a)(2)(A) of such Act is amended by striking ``beginning on March 23, 1933, and ending on May 8, 1945'' and inserting ``beginning on January 1, 1931, and ending on December 31, 1945''.
Modification of Name of Working Group.--Such Act is further amended by striking ``Nazi War Criminal Records Interagency Working Group'' in each place such term appears and inserting ``Nazi and Japanese War Criminal Records Interagency Working Group''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 2(d) of such Act is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for the Interagency Working Group to carry out this section, $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 and 2002.''.
Amendment to Title.--Section 1 of such Act is amended by striking ``Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act'' and inserting ``Nazi and Japanese War Crimes of World War II Disclosure Act''.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING COOPERATION OF FOREIGN NATIONS.
It is the sense of Congress that foreign nations, and in particular the nation of Japan, should make every effort possible to cooperate with the Nazi and Japanese War Criminal Records Interagency Working Group established by section 2 of the Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act (Public Law 105-246; 5 United States Code 552 note) in carrying out the duties of the Group under such Act.