EXCLUSION FROM ESTATE TAX FOR HISTORIC PROPERTY SUBJECT TO PRESERVATION EASEMENT.
In General.--Part IV of subchapter A of chapter 11 of the Internal Revenue of 1986 (relating to taxable estate) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
General Rule.--For purposes of the tax imposed by section 2001, the value of the taxable estate shall be determined by deducting from the value of the gross estate an amount equal to the value of any qualified historic property included in the gross estate.
Qualified Historic Property.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified historic property' means any historic property if-- ``(A) on or before the date on which the return of the tax imposed by section 2001 is filed, a qualified real property interest described in section 170(h)(2)(C) in such property is held by a qualified organization for the purpose described in section 170(h)(4)(A)(iv), and ``(B) such property is covered by an agreement meeting the requirements of paragraph (4) which is entered into on or before such date.
Such term includes personal property included within, or associated with, qualified historic property (as defined in the preceding sentence) if such personal property is covered by the agreement referred to in subparagraph (B) which covers such qualified historic property.
Historic property.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `historic property' means-- ``(A) a certified historic structure (as defined in section 170(h)(4)(B)), and ``(B) any other real property to the extent reasonably necessary for public view and visitation of such structure.
Qualified organization.--For the purposes of paragraph (1), the term `qualified organization' has the meaning given to such term by section 170(h)(3).
Requirements for agreement.--For the purposes of paragraph (1), an agreement meets the requirements of this paragraph if-- ``(A) such agreement is a written agreement signed by each person in being who has an interest (whether or not in possession) in the historic property (other than the qualified organization), ``(B) such agreement is entered into with a State historic preservation agency (or similar State agency) and filed with the Secretary with the return of the tax imposed by section 2001, ``(C) such agreement provides that the historic property will be open to the public for a period of at least 20 years beginning on the date on which the return of the tax imposed by section 2001 is filed, and ``(D) such agreement provides that any admission fees (if any) shall bear a reasonable relationship to admission fees for other comparable tourist sites and shall be approved by such State historic preservation agency (or similar State agency).
The 20-year period referred to in subparagraph (C) shall be suspended during reasonable periods of renovation.
Open to the public.--For the purposes of paragraph (4)(C), a property shall be treated as being open to the public for any year if a substantial portion of the property is open for public visitation for at least 8 hours per day and 6 days per week during at least any 32 weeks of such year.
Treatment of qualified historic property held by a corporation.--In the case of a corporation all of the stock in which was held on the date of the decedent's death by the decedent or members of the decedent's family (as defined in section 2032A(e)(2)), stock in such corporation shall be treated for purposes of this section as qualified historic property to the extent that the value of such stock is attributable to qualified historic property held by such corporation.
Tax Treatment of Dispositions and Failure to Comply With Agreement.-- ``(1) Imposition of additional estate tax.--If, during the 20-year period referred to in subsection (b)(4)(C)-- ``(A) any person signing the written agreement referred to in subsection (b)(4) disposes of any interest in the qualified historic property, or ``(B) there is a violation of any provision of such agreement (as determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary), then there is hereby imposed an additional estate tax.
Exception where transferee agrees to be bound by agreement.--No tax shall be imposed under paragraph (1) by reason of any disposition if the person acquiring the property agrees to be bound by the agreement referred to in subsection (b)(4) and to be liable for any tax under this subsection in the same manner as the person disposing such property.
Amount of additional tax.--The amount of the additional tax imposed by paragraph (1) with respect to any property shall be an amount equal to-- ``(A) the excess of-- ``(i) what would (but for subsection (a)) have been the tax imposed by section 2001 (reduced by the credits allowable), over ``(ii) the tax imposed by section 2001 (as so reduced), multiplied by ``(B) the fraction-- ``(i) the numerator of which is the number of months remaining after the month in which the disposition or violation occurs in the 20- year period referred to in subsection (b)(4)(C), and ``(ii) the denominator of which is 240.
Due date.--The additional tax imposed by this subsection shall be due and payable on the day which is 6 months after the date of the disposition or violation referred to in paragraph (1).
Liability for tax.--Any person signing the agreement referred to in subsection (b)(4) (other than the executor) shall be personally liable for the additional tax imposed by this subsection.
If more than 1 person is liable under this subsection, all such persons shall be jointly and severally liable.
Certain other rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules of sections 2013(f) and 2032A(f) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
Coordination With Deduction for Transfer of Easement.-- Section 2055(f) shall not apply to any interest referred to therein with respect to property for which a deduction is allowed under subsection (a).''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (A) of section 2056A(b)(10) of such Code is amended by inserting ``2057,'' after ``2056,''.
The table of sections for part IV of subchapter A of chapter 11 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to the estates of decedents dying after the date of the enactment of this Act.