CHILD SUPPORT AUDIT ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
Establishment.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a committee which shall be known as the Child Support Audit Advisory Committee (in this Act referred to as the ``Committee'').
Duties.--The Committee shall assist the Secretary in-- (1) developing revised audit criteria and standards to be used pursuant to section 452(a)(4) of the Social Security Act based on-- (A) common data elements which are defined, collected, and reported in a uniform manner from each State; (B) numeric measures of the outcomes of the child support enforcement program under part D of title IV of such Act; and (C) numeric measures for assessing compliance with the regulations issued by the Secretary pursuant to subsections (h) and (i) of section 452 of such Act; (2) formulating a definition of substantial compliance that is based on such revised audit criteria and standards; (3) determining the period of time after interim or final Federal regulations are issued implementing such revised audit criteria and standards after which a State may be audited to determine compliance with such regulations; and (4) recommending to the Congress such legislation as may be necessary, with respect to the financing of State child support programs under part D of title IV of such Act, to enhance the effectiveness of audits required to be conducted under section 452(a)(4) of such Act and the associated penalty process under section 403(h) of such Act.
Membership.--The Committee shall be composed of not less than 6 members appointed by the Secretary, including-- (1) at least 1 director of a State child support enforcement program operating under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act; (2) at least 1 commissioner of a State human services agency; (3) individuals who have demonstrated expertise in the development of quantitative and qualitative measures for performance-based audits; and (4) at least 2 representatives of recipients of child support enforcement services.
Procedure.-- (1) Participation of the secretary.--The Secretary (or a designee of the Secretary) shall be an ex officio member of the Committee, and shall not vote on matters before the Committee.
Meetings.--The Committee shall meet at the call of the Secretary or a designee of the Secretary.
Compensation.-- (1) In general.--No member of the Committee may receive compensation for service on the Committee.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Committee shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Administrative Support.--Upon request of the Committee, the Secretary shall provide to the Committee the administrative support services necessary for the Committee to carry out its duties under this Act.
Inapplicability of the Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to the Committee.
Report.--Within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Committee shall submit to the Secretary a report that contains proposed criteria and standards for conducting audits under section 452(a)(4) of the Social Security Act, which emphasize program outcomes.
NEW CHILD SUPPORT AUDIT PROCESS.
In General.--After consultation with the Committee, the Secretary shall-- (1) in accordance with subsection (b), promulgate new criteria and standards for conducting audits under section 452(a)(4) of the Social Security Act, which emphasize program outcomes; and (2) not later than the 1st day of the 12th calendar month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, recommend to the Congress such legislation as may be necessary, with respect to the financing of State child support programs under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act, to enhance the effectiveness of such audits and the associated penalty process under section 403(h) of the Social Security Act.
Timing.-- (1) Notice of proposed rulemaking.--Not later than 270 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a notice of proposed rulemaking with respect to the audit criteria and standards required by subsection (a)(1).
Final regulations.--Not later than the first day of the 12th calendar month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, and after allowing not less than 45 days for public comment on the proposed rulemaking required by paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Secretary shall issue final regulations with respect to the audit criteria and standards required by subsection (a)(1).