Congress finds that the conveyance of the Properties described in section 4(b) to the Lessees of those Properties for fair market value would have the beneficial results of-- (1) reducing Pick-Sloan project debt for the Canyon Ferry Unit; (2) providing a permanent source of funding for projects that develop and maintain public recreation, and that conserve and enhance fish and wildlife opportunities in the State of Montana; (3) reducing Federal payments in lieu of taxes and associated management expenditures in connection with the Government's ownership of the Properties while increasing local tax revenues from the new owners; and (4) eliminating expensive and contentious disputes between the Secretary and leaseholders while ensuring that the Federal Government receives full and fair value for the acquisition of the Properties.
The purpose of this Act is to establish terms and conditions under which the Secretary of the Interior shall, for fair market value, convey certain Properties around Canyon Ferry Reservoir, Montana, to the Lessees of those Properties.
In this Act: (1) CFRA.--The term ``CFRA'' means Canyon Ferry Recreation Association, Incorporated, a Montana corporation.
Lessee.--The term ``Lessee'' means the leaseholder of 1 of the properties described in section 4(b) on the date of enactment of this Act and the leaseholder's heirs, executors, and assigns of their leasehold interest.
Property.--The term ``Property'' means 1 of the properties described in section 4(b).
Purchaser.--The term ``Purchaser'' means a person or entity, excluding CFRA, that purchases the 265 leaseholds under section 4.
Reservoir.--The term ``Reservoir'' means the Canyon Ferry Reservoir in the State of Montana.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
In General.--Subject to subsection (c) and notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall sell at fair market value-- (1) all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to all (but not fewer than all) of the leaseholds described in subsection (b), subject to valid existing rights; and (2) easements for-- (A) vehicular access to each leasehold; (B) access to and the use of 1 dock per leasehold; and (C) access to and the use of all boathouses, ramps, retaining walls, and other improvements for which access is provided in the leases as of the date of this Act.
Description of Leaseholds.-- (1) In general.--The leaseholds to be conveyed are-- (A) the 265 cabin sites of the Bureau of Reclamation located along the northern portion of the Reservoir in portions of sections 2, 11, 12, 13, 15, 22, 23, and 26, Township 10 North, Range 1 West; plus (B) any small parcels contiguous to the leaseholds (not including shoreline property or property needed to provide public access to the shoreline of the Reservoir) that the Secretary determines should be conveyed in order to eliminate inholdings and facilitate administration of surrounding land remaining in Federal ownership.
Acreage; legal description.--The acreage and legal description of each Property shall be agreed on by the Secretary and CFRA.
Purchase Process.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall-- (A) solicit sealed bids for all of the leaseholds; (B) subject to paragraph (2), sell the leaseholds to the bidder that submits the highest bid above the minimum bid determined under paragraph (2); and (C) only accept bids for all 265 leaseholds.
Minimum bid.--Before accepting bids, the Secretary, in consultation with interested bidders, shall establish a minimum bid based on an appraisal of the fair market value of the leaseholds, exclusive of the value of private improvements made by the leaseholders before the date of the conveyance by means of an appraisal conducted in conformance with the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice.
Right of first refusal.--If the highest bidder is other than CFRA, CFRA shall have the right to match the highest bid and purchase the leaseholds at a price equal to the amount of that bid.
Terms of Conveyance.-- (1) Purchaser to extend option to purchase or to continue leasing.-- (A) In general.--The Purchaser shall give each leaseholder of record of a leasehold conveyed under this section an option to purchase the leasehold at fair market value as determined in subsection (c)(2).
Nonpurchasing lessees.-- (i) Right to continue lease.--A Lessee that is unable or unwilling to purchase a Property shall be permitted to continue to lease the Property for fair market value rent under the same terms and conditions as the existing leases, including the right to renew the term of the existing lease for 2 consecutive 5-year terms.
Compensation for improvements.--If a Lessee declines to purchase a leasehold, the Purchaser shall compensate the Lessee for the full market value, as determined pursuant to customary appraisal procedures, of all improvements made to the leasehold.
The Lessee may sell the improvements to Purchaser at any time, but the sale shall be completed by the final termination of the lease, after all renewals as provided in clause (i).
Historical use.--The Purchaser shall honor the existing Property descriptions and historical use restrictions for the leaseholds.
Continuation of leases.-- (A) In general.--A Lessee that is unable or unwilling to purchase a leasehold shall be permitted to continue to lease the property pursuant to the terms and conditions of the lease, existing on the date of enactment of this Act.
Rental payments.--All rents received during the continuation of a lease under subparagraph (A) shall be paid to the Purchaser.
Limitation on right to transfer lease.--Subject to valid existing rights, a Lessee may not sell or otherwise assign or transfer the leasehold without purchasing the property from the Purchaser and conveying the fee interest in the property.
Administrative Costs.--Any reasonable administrative cost incurred by the Secretary incident to the conveyance under subsection (a) shall be reimbursed by the Purchaser or CFRA.
Timing.--The Secretary shall make every effort to complete the conveyance under subsection (a) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Closing.--Real estate closings to complete the conveyance under subsection (a) may be staggered to facilitate the conveyance as agreed to by the Secretary and the Purchaser or CFRA.
Conveyance to Lessee.--Where the Lessee will purchase the leasehold from Purchaser or CFRA, the Lessee may request the Secretary to have the conveyance documents prepared in the Lessee's name or names in order to minimize the time and documents required to complete the closing for each leasehold.
Costs.--The Lessee shall reimburse CFRA for a proportionate share of the costs to CFRA in completing the transactions contemplated by this Act, including any interest charges.