This Act may be cited as the ``Immigration Law Enforcement Act of 1993''.
TITLE I--BORDER PERSONNEL, TRAINING AND INFRASTRUCTURE ENHANCEMENT SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Improved Border Control and Narcotics Abatement Act''.
EXPANDED BORDER PATROL AND SOUTHWESTERN REGION DEPLOYMENT.
Increased Personnel.--The Attorney General, in each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996, shall increase by no fewer than 700 the number of full-time, active-duty Border Patrol agents within the Immigration and Naturalization Service above the numbers of such agents employed in the preceding fiscal year.
Deployment of Personnel.--The Attorney General shall, to the maximum extent practicable, ensure that the personnel hired pursuant to subsection (a) shall be deployed primarily on the Southwestern border of the United States or be actively engaged in law enforcement activities related to illegal transit of such border.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Justice for fiscal years 1995 and 1996 such sums as may be necessary for salaries and expenses relating to the employment and deployment of personnel under this section, including, but not limited to, such training authorized by this Act and otherwise deemed appropriate by the Attorney General.
HIRING PREFERENCE FOR BILINGUAL BORDER PATROL AGENTS.
The Attorney General shall, in hiring the Border Patrol Agents specified in section 102(a), give priority to the employment of multilingual candidates who are proficient in both English and such other language or languages as may be spoken in the region in which such Agents are likely to be deployed.
IMPROVED BORDER PATROL TRAINING.
Improvement.--Section 103 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1103) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e)(1) The Attorney General shall ensure that all Border Patrol personnel, and any other personnel of the Service who are likely to have contact with undocumented or improperly documented persons, or other immigrants, in the course of their official duties, receive in- service training adequate to ensure that all such personnel respect the civil rights, personal safety, and human dignity of such persons at all times.
The Attorney General shall ensure that the annual report to Congress of the Service-- ``(A) describes in detail actions taken by the Attorney General to meet the requirement set forth in paragraph (1); ``(B) incorporates specific findings by the Attorney General with respect to the nature and scope of any verified incident of conduct by Border Patrol personnel that-- ``(i) was not consistent with paragraph (1); and ``(ii) was not described in a previous annual report; and ``(C) sets forth specific recommendations for preventing any similar incident in the future.''.
ADDITIONAL LAND BORDER INSPECTORS.
Increased Personnel.--In order to eliminate undue delay in the thorough inspection of persons and vehicles lawfully attempting to enter the United States, the Attorney General and Secretary of the Treasury shall increase, by approximately equal numbers in each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996, the number of full-time land border inspectors assigned to active duty by the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the United States Customs Service to a level adequate to assure full staffing of all border crossing lanes now in use, under construction, or whose construction has been authorized by Congress.
Deployment of Personnel.--The Attorney General and the Secretary of the Treasury shall, to the maximum extent practicable, ensure that the personnel hired pursuant to subsection (a) shall be deployed primarily on the Southwestern border of the United States or be actively engaged in law enforcement activities related to illegal transit of such border.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Justice for fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997, and to the Department of the Treasury for fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997, such sums as may be necessary for salaries and expenses relating to the employment of the inspectors referred to in subsection (a).
IMPROVEMENT OF BORDER CROSSING INFRASTRUCTURE.
Identification of Necessary Improvements.--Not later than March 1, 1994, the Attorney General shall, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, identify those physical improvements to the infrastructure of the international land borders of the United States necessary to expedite the inspection of persons and vehicles attempting to lawfully enter the United States in accordance with existing policies and procedures of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the United States Customs Service, and the Drug Enforcement Agency.
Implementation of Recommendations.--Not later than March 1, 1994, the Attorney General shall begin implementation of projects for the physical improvements referred to in subsection (a).
Improvements to the infrastructure of the Southwestern border of the United States shall be substantially completed and fully funded before the Attorney General may begin construction on any other such project.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Justice for fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
TECHNOLOGY AND EQUIPMENT TRANSFER TO THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
Authority To Acquire Technology and Equipment.--In order to facilitate or improve the detection, interdiction, and reduction by the Immigration and Naturalization Service of illegal immigration into the United States, the Attorney General is authorized to acquire and utilize any Federal equipment (including, but not limited to, aircraft, helicopters, four wheel drive vehicles, sedans, night vision goggles, night vision scopes, and sensor units) determined available for transfer to the Department of Justice by any other agency of the Federal Government upon request of the Attorney General.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Justice for fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997, such sums as may be necessary for the acquisition of technology and equipment (including, but not limited to, aircraft, helicopters, four wheel drive vehicles, sedans, night vision goggles, night vision scopes, and sensor units) under subsection (b).
IMMIGRATION LAW ENFORCEMENT FUND.
Establishment of Fund.--There is hereby established in the Treasury of the United States a revolving fund known as the Immigration Law Enforcement Fund (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Fund'').
Border Crossing User Fee.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law or treaty to which the United States is a party, the Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretaries of State and the Treasury, and such other parties as the Attorney General deems appropriate, shall collect from each individual entering into the United States by land or sea, without regard to the immigration or citizenship status of such individual a border crossing user fee of $1.
Fee Adjustment and Special Fee Program Authority.-- Notwithstanding subsection (b), the Attorney General may-- (1) adjust the border crossing user fee periodically to compensate for inflation and other escalation in the cost of carrying out the purposes of this Act; and (2) develop and implement special discounted fee programs for frequent border crossers including, but not limited to, commuter coupon books or passes.
Authorize Roll-Over of Fund Surpluses From Year-to-Year.--There shall be deposited in the Fund amounts received by the Attorney General as fees collected under subsection (b).
Uses of User Fee Fund.--(1) The Fund shall be available to the Attorney General, to the extent and in the amounts provided in appropriation Acts and without fiscal year limitation, to pay for matters authorized under this Act, as follows: (A) For additional salaries and expenses incurred by reason of the employment of personnel under this Act, including, but not limited to, Border Patrol, inspection, investigation, enforcement, and security personnel, and adjudication officers.
For costs relating to land border crossing infrastructure improvement.
For costs relating to the acquisition by the Department of Justice of technology and equipment (including, but not limited to, aircraft, helicopters, four wheel drive vehicles, sedans, night vision goggles, night vision scopes, and sensor units).
For the cost of facilitating and expanding the activities of the Organized Crime and Drug Enforcement Interagency Task Force in order to fully abate the flow of narcotics and other illegal drugs into the United States.
For the cost of expediting initial asylum claim review procedures.
For the cost of devising and implementing regulatory reform of the affirmative asylum adjudication process.
For the cost of expanding the Institutional Hearing Program.
For the cost of expanding the Advanced Passenger Information System.
For the cost of increasing rewards for information leading to the arrest and conviction of terrorists.
For the cost of conducting classes, or otherwise assisting or encouraging, legal immigrants to the United States to attain American citizenship.
For the cost of such other activities that, in the discretion of the Attorney General, will reduce: illegal transit of the Nation's borders, the flow of illegal drugs across such borders, the time necessary to process applications for asylum in the United States, and the number of alien criminals incarcerated in this country.
Funds made available under subparagraph (A) in each fiscal year shall be allotted to districts of the Immigration and Naturalization Service in proportion to the amount of illegal immigration in each district as the Attorney General finds to have occurred in the preceding fiscal year.
TITLE II--ASYLUM REFORM SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Executive Order Enhanced Consideration Revocation Act''.
PARTIAL REVOCATION OF EXECUTIVE ORDER.
Section 4 of Executive Order No.
12711 of April 11, 1990, and any rule, regulation, or order issued under that section, shall be of no force or effect, except that nothing in this Act invalidates or otherwise affects any final determination of eligibility for asylum made before the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--CRIMINAL ALIEN DEPORTATION AND ENHANCED PRISONER TRANSFER SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Criminal Alien Deportation and Enhanced Transfer Act of 1993''.
JUDICIAL ORDER OF DEPORTATION.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 227 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Order of deportation for certain aliens ``The court, upon sentencing an individual who is an alien for an aggravated felony (as defined in section 101(a)(43) of the Immigration and Nationality Act) shall include in the sentencing order issued a declaration that the individual is deportable.
A presentence report required under the Rules of Criminal Procedure with respect to the sentencing of any individual for such a felony shall specify whether or not such individual is an alien.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of subchapter A of chapter 227 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``3560.
Order of deportation for certain aliens.''.
Deportation Procedures.--Section 242A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (18 United States Code 1252a) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Deportation Pursuant to a Judicial Order.--An alien subject to a judicial order of deportation under section 3560 of title 18, United States Code, shall be deported promptly consistent with section 242(h).''.
NEGOTIATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS.
Negotiations With Other Countries.--The Secretary of State, together with the Attorney General, may enter into an agreement with any foreign country providing for the incarceration in that country of any individual who-- (1) is a national of that country; and (2) is an alien who-- (A) is not in lawful immigration status in the United States, or (B) on the basis of conviction of a criminal offense under Federal or State law, or on any other basis, is subject to deportation under the Immigration and Nationality Act, for the duration of the prison term to which the individual was sentenced for the offense referred to in subparagraph (B).
Any such agreement may provide for the release of such individual pursuant to parole procedures of that country.
Priority.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary of State should give priority to concluding an agreement with any country for which the President determines that the number of individuals described in subsection (a) who are nationals of that country in the United States represents a significant percentage of all such individuals in the United States.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
DENIAL OF DISCRETIONARY RELIEF TO ALIENS CONVICTED OF AGGRAVATED FELONIES.
Ineligibility for Suspension of Deportation.--Section 244 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1254) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Suspension of deportation and adjustment of status under subsection (a)(2) shall not be available to any alien who has been convicted of an aggravated felony.''.
Application of Exclusion for Drug Offenses.--Section 212(h) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1182(h)) is amended in the second sentence by inserting ``or any other aggravated felony'' after ``torture''.
Adjustment of Status; Change of Nonimmigrant Classification.-- (1) Section 245(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1255(c)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``or'' after ``section 212(d)(4)(C)''; and (B) by inserting ``; or (5) an alien who has been convicted of an aggravated felony'' immediately after ``section 217''.
Section 248 of such Act (8 United States Code 1258) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (3); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (4) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) an alien convicted of an aggravated felony.''.
Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Attorney General shall submit to the appropriate committees of the Congress a report detailing-- (1) the number of illegal aliens incarcerated in Federal and State prisons for having committed felonies; (2) programs and plans underway in the Department of Justice to ensure the prompt removal from the United States of criminal aliens subject to exclusion or deportation; and (3) methods for identifying and preventing the unlawful reentry of aliens who have been convicted of criminal offenses in the United States and removed from the United States.