This Act may be cited as the ``Cabinet-Level Interagency Task Force on Welfare Reform Act of 1993''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a cabinet-level interagency task force to develop a comprehensive legislative proposal that coordinates and reforms all Federal programs that provide assistance to individuals with limited incomes in order to help such individuals achieve self-sufficiency within a reasonable period of time.
There is established a cabinet-level interagency task force to be known as the ``Cabinet-Level Interagency Task Force on Welfare Reform'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Task Force'').
The Task Force shall-- (1) review all Federal programs that provide assistance to individuals with limited incomes; (2) in consultation with appropriate State and local officials, develop a comprehensive legislative proposal that coordinates and reforms such programs by-- (A) providing assistance under such programs according to a coordinated plan under which services are designed to meet the needs of each such individual; (B) establishing eligibility standards for such programs to allow maximum flexibility for such individuals; (C) establishing a single application form and process for assistance under such programs, including a single location at which an individual can apply for and receive such assistance; and (D) establishing as the clear purpose of all assistance to individuals with limited incomes the goal of self-sufficiency and independence for such individuals; and (3) not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, submit a report to the Congress which contains the legislative proposal developed under paragraph (2).
Number.--The Task Force shall be composed of 6 members as follows: (1) The Secretary of Agriculture.
The Secretary of Education.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
The Secretary of Labor.
The Secretary of the Treasury.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Task Force.
Chairperson.--The Task Force shall elect a chairperson from among its members.
Basic Pay.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Meetings.--The Task Force shall meet at the call of the chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Director.--The Task Force shall have a director who shall be appointed by the chairperson subject to rules prescribed by the Task Force.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the chairperson, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the agency to the Task Force to assist the Task Force in carrying out its duties.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The director and staff of the Task Force may be appointed without regard to title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the requirements of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-13 of the General Schedule.
Obtaining Official Data.--The chairperson may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable the Task Force to carry out its duties.
Upon request of the chairperson, the head of the agency shall furnish such information to the Task Force to the extent such information is not prohibited from disclosure by law.
Mails.--The Task Force may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the chairperson, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Task Force, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Task Force to carry out its duties.
Contract Authority.--The chairperson may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for the purpose of conducting research, surveys, and other services necessary to enable the Task Force to carry out its duties.
The Task Force shall terminate 3 months after the date on which the Commission submits to the Congress the report under section 4(3).