This Act may be cited as the ``Homeland Infrastructure Power Security and Assurance Incentives Act of 2003''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) In order to fortify and protect critical infrastructure systems and facilities like military installations, banks, utilities, and information technology systems from potential terrorist threats and to provide efficient and assured power to such facilities advanced technologies must be encouraged and installed by United States Reports electricity providers.
Dependence on foreign oil is a matter of national security and the nation must consider all energy resource options, including support for energy efficiency and renewable resources and technologies that will ensure a diverse energy portfolio.
Estimates are that power outages, brownouts, and other voltage disturbances cost United States Reports industry up to $150 billion per year and cause great disruption to the Nation's economy.
Distributed Power systems, such as fuel cells, turbines and hybrid combinations of these technologies, backed up with storage systems, can reduce costly outages, and ensure more assured and secure and reliable power generation and distribution, protected from potential terrorist threats to our national infrastructure.
Advanced Technology Incentives Program.--(1) The Secretary of Energy shall establish within the Department of Energy an Advanced Technology Incentives Program to make funding available, subject to annual appropriation, to accelerate the development and deployment of new advanced technologies such as fuel cells, turbines, hybrid, and storage system power technologies.
Advanced technology funding provided under this section shall be used by the Secretary for payments to eligible owners or operators to support efforts to reduce system costs, and improve the performance and reliability of advanced distributed power generation and energy storage systems.
Payments made by the Secretary shall be used for the purposes of demonstrating the capability of new technologies to increase power generation through enhanced operational, economic, and environmental performance.
Payments under this section may only be made upon receipt by the Secretary of an incentive payment application establishing that an applicant is eligible to receive such payment as either-- (A) a qualifying advanced technology facility, or (B) a qualifying security and assured power facility (4) Incentive payments made by the Secretary under this section to owners or operators of qualifying advanced technology facilities shall be based on the number of kilowatt hours of electricity generated by the facility through the use of an advanced technology during a 10-year fiscal year period beginning with the fiscal year in which the qualifying facility is first eligible for payment.
A payment of 1.8 cents per kilowatt-hour shall be paid to the owner or operator of a qualifying advanced technology facility under this section.
An additional 0.7 cents per kilowatt-hour shall be paid to the owner or operator that is also a qualifying security and assured power facility under this section.
The amount of the payment made to such qualifying facilities shall be adjusted for inflation for each fiscal year of the program as determined by the Secretary.
A facility qualifying under this section shall be eligible for an incentive payment up to, but not to exceed the first 10 million kilowatt-hours produced in any fiscal year.
Determination of a Security and Power Facility.--Within six months after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security, shall-- (1) measure, evaluate and rate security and assurance performance improvement, (2) define the types of locations and facilities that would most need the benefits of the improvements, (3) determine the criteria for facilities that generate or store and distribute electric energy that improves the security, assurance, and reliability of the nation's electricity grid and protects infrastructure including military installations, financial institutions, medical and first responder facilities, and other locations critical to the security of the nation, and (4) report back to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the United States House of Representatives on ways that incentive payments under this section can accelerate the introduction of technologies capable of providing the maximum level of improvement and benefit to the public.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Advanced technology.--The term ``advanced technology'' means an advanced fuel cell, turbine, hybrid, or storage system power that is used to generate or store electric energy at or in conjunction with a qualifying advanced technology facility.
Qualifying advanced technology facility.--The term ``qualifying advanced technology facility'' means any facility that generates electric energy from a power generation, storage and distribution system.
Qualifying security and assured power facility.--The term ``qualifying security and assurance power facility'' means a facility that also generates or stores and distributes electric energy that improves the security and assures the reliability of the nation's electricity infrastructure in locations and facilities determined by the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security, to be in critical need of improvement and protection.
The facility must substantially reduce electric system vulnerabilities by providing exceedingly secure, reliable, rapidly available, high power quality electric energy to critical governmental, commercial and industrial demand facilities.
Authorization of Appropriations.--The following sums are authorized to be apppropriated to carry out the purposes of this section: (1) For fiscal year 2004, $25,000,000.
For fiscal year 2005, $50,000,000.
For fiscal year 2006, $75,000,000.
For fiscal year 2007, $100,000,000.