Congress makes the following findings: (1) Today in the West Bank and Gaza, textbooks used in Palestinian schools are teaching hatred towards Jews and the incitement towards violence.
Article XXII of the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip of 1995 declares that Israel and the Palestinian Authority will ``ensure that their respective educational systems contribute to the peace between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and to peace in the entire region, and will refrain from the introduction of any motifs that could adversely affect the process of reconciliation''.
As a result of the Oslo Accords, the responsibility for education in the West Bank and Gaza was transferred from the Government of Israel to the Palestinian Ministry of Education.
Since the early 1950s, Palestinian schools in the West Bank have used Jordanian textbooks and the schools in Gaza used Egyptian textbooks, but when these areas were under the control of the Israeli government, anti-Semitic and anti-Israel content was removed from the school books.
While beginning to develop their own curriculum, the Palestinian Ministry of Education continued to use Egyptian and Jordanian books, but failed to remove the anti-Israel and anti- Semitic content.
The Palestinian Ministry of Education directly supervised the production of new textbooks which are now used in schools in the West Bank and Gaza.
The new textbooks contain anti-Semitic and anti-Israel content, and the Israeli government no longer has the authority to change the content of the textbooks.
Palestinian Authority school children are actively taught that the Jews and Israel are the enemy in a broad range of contexts, and for example, page 79 of the Islamic Education for Ninth Grade reads, ``One must beware of the Jews, for they are treacherous and disloyal''.
The Islamic Education for Ninth Grade also instructs that ``one must beware of civil war which the Jews try to incite, scheming against the Muslims,'' on page 94.
On page 182, the text of the Islamic Education for Ninth Grade reads ``The Jews .
have killed and evicted Muslim and Christian inhabitants of Palestine, whose inhabitants are still suffering oppression and persecution under racist Jewish administration.''
The Islamic Religious Education for the Fourth Grade teaches students on page 44, `` .
the Jews--as is their way--do not want people to live in peace.''
The books include lessons equating Zionism with Nazism, Fascism, and racism, and for example, The Contemporary History of Arabs and the World, on page 123, states ``The clearest examples of racist belief and racial discrimination in the world are Nazism and Zionism.''
Islamic Education for the Fourth Grade teaches children ``the Jews are the enemies'' on page 67.
The new textbooks do not acknowledge the State of Israel, but rather the creation of Israel is explained as the Israeli occupation of 1948.
All the maps of ``Palestine'', be they political, historical, geographical, or natural resource maps in the textbooks, erase mention of Israel.
The calls to fight and eliminate Israel through Jihad (Holy War) and Martyrdom for Allah, appear frequently in the school books.
In addition there is a separate recurring theme: the children are taught to fight and conquer Israel's capital, Jerusalem, and for example, the book Islamic Education for Seventh Grade asks: ``How are we going to liberate our stolen land?
Make use of the following ideas: Arab unity, genuine faith in Allah, most modern weapons and ammunition, using oil and other precious natural resources as weapons in the battle for liberation'' on page 15.
The need to fight Israel, all of which is said to be on ``occupied Arab land'' becomes a religious imperative, with teachings like the following from Islamic Education for Seventh Grade, page 108: ``if the enemy has conquered part of its land and those fighting for it are unable to repel the enemy, then Jihad becomes the individual religious duty of every Muslim man and woman, until the attack is successfully repulsed and the land liberated from conquest and to defend Muslim honor .
The same message appears in the fifth grade text Our Arabic Language for Fifth Grade on pages 69 and 70, ``there will be a Jihad and our country shall be freed.
This is our story with the thieving conquerors.
You must know, my boy, that Palestine is your grave responsibility.''
Children are specifically taught to protect all mosques, and for example, Islamic Education for the Seventh Grade instructs students that ``they must devote all their efforts and resources to repairing them and to protecting them and must wage a Jihad both of life and property to liberate al- Aqsa Mosque from the Zionist conquest'' on page 184.
Palestinian Authority Television is under direct control of the Palestinian Authority.
The same hateful portrayal of Jews and Israel found in the school books is promoted regularly on Palestinian television, and for example, on May 14, 1998, Palestinian television broadcast statements such as ``The Jewish gangs waged racial cleansing wars against innocent Palestinians .
large scale appalling massacres saving no women or children''.
Also, radio and television broadcasts made by publicly funded facilities in the Palestinian Authority-controlled areas of the West Bank and Gaza include programs having an anti- Semitic, anti-Israel content.
On May 14, 1998, on Palestinian Television Zionism was presented as ``a cancer in the body of the nation.''
The Palestinian Television also refuses to acknowledge the state of Israel, and broadcast in May 1998, ``the war of 1948 brought about the establishment of the Zionist entity on Palestinian land.''
The message of Jihad is also conveyed on the Palestinian Television, and for example, the broadcasts declared in May 1998, ``This is our Palestine.
We defend it with blood.''
While the United States has not given aid directly to the Palestinian Authority since 1995, in fiscal year 2000 the United States allocated $485 million in development assistance to non-governmental organizations working in the West Bank and Gaza, including funds for education programs.
Between 1995 and 1998 international aid provided by 21 countries and 4 international organizations provided $226.9 million to educational projects in the Palestinian Territories.
From 1994 to 1999, the European Community committed over $600 million in assistance to the Palestinian Territories, including funds for education programs.
Restriction.--No assistance shall be provided to the Palestinian Authority unless and until the President certifies to Congress that the Palestinian Authority has removed the anti-Semitic, anti-Israel content included in the textbooks used in schools, and radio and television broadcasts made by publicly funded facilities, in the Palestinian Authority-controlled areas of the West Bank and Gaza.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the President should urge allies of the United States to apply an equivalent restriction on assistance as described in subsection (a).