ENHANCED PERIMETER SECURITY AND ACCESS CONTROL THROUGH COMPREHENSIVE SCREENING OF AIRPORT WORKERS.
Pilot Program.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security (Transportation Security Administration) shall carry out a pilot program at 7 service airports to screen all individuals with unescorted access to secure and sterile areas of the airport in accordance with section 44903(h) of title 49, United States Code.
Participating Airports.--At least 2 of the airports participating in the pilot program shall be large hub airports (as defined in section 40102 of title 49, United States Code).
At least 1 of the airports participating in the pilot program shall be a category III airport.
Each of the remaining airports participating in the pilot program shall represent a different airport security risk category (as defined by the Assistant Secretary).
Screening Standards.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided under paragraphs (2) and (3), screening for individuals with unescorted access under the pilot program shall be conducted under the same standards as apply to passengers at airport security screening checkpoints and, at a minimum of 1 airport, shall be carried out by a private screening company that meets the standards in accordance with section 44920(d) of title 49, United States Code.
That airport shall be an airport that uses such a private screening company to carry out passenger screenings as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Designated screening lane.--In addition to the requirements under paragraph (1), each airport participating in the pilot program shall designate at least one screening lane at each airport security screening checkpoint to be used to screen individuals with unescorted access on a priority basis under the pilot program.
Such lane may also be used to screen passengers.
Alternative means of screening.--At 1 of the 7 airports participating in the pilot program, the Assistant Secretary shall deploy, instead of the screening standards required under paragraphs (1) and (2), alternative means of screening all individuals with unescorted access to secure and sterile areas of the airport.
Alternative means of screening may include-- (A) biometric technology for airport access control; (B) behavior recognition programs; (C) canines to screen individuals with unescorted access to secure and sterile areas of the airport; (D) targeted physical inspections of such individuals; (E) video cameras; and (F) increased vetting, training, and awareness programs for such individuals.
Vulnerability Assessments.--As part of the pilot program under this section, the Assistant Secretary shall conduct a vulnerability assessment of each airport participating in the pilot program.
Each such assessment shall include an assessment of vulnerabilities relating to access badge and uniform controls.
Technology Assessments.--Airport operators at each airport at which the pilot program under this section is implemented shall conduct an assessment of the screening technology being used at that airport and submit the results of the assessment to the Assistant Secretary.
The Assistant Secretary shall compile the results of all the assessments and provide them to each airport participating in the pilot program.
Operational Assessments.--As part of the pilot program under this section, the Assistant Secretary shall conduct an operational assessment at each airport participating in the pilot program.
Each such assessment shall include an evaluation of-- (1) the effect on security of any increase in terminal congestion created as a result of screening individuals with unescorted access under the pilot program; (2) the average wait times at screening checkpoints for passengers and individuals with unescorted access; (3) any additional personnel required to screen individuals with unescorted access; (4) the effect of screening individuals with unescorted access on other security-related activities at the airport; (5) any lost productivity of individuals with unescorted access associated with airport participation in the pilot program; and (6) the rate at which ``prohibited items'' are detected and confiscated from individuals with unescorted access.
Duration.--The pilot program shall be carried out for a period of not less than 180 days.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the last day of the pilot program, the Assistant Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report on the results of the pilot program.
Contents of report.--The report shall include the following: (A) An assessment of the effect of screening all airport workers with access to secure and sterile airport areas on screening and logistical resources.
An assessment of the security improvements that are achieved from screening such workers.
An assessment of the costs of screening such workers.
The results of the vulnerability assessments conducted under subsection (d).
An estimate of the infrastructure and personnel requirements necessary to implement a screening program for individuals with unescorted access at all commercial service airports in the United States in order to process each such individual and each passenger through each screening checkpoint in fewer than 10 minutes.
Passed the House of Representatives December 11, 2007.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.