HEALTH CARE FRAUD AND ABUSE GUIDANCE.
Solicitation and Publication of Modifications to Existing Safe Harbors and New Safe Harbors.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Solicitation of proposals for safe harbors.-- Not later than January 1, 1995, and not less than annually thereafter, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall publish a notice in the Federal Register soliciting proposals, which will be accepted during a 60-day period, for-- (i) modifications to existing safe harbors issued pursuant to section 14(a) of the Medicare and Medicaid Patient and Program Protection Act of 1987 (42 United States Code 1320a-7b note); (ii) additional safe harbors specifying payment practices that shall not be treated as a criminal offense under section 1128B(b) of the Social Security Act the (42 United States Code 1320a- 7b(b)) and shall not serve as the basis for an exclusion under section 1128(b)(7) of such Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7(b)(7)); (iii) interpretive rulings to be issued pursuant to subsection (b); and (iv) special fraud alerts to be issued pursuant to subsection (c).
Publication of proposed modifications and proposed additional state harbors.--After considering the proposals described in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A), the Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall publish in the Federal Register proposed modifications to existing safe harbors and proposed additional safe harbors, if appropriate, with a 60-day comment period.
After considering any public comments received during this period, the Secretary shall issue final rules modifying the existing safe harbors and establishing new safe harbors, as appropriate.
Report.--The Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Inspector General'') shall, in an annual report to Congress or as part of the year-end semiannual report required by section 5 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.
), describe the proposals received under clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A) and explain which proposals were included in the publication described in subparagraph (B), which proposals were not included in that publication, and the reasons for the rejection of the proposals that were not included.
Criteria for modifying and establishing safe harbors.-- In modifying and establishing safe harbors under paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary may consider the extent to which providing a safe harbor for the specified payment practice may result in any of the following: (A) An increase or decrease in access to health care services.
An increase or decrease in the quality of health care services.
An increase or decrease in patient freedom of choice among health care providers.
An increase or decrease in competition among health care providers.
An increase or decrease in the ability of health care facilities to provide services in medically underserved areas or to medically underserved populations.
An increase or decrease in the cost to Government health care programs.
An increase or decrease in the potential overutilization of health care services.
The existence or nonexistence of any potential financial benefit to a health care professional or provider which may vary based on their decisions of-- (i) whether to order a health care item or service; or (ii) whether to arrange for a referral of health care items or services to a particular practitioner or provider.
Any other factors the Secretary deems appropriate in the interest of preventing fraud and abuse in Government health care programs.
Interpretive Rulings.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Request for interpretive ruling.--Any person may present, at any time, a request to the Inspector General for a statement of the Inspector General's current interpretation of the meaning of a specific aspect of the application of sections 1128A and 1128B of the Social Security Act (hereafter in this section referred to as an ``interpretive ruling'').
Issuance and effect of interpretive ruling.-- (i) In general.--If appropriate, the Inspector General shall in consultation with the Attorney General, issue an interpretive ruling in response to a request described in subparagraph (A).
Interpretive rulings shall not have the force of law and shall be treated as an interpretive rule within the meaning of section 553(b) of title 5, United States Code.
All interpretive rulings issued pursuant to this provision shall be published in the Federal Register or otherwise made available for public inspection.
Reasons for denial.--If the Inspector General does not issue an interpretive ruling in response to a request described in subparagraph (A), the Inspector General shall notify the requesting party of such decision and shall identify the reasons for such decision.
Criteria for interpretive rulings.-- (A) In general.--In determining whether to issue an interpretive ruling under paragraph (1)(B), the Inspector General may consider-- (i) whether and to what extent the request identifies an ambiguity within the language of the statute, the existing safe harbors, or previous interpretive rulings; and (ii) whether the subject of the requested interpretive ruling can be adequately addressed by interpretation of the language of the statute, the existing safe harbor rules, or previous interpretive rulings, or whether the request would require a substantive ruling not authorized under this subsection.
No rulings on factual issues.--The Inspector General shall not give an interpretive ruling on any factual issue, including the intent of the parties or the fair market value of particular leased space or equipment.
Special Fraud Alerts.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Request for special fraud alerts.--Any person may present, at any time, a request to the Inspector General for a notice which informs the public of practices which the Inspector General considers to be suspect or of particular concern under section 1128B(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7b(b)) (hereafter in this subsection referred to as a ``special fraud alert'').
Issuance and publication of special fraud alerts.--Upon receipt of a request described in subparagraph (A), the Inspector General shall investigate the subject matter of the request to determine whether a special fraud alert should be issued.
If appropriate, the Inspector General shall in consultation with the Attorney General, issue a special fraud alert in response to the request.
All special fraud alerts issued pursuant to this subparagraph shall be published in the Federal Register.
Criteria for special fraud alerts.--In determining whether to issue a special fraud alert upon a request described in paragraph (1), the Inspector General may consider-- (A) whether and to what extent the practices that would be identified in the special fraud alert may result in any of the consequences described in subsection (a)(2); and (B) the volume and frequency of the conduct that would be identified in the special fraud alert.