This Act may be cited as the ``Jicarilla Apache Reservation Rural Water System Act''.
The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To ensure a safe and adequate rural, municipal, and water supply and wastewater systems for the residents of the Jicarilla Apache Reservation in the State of New Mexico in accordance with Public Law 106-243.
To authorize the Secretary of the Interior, through the Bureau of Reclamation, in consultation and collaboration with the Jicarilla Apache Nation-- (A) to plan, design, and construct the water supply, delivery, and wastewater collection systems on the Jicarilla Apache Reservation in the State of New Mexico; and (B) to include service connections to facilities within the town of Dulce and the surrounding area, and to individuals as part of the construction.
To require the Secretary, at the request of the Jicarilla Apache Nation, to enter into a self-determination contract with the Jicarilla Apache Nation under title I of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450f et sequentes) under which-- (A) the Jicarilla Apache Nation shall plan, design, and construct the water supply, delivery, and wastewater collection systems, including service connections to communities and individuals; and (B) the Bureau of Reclamation shall provide technical assistance and oversight responsibility for said project.
To establish a process in which the Jicarilla Apache Nation shall assume title and responsibility for the ownership, operation, maintenance, and replacement of the system.
As used in this Act: (1) Act.--The term ``Act'' means the Jicarilla Apache Reservation Rural Water System Act.
BIA.--The term ``BIA'' means the Bureau of Indian Affairs, an agency within the Department of the Interior.
Irrigation.--The term ``irrigation'' means the commercial application of water to land for the purpose of establishing or maintaining commercial agriculture in order to produce field crops and vegetables for sale.
Reclamation.--The term ``Reclamation'' means the Bureau of Reclamation, an agency within the Department of the Interior.
Report.--The term ``Report'' means the report entitled ``Planning Report/Environmental Assessment, Water and Wastewater Improvements, Jicarilla Apache Nation, Dulce, New Mexico'', dated September 2001, which was completed pursuant to Public Law 106-243.
Reservation.--The term ``Reservation'' means the Jicarilla Apache Reservation in the State of New Mexico, including all lands and interests in land that are held in trust by the United States for the Tribe.
Rural water supply project.--The term ``Rural Water Supply Project'' means a municipal, domestic, rural, and industrial water supply and wastewater facility area and project identified to serve a group of towns, communities, cities, tribal reservations, or dispersed farmsteads with access to clean, safe domestic and industrial water, to include the use of livestock.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of New Mexico.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Reclamation.
Tribe.--The term ``Tribe'' means the Jicarilla Apache Nation.
JICARILLA APACHE RESERVATION RURAL WATER SYSTEM.
Construction.--The Secretary, in consultation and collaboration with the Tribe, shall plan, design, and construct the Rural Water Supply Project to improve the water supply, delivery, and wastewater facilities to the town of Dulce, New Mexico, and surrounding communities for the purpose of providing the benefits of clean, safe, and reliable water supply, delivery, and wastewater facilities.
Scope of Project.--The Rural Water Supply Project shall consist of the following: (1) Facilities to provide water supply, delivery, and wastewater services for the community of Dulce, the Mundo Ranch Development, and surrounding areas on the Reservation.
Pumping and treatment facilities located on the Reservation.
Distribution, collection, and treatment facilities to serve the needs of the Reservation, including, but not limited to, construction, replacement, improvement, and repair of existing water and wastewater systems, including systems owned by individual tribal members and other residents on the Reservation.
Appurtenant buildings and access roads.
Necessary property and property rights.
Such other electrical power transmission and distribution facilities, pipelines, pumping plants, and facilities as the Secretary deems necessary or appropriate to meet the water supply, economic, public health, and environmental needs of the Reservation, including, but not limited to, water storage tanks, water lines, maintenance equipment, and other facilities for the Tribe on the Reservation.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Tribal share.--Subject to paragraph (3) and subsection (d), the tribal share of the cost of the Rural Water Supply Project is comprised of the costs to design and initiate construction of the wastewater treatment plant, to replace the diversion structure on the Navajo River, and to construct raw water settling ponds, a water treatment plant, water storage plants, a water transmission pipeline, and distribution pipelines, and has been satisfied.
Federal share.--Subject to paragraph (3) and subsection (d), the Federal share of the cost of the Rural Water Supply Project shall be all remaining costs of the project identified in the Report.
Operation and maintenance.--The Federal share of the cost of operation and maintenance of the Rural Water Supply Project shall continue to be available for operation and maintenance in accordance with the Indian Self-Determination Act, as set forth in this Act.
Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement After Completion.--Upon determination by the Secretary that the Rural Water Supply Project is substantially complete, the Tribe shall assume responsibility for and liability related to the annual operation, maintenance, and replacement cost of the project in accordance with this Act and the Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Plan under chapter IV of the Report.
The Secretary is authorized to enter into contracts, grants, cooperative agreements, and other such agreements and to promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Act and the Indian Self-Determination Act (Public Law 93-638; 25 United States Code 450 et sequentes).
Plans.-- (1) Project plan.--Not later than 60 days after funds are made available for this purpose, the Secretary shall prepare a recommended project plan, which shall include a general map showing the location of the proposed physical facilities, conceptual engineering drawings of structures, and general standards for design for the Rural Water Supply Project.
OM&R plan.--The Tribe shall develop an operation, maintenance, and replacement plan, which shall provide the necessary framework to assist the Tribe in establishing rates and fees for customers of the Rural Water Supply Project.
Construction Manager.--The Secretary, through Reclamation and in consultation with the Tribe, shall select a project construction manager to work with the Tribe in the planning, design, and construction of the Rural Water Supply Project.
Memorandum of Agreement.--The Secretary shall enter into a memorandum of agreement with the Tribe that commits Reclamation and BIA to a transition plan that addresses operations and maintenance of the Rural Water Supply Project while the facilities are under construction and after completion of construction.
Oversight.--The Secretary shall have oversight responsibility with the Tribe and its constructing entity and shall incorporate value engineering analysis as appropriate to the Rural Water Supply Project.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide such technical assistance as may be necessary to the Tribe to plan, develop, and construct the Rural Water Supply Project, including, but not limited to, operation and management training.
Service Area.--The service area of the Rural Water Supply Project shall be within the boundaries of the Reservation.
Other Law.--The planning, design, construction, operation, and maintenance of the Rural Water Supply Project shall be subject to the provisions of the Indian Self-Determination Act (25 United States Code 450 et seq.).
Report.--During the year that construction of the Rural Water Supply Project begins and annually until such construction is completed, the Secretary, through Reclamation and in consultation with the Tribe, shall report to Congress on the status of the planning, design, and construction of the Rural Water Supply Project.
Title.--Title to the Rural Water Supply Project shall be held in trust for the Tribe by the United States and shall not be transferred or encumbered without a subsequent Act of Congress.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $45,000,000 (January 2002 dollars) plus or minus such amounts, if any, as may be justified by reason of changes in construction costs as indicated by engineering cost indexes applicable to the types of construction involved for the planning, design, and construction of the Rural Water Supply Project as generally described in the Report dated September 2001.
Conditions.--Funds may not be appropriated for the construction of any project authorized under this Act until after-- (1) an appraisal investigation and a feasibility study have been completed by the Secretary and the Tribe; and (2) the Secretary has determined that the plan required by section 6(a)(2) is completed.
NEPA.--The Secretary shall not obligate funds for construction until after the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) are met with respect to the Rural Water Supply Project.
PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR IRRIGATION PURPOSES.
None of the funds made available to the Secretary for planning or construction of the Rural Water Supply Project may be used to plan or construct facilities used to supply water for the purposes of irrigation.
The water rights of the Tribe are part of and included in the Jicarilla Apache Tribe Water Rights Settlement Act (Public Law 102- 441).
These rights are adjudicated under New Mexico State law as a partial final judgment and decree entered in the Eleventh Judicial District Court of New Mexico.
That Act and decree provide for sufficient water rights under ``historic and existing uses'' to supply water for the municipal water system.
These water rights are recognized depletions within the San Juan River basin and no new depletions are associated with the Rural Water Supply Project.
In consultation with the Fish and Wildlife Service, Reclamation has determined that there shall be no significant impact to endangered species as a result of water depletions associated with this project.
No other water rights of the Tribe shall be impacted by the Rural Water Supply Project.