This Act may be cited as the ``National Community Health Advisor Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Communities across America have joined forces with State health departments, academic institutions, and community- based public and nonprofit organizations to improve the health of their neighborhoods and help us as a Nation reach the Healthy People 2000 objectives.
Recognizing the difficult barriers confronting their medically underserved communities--poverty, geographic isolation, cultural differences, lack of transportation, low literacy, and lack of access to services--community leaders are becoming bridges between their communities and local health and social service providers to break down these barriers.
These community leaders, often referred to as community health advisors, are uniquely knowledgeable about their communities' needs.
Community health advisors can communicate to health and social service providers the needs of community members, provide quality health promotion and disease prevention information to the community, and serve as the crucial link between their community and service providers.
Community health advisors can increase utilization of available preventive health services, increase the effectiveness of the health care delivery system, reduce preventable morbidity and mortality, and improve the quality of life of their neighbors.
Community health advisors can be a critical part of our national challenge to meet the Healthy People 2000 vision for the new century.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``authorized program services'', with respect to a community health advisor program, means the services authorized in section 5(a) to be included in a plan under such section.
The term ``community health advisor'' means an individual-- (A) who has demonstrated the capacity to carry out one or more of the authorized program services; (B) who, for not less than 1 year, has been a resident of the community in which the community health advisor program involved is to be operated; and (C) is a member of the target population to be served by the program.
The term ``community health advisor program'' means a program carried out in accordance with a plan under section 5(a).
The term ``financial assistance'', with respect to an award under section 4, means a grant, cooperative agreement, or a contract.
The term ``Healthy People 2000 Objectives'' means the objectives established by the Secretary toward the goals of increasing the span of healthy life, reducing health disparities among various populations, and providing access to preventive services, which objectives apply to the health status of the population of the United States for the year 2000.
The term ``medically underserved community'' means-- (A) a community that has a substantial number of individuals who are members of a medically underserved population, as defined in section 330 of the Public Health Service Act; or (B) a community a significant portion of which is a health professional shortage area designated under section 332 of such Act.
The term ``official poverty line'' means the official poverty line established by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and revised by the Secretary in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, which poverty line is applicable the size of the family involved.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, and each of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
The term ``State involved'', with respect to an applicant for an award under section 4, means the State in which the applicant is to carry out a community health advisor program.
FORMULA GRANTS REGARDING COMMUNITY HEALTH ADVISOR PROGRAMS.
Formula Grants.--In the case of each State (or entity designated by a State under subsection (c)) that submits to the Secretary a plan in accordance with section 5(a) for a fiscal year, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in coordination with the heads of the agencies specified in subsection (b), shall make an award of financial assistance to the State or entity for the development and operation of community health advisor programs under the plan.
The award shall consist of the allotment determined under section 7 with respect to the State, subject to section 11(b).
Coordination With Other Agencies.--The agencies referred to in subsection (a) regarding coordination are the Health Resources and Services Administration, the National Institutes of Health, and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Designated Entities.--With respect to the State involved, an entity other than the State may receive an award under subsection (a) only if the entity-- (1) is a public or nonprofit private academic organization (or other public or nonprofit private entity); and (2) has been designated by the State to carry out the purpose described in such subsection in the State and to receive amounts under such subsection in lieu of the State.
In General.--An applicant for an award under section 4 for a fiscal year may receive such an award only if the applicant submits to the Secretary a plan for such year that is in such form, is made in such manner, and is submitted at such time as the Secretary may require, and that meets the following requirements: (1) The plan contains a description of how-- (A) if the applicant is a State, the award will be administered by the State agency with the principal responsibility for carrying out public health programs; and (B) if the applicant is an entity designated under section 4, the award will be administered in consultation with such State agency.
(A) The plan contains a description of how the applicant will-- (i) operate a clearinghouse to maintain and disseminate information on community health advisor programs (and similar programs) in the State; (ii) provide to community health advisor programs in the State technical assistance in training community health advisors; and (iii) provide to community health advisor programs in the State evaluation assistance in evaluating their community health advisor programs and preparing the reports required in paragraph (22); and (B) The plan contains assurances that-- (i) not more than 15 percent of the award will be expended in the aggregate for carrying out subparagraph (A) and for the expenses of administering the award with respect to the State involved; and (ii) the remainder of the award will be provided directly to community health advisor programs in the State for carrying out the duties of the programs pursuant to this subsection.
The plan contains a description of how the applicant will use the award, including the following: (A) description of the criteria the applicant will use to identify which community-based public and private nonprofit entities will receive funds from the award and how the funds will be allocated among such public and private nonprofit entities.
A description of how the award will assist the State involved in attaining the Healthy People 2000 Objectives.
Assurances that for each community health advisor program operated with the award, a program is carried out to train community health advisors to provide the authorized program services.
Assurances that, for each community health advisor program operated with the award, a program of evaluation will be carried out.
A description of how the applicant will identify and consider the needs of the community involved for the authorized program services.
Assurances that each community health advisor program operated with the award will be provided in the cultural context most appropriate for the individuals served by the program.
A description of how the applicant will provide public education on health promotion and disease prevention and facilitate the use of available health services and health-related social services.
A description of how the applicant will provide health-related counseling.
A description of how the applicant will collaborate with and provide referrals for available health services and health-related social services.
Assurances that, with respect to the purposes for the award is authorized to be expended, the State involved will maintain expenditures of non-Federal amounts for such purposes at a level that is not less than the level of such expenditures maintained by the State for the fiscal year preceding the first fiscal year for which such an award is made with respect to the State.
Assurances that not more than 15 percent of the award will be expended for the program of training under subparagraph (C).
Assurances that the applicant will not provide amounts from the award to a community-based public and private nonprofit entity to operate a community health advisor program unless the entity complies with section 6.
Assurances that the applicant will carry out community health advisor programs in accordance with the guidelines established under section 8.
Such other information as the Secretary may require.
Certain Expenditures.--An award under section 4 may be expended to provide compensation for the services of community health advisors.
A community-based public or private nonprofit entity may receive funds from an award under section 4 for a fiscal year to operate a community health advisor program only if the entity submits to the recipient of such award a plan for such year that is in such form, is made in such manner, and is submitted at such time as the recipient may require.
DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF ALLOTMENT.
In General.--For purposes of section 4(a), the allotment under this section with respect to a State for a fiscal year is the greater of-- (1) the sum of the respective amounts determined for the State under subsection (b) and subsection (c); and (2) $500,000.
Amount Relating to Population.--For purposes of subsection (a), the amount determined under this subsection is the product of-- (1) an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount appropriated under section 11 for the fiscal year and available for awards under section 4; and (2) the percentage constituted by the ratio of-- (A) the number of individuals residing in the State involved; to (B) the sum of the respective amounts determined for each State under subparagraph (A).
Amount Relating to Poverty Level.--For purposes of subsection (a), the amount determined under this subsection is the product of-- (1) the amount determined under subsection (b)(1); and (2) the percentage constituted by the ratio of-- (A) the number of individuals residing in the State whose income is at or below an amount equal to 200 percent of the official poverty line; to (B) the sum of the respective amounts determined for each State under subparagraph (A).
The Secretary shall establish guidelines for assuring the quality of community health advisor programs (including quality in the training of community health advisors) and for assuring the cost-effectiveness of the programs.
Evaluations.--The Secretary shall conduct evaluations of community health advisor programs, and disseminate information developed as a result of the evaluations.
In conducting such evaluations, the Secretary shall determine whether the programs are in compliance with the guidelines established under section 8.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may provide technical assistance to recipients of awards under section 4 with respect to the planning, development, and operation of community health advisor programs.
Grants and Contracts.--The Secretary may carry out this section directly or through grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts.
Limitation on Expenditures.--Of the amounts appropriated under section 11 for a fiscal year, the Secretary may reserve not more than 5 percent for carrying out this section.
RULE OF CONSTRUCTION REGARDING PROGRAMS OF INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE.
This Act may not be construed as requiring the Secretary to modify or terminate the program carried out by the Director of the Indian Health Service and designated by such Director as the Community Health Representative Program.
The Secretary shall ensure that support for such Program is not supplanted by awards under section 4.
In communities in which both such Program and a community health advisor program are being carried out, the Secretary shall ensure that the community health advisor program works in cooperation with, and as a complement to, the Community Health Representative Program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1996 through 2001.
Effect of Insufficient Appropriations for Minimum Allotments.-- (1) In general.--If the amounts made available under subsection (a) for a fiscal year are insufficient for providing each State (or entity designated by the State pursuant to section 4, as the case may be) with an award under section 4 in an amount equal to or greater than the amount specified in section 7(a)(2), the Secretary shall, from such amounts as are made available under subsection (a), make such awards on a discretionary basis.
Rule of construction.--For purposes of paragraph (1), awards under section 4 are made on a discretionary basis if the Secretary determines which States (or entities designated by States pursuant to such section, as the case may be) are to receive such awards, subject to meeting the requirements of this subtitle for such an award, and the Secretary determines the amount of such awards.