This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Home Health Payment Improvement Act of 1999''.
ELIMINATION OF SCHEDULED 15 PERCENT REDUCTION.
Prospective Payment System.-- (1) In general.--Section 1895(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(3)(A)) is amended-- (A) in clause (i)-- (i) by striking ``but if the reduction in limits described in clause (ii) had been in effect''; and (ii) by striking ``(i) In general.--'' and adjusting the margin accordingly; and (B) by striking clause (ii).
Conforming amendment.--Section 1895(d)(3) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(d)(3)) is amended by striking ``(including the reduction described in clause (ii) of such subsection)''.
Interim Payment System.--Section 4603 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33), as amended by section 5101(c)(3) of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-277), is amended by striking subsection (e).
EXTENSION OF REPAYMENT PERIOD FOR OVERPAYMENTS.
60-Month Repayment Period.--In the case of an overpayment by the Secretary of Health and Human Services to a home health agency for home health services furnished under the medicare program during a cost reporting period beginning on or after October 1, 1997, as a result of payment limitations provided for under clause (v), (vi), or (viii) of section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)), the home health agency may elect to repay the amount of such overpayment over a 60-month period beginning on the date of notification of such overpayment.
Interest on Overpayment Amounts.-- (1) 60-month grace period.-- (A) In general.--In the case of an agency that makes an election under subsection (a), no interest shall accrue on the outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment during such 60-month period.
Overdue balances.--In the case of such an agency, interest shall accrue on any outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment after termination of such 60-month period.
Interest shall accrue under this subparagraph at the rate of interest charged by banks for loans to their most favored commercial customers, as published in the Wall Street Journal on the Friday immediately following the date of the enactment of this Act.
Other agencies.--In the case of an agency described in subsection (a) that does not make an election under subsection (a), interest shall accrue on the outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment at the rate described in the second sentence of paragraph (1)(B).
Termination.--No election under subsection (a) may be made for cost reporting periods, or portions of cost reporting periods, beginning on or after the date of the implementation of the prospective payment system for home health services under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff).
Effective Date.--The provisions of this section shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
REPORT TO CONGRESS ON ADMINISTRATIVE BURDENS ON MEDICARE HOME HEALTH AGENCIES IN COMPLYING WITH OUTCOME AND ASSESSMENT INFORMATION SET (OASIS) REQUIREMENT.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to Congress and the Comptroller General of the United States a report describing costs incurred by medicare home health agencies in complying with the data collection requirement of patients of such agencies under the Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS) standard as part of the comprehensive assessment of patients.
GAO Audit.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an independent audit of the costs described in subsection (a).
Not later than 180 days after receipt of the report under subsection (a), the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report describing the Comptroller General's findings with respect to such audit, and shall include comments on the report submitted to Congress by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under subsection (a).
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Comprehensive assessment of patients.--The term ``comprehensive assessment of patients'' means the rule published by the Health Care Financing Administration that requires, as a condition of participation in the medicare program, a home health agency to provide a patient-specific comprehensive assessment that accurately reflects the patient's current status and that incorporates the Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS).
Outcome and assessment information set.--The term ``Outcome and Assessment Information Set'' means the standard provided under the rule relating to data items that must be used in conducting a comprehensive assessment of patients.
ELIMINATION OF INCREMENTAL BILLING REQUIREMENT.
In General.--Section 1895(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(c)(2)) is amended by striking ``, as measured in 15 minute increments.''
and inserting a period.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) takes effect as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33).