Relating to Agreement For Nuclear Cooperation.--The joint resolution entitled ``Joint Resolution relating to the approval and implementation of the proposed agreement for nuclear cooperation between the United States and the People's Republic of China (Public Law 99-183; approved December 16, 1985) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)-- (A) by inserting ``and subject to section 2,'' after ``or any international agreement,''; and (B) in paragraph (1) by striking ``thirty'' and inserting ``120''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Action by Congress To Disapprove Certification.--No license may be issued for the export to the People's Republic of China of any nuclear material, facilities, or components subject to the Agreement, and no approval for the transfer or retransfer to the People's Republic of China of any nuclear material, facilities, or components subject to the Agreement shall be given if, during the 120- day period referred to in subsection (b)(1) of the first section, there is enacted a joint resolution described in subsection (b) of this section.
Description of Joint Resolution.--A joint resolution is described in this subsection if it is a joint resolution which has a provision disapproving the President's certification under subsection (b)(1), or a provision or provisions modifying the manner in which the Agreement is implemented, or both.
Procedures For Consideration of Joint Resolutions.-- ``(1) Reference to committees.--Joint resolutions-- ``(A) may be introduced in either House of Congress by any Member of such House; and ``(B) shall be referred, in the House of Representatives, to the Committee on International Relations and, in the Senate, to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
It shall be in order to amend such joint resolutions in the committees to which they are referred.
Floor consideration.--(A) The provisions of section 152(d) and (e) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2192(d) and (e)) (relating to the floor consideration of certain resolutions in the House and Senate) apply to joint resolutions described in subsection (b).
It is not in order for-- ``(i) the House of Representatives to consider any joint resolution described in subsection (b) that has not been reported by the Committee on International Relations; and ``(ii) the Senate to consider any joint resolution described in subsection (b) that has not been reported by the Committee on Foreign Relations.
Consideration of Second Resolution Not in Order.--It shall not be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider a joint resolution described in subsection (b) (other than a joint resolution described in subsection (b) received from the other House), if that House has previously adopted such a joint resolution.
Procedures Relating to Conference Reports in the Senate.-- ``(1) Consideration.--Consideration in the the Senate of the conference report on any joint resolution described in subsection (b), including consideration of all amendments in disagreement (and all amendments thereto), and consideration of all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to 10 hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Debate on any debatable motion or appeal related to the conference report shall be limited to 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the conference report.
Debate on amendments in disagreement.--In any case in which there are amendments in disagreement, time on each amendment shall be limited to 30 minutes, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the manager of the conference report and the minority leader or his designee.
No amendment to any amendment in disagreement shall be received unless it is a germane amendment.
Consideration of veto message.--Consideration in the Senate of any veto message with respect to a joint resolution described in subsection (b), including consideration of all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to 10 hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.''.
Passed the House of Representatives November 5, 1997.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.