This Act may be cited as the ``Regulatory Right-to-Know Act of 1999''.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) promote the public right-to-know about the costs and benefits of Federal regulatory programs and rules; (2) increase Government accountability; and (3) improve the quality of Federal regulatory programs and rules.
In this Act: (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the definitions under section 551 of title 5, United States Code, shall apply to this Act.
Benefit.--The term ``benefit'' means the reasonably identifiable significant favorable effects, quantifiable and nonquantifiable, including social, health, safety, environmental, economic, and distributional effects, that are expected to result from implementation of, or compliance with, a rule.
Cost.--The term ``cost'' means the reasonably identifiable significant adverse effects, quantifiable and nonquantifiable, including social, health, safety, environmental, economic, and distributional effects, that are expected to result from implementation of, or compliance with, a rule.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, acting through the Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs.
Major rule.--The term ``major rule'' means any rule as that term is defined under section 804(2) of title 5, United States Code.
Program element.--The term ``program element'' means a rule or related set of rules.
In General.--Not later than February 5, 2001, and each year thereafter, the President, acting through the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall prepare and submit to Congress, with the budget of the United States Government submitted under section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, an accounting statement and associated report containing-- (1) an estimate of the total annual costs and benefits of Federal regulatory programs, including rules and paperwork-- (A) in the aggregate; (B) by agency, agency program, and program element; and (C) by major rule; (2) an analysis of direct and indirect impacts of Federal rules on Federal, State, local, and tribal government, the private sector, small business, wages, and economic growth; and (3) recommendations to reform inefficient or ineffective regulatory programs or program elements.
Benefits and Costs.--To the extent feasible, the Director shall quantify the net benefits or net costs under subsection (a)(1).
Years Covered by Accounting Statement.--Each accounting statement submitted under this Act shall cover, at a minimum, the costs and corresponding benefits for each of the 4 fiscal years preceding the year in which the report is submitted.
The statement may cover any year preceding such years for the purpose of revising previous estimates.
In General.--Before submitting a statement and report to Congress under section 4, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall-- (1) provide public notice and an opportunity to comment on the statement and report; and (2) consult with the Comptroller General of the United States on the statement and report.
Appendix.--After consideration of the comments, the Director shall incorporate an appendix to the report addressing the public comments and peer review comments under section 7.
GUIDANCE FROM THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with the Council of Economic Advisors, shall issue guidelines to agencies to standardize-- (1) most plausible measures of costs and benefits; and (2) the format of information provided for accounting statements.
Review.--The Director shall review submissions from the agencies to ensure consistency with the guidelines under this section.
In General.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall arrange for a nationally recognized public policy research organization with expertise in regulatory analysis and regulatory accounting to provide independent and external peer review of the guidelines and each accounting statement and associated report under this Act before such guidelines, statements, and reports are made final.
Written Comments.--The peer review under this section shall provide written comments to the Director in a timely manner.
The Director shall use the peer review comments in preparing the final guidelines, statements, and associated reports.
FACA.--Peer review under this section shall not be subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.