This Act may be cited as the ``Family Reinforcement Act''.
TITLE I--ADOPTION ASSISTANCE SEC.
REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR ADOPTION EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year the amount of the qualified adoption expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Dollar limitation.--The aggregate amount of qualified adoption expenses which may be taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to the adoption of a child shall not exceed $5,000.
Income limitation.--The amount allowable as a credit under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount so allowable (determined without regard to this paragraph but with regard to paragraph (1)) as-- ``(A) the amount (if any) by which the taxpayer's adjusted gross income exceeds $60,000, bears to ``(B) $40,000.
Denial of double benefit.-- ``(A) In general.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any expense for which a deduction or credit is allowable under any other provision of this chapter.
Grants.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any expense to the extent that funds for such expense are received under any Federal, State, or local program.
Qualified Adoption Expenses.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified adoption expenses' means reasonable and necessary adoption fees, court costs, attorney fees, and other expenses which are directly related to the legal adoption of a child by the taxpayer and which are not incurred in violation of State or Federal law or in carrying out any surrogate parenting arrangement.
The term `qualified adoption expenses' shall not include any expenses in connection with the adoption by an individual of a child who is the child of such individual's spouse.
Married Couples Must File Joint Returns.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of section 21(e) shall apply for purposes of this section.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``, or from section 35 of such Code''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
TITLE II--ELDERCARE ASSISTANCE SEC.
REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR CUSTODIAL CARE OF CERTAIN DEPENDENTS IN TAXPAYER'S HOME.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 36 as section 37 and by inserting after section 35 the following new section: ``SEC.
36. CREDIT FOR TAXPAYERS WITH CERTAIN PERSONS REQUIRING CUSTODIAL CARE IN THEIR HOUSEHOLDS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual who maintains a household which includes as a member one or more qualified persons, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year an amount equal to $500 for each such person.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified person.--The term `qualified person' means any individual-- ``(A) who is-- ``(i) a father or mother, or stepfather or stepmother, of the taxpayer, his spouse, or his former spouse, or ``(ii) a father or mother, or stepfather or stepmother, of an individual described in clause (i), ``(B) who has been certified by a physician as-- ``(i) being unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another individual) at least 2 activities of daily living (as defined in paragraph (2)), or ``(ii) having a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment, and ``(C) who has as his principal place of abode for more than half of the taxable year the home of the taxpayer.
Activities of daily living.--For purposes of paragraph (1), each of the following is an activity of daily living: ``(A) Bathing.--The overall complex behavior of getting water and cleansing the whole body, including turning on the water for a bath, shower, or sponge bath, getting to, in, and out of a tub or shower, and washing and drying oneself.
Dressing.--The overall complex behavior of getting clothes from closets and drawers and then getting dressed.
Toileting.--The act of going to the toilet room for bowel and bladder function, transferring on and off the toilet, cleaning after elimination, and arranging clothes.
Transfer.--The process of getting in and out of bed or in and out of a chair or wheelchair.
Eating.--The process of getting food from a plate or its equivalent into the mouth.
Physician.--The term `physician' means a doctor of medicine or osteopathy legally authorized to practice medicine or surgery in the jurisdiction in which he makes the determination under paragraph (1).
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section, rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of section 21(e) shall apply.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``or 36'' after ``section 35''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 36 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
36. Credit for taxpayers with certain persons requiring custodial care in their households.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
TITLE III--CHILD PROTECTION SEC.
INCREASED PENALTIES FOR USE OF A COMPUTER IN SEXUAL CRIMES AGAINST CHILDREN.
The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend the sentencing guidelines applicable to section 2252 of title 18, United States Code, to increase the offense level by 2 levels if a computer was used in the transporting or shipment of the visual depiction.
MANDATORY MINIMUM SENTENCE FOR PROSTITUTION OF CHILDREN.
Section 2423 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both.''
and inserting ``and imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 10 years.
''; and (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.''
and inserting ``and imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 10 years.''.
SENTENCING GUIDELINES RELATING TO PROSTITUTION OF CHILDREN.
The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend the sentencing guidelines applicable to section 2423 of title 18, United States Code, to assure that an increase in the age of the child who is the victim of the offense does not result in a lighter punishment.
INCREASE IN PENALTY FOR SEXUAL ABUSE OF A MINOR.
Section 2243(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``less than 3 nor'' after ``imprisoned not''.
INCREASE IN PENALTY FOR SEXUAL ABUSE OF A WARD.
Section 2243(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``more than one year'' and inserting ``less than 3 nor more than 15 years''.
TITLE IV--FAMILY PRIVACY PROTECTION SEC.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no program or activity funded in whole in or part by any Federal department or agency shall require a minor to submit to a survey, analysis, or evaluation that reveals information concerning: (1) parental political affiliations; (2) mental or psychological problems potentially embarrassing to the minor or his family; (3) sexual behavior or attitudes; (4) illegal, anti-social, self-incriminating, or demeaning behavior; (5) appraisals of other individuals with whom the minor has a familial relationship; (6) relationships that are legally recognized as privileged, such as those with lawyers, physicians, and members of the clergy; (7) the minor's household income, other than information required by law to determine eligibility for participation in a program or for receiving financial assistance from a program; or (8) religious beliefs, without the written consent of at least one of the minor's parents or guardians or, in the case of an emancipated minor, the prior consent of the minor himself.
Subsection (a) shall not apply to tests intended to measure academic performance except to the extent that such tests would require a minor to reveal information listed in paragraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (a).
A department or agency which, in whole or in part, supports a program or activity involving any survey, analysis, or evaluation of minors shall establish procedures by which the department or agency, or its grantees, shall notify minors and their parents of their rights under this title.
This title shall take effect 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE V--CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT SEC.
ENFORCEMENT OF CHILD SUPPORT ORDERS.
In General.--Section 1738A of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a) by inserting ``or child support order'' after ``child custody determination''; (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (8) as paragraphs (3) through (9), respectively; and (B) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) `child support order' means a judgment, decree, or order of a court requiring the payment of money, whether in periodic amounts or lump sum, for the support of a child and includes permanent and temporary orders, initial orders and modifications, on-going support and arrearages;''; (3) in subsection (c)-- (A) in the first sentence by inserting ``or child support order'' after ``child custody determination''; and (B) in paragraph (2)(D)(i) by inserting ``or support'' after ``determine the custody''; (4) in subsection (d), by striking out ``the requirement of subsection (c)(1) of this section continues to be met and''; and (5) in subsection (f)(2), by inserting ``as described under subsection (d) of this section,'' after ``no longer has jurisdiction,''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--(1) The heading for section 1738A of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
FULL FAITH AND CREDIT GIVEN TO CHILD CUSTODY DETERMINATIONS AND CHILD SUPPORT ORDERS.''.
The table of sections for chapter 115 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking out the item relating to section 1738A and inserting in lieu thereof: ``1738A.
Full faith and credit given to child custody determinations and child support orders.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall be effective on and after the date of the enactment of this Act.
UNIFORM TERMS IN ORDERS.
In General.--Section 452(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 652(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (9), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in paragraph (10), by striking the period at the end of the 2nd sentence and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(11) develop, in conjunction with State executive and judicial organizations, a uniform abstract of a child support order, for use by all State courts to record in each child support order-- ``(A) the date support payments are to begin under the order; ``(B) the circumstances upon which support payments are to end under the order; ``(C) the amount of child support payable pursuant to the order expressed as a sum certain to be paid on a monthly basis, arrearages expressed as a sum certain as of a certain date, and any payback schedule for the arrearages; ``(D) whether the order awards support in a lump sum (nonallocated) or per child; ``(E) if the award is in a lump sum, the event causing a change in the support award and the amount of any change; ``(F) other expenses covered by the order; ``(G) the names of the parents subject to the order; ``(H) the social security account numbers of the parents; ``(I) the name, date of birth, and social security account number (if any) of each child covered by the order; ``(J) the identification (FIPS code, name, and address) of the court that issued the order; ``(K) any information on health care support required by the order; and ``(L) the party to contact if additional information is obtained.''.
WORK REQUIREMENT FOR NONCUSTODIAL PARENTS WITH CHILD SUPPORT ARREARAGES.
Section 466(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 666(a)) is amended by inserting after paragraph (11) the following: ``(12) Procedures requiring that-- ``(A) upon a determination by the State agency referred to in section 402(a)(3) that the noncustodial parent of any child who is applying for or receiving aid under the State plan approved under part A owes child support (as defined in section 462(b)) with respect to the child, is in arrears in the payment of such support in an amount that is not less than twice the amount of the monthly child support obligation, is not incapacitated, and is not subject to a court- approved plan for payment of such arrearage, the State agency referred to in section 402(a)(3) send to the noncustodial parent a letter notifying the noncustodial parent that the noncustodial parent-- ``(i) is required to pay child support with respect to the child; and ``(ii) is subject to fines and other penalties for failure to pay the full amount of such support in a timely manner; and ``(B) if, by the end of the 30-day period that begins with the date the letter is sent pursuant to subparagraph (A), the amount of the arrearage has not decreased by at least a percentage amount specified by the State agency, the State seek a court order requiring the noncustodial parent-- ``(i) to participate in a job search program established by the State, for not less than 2 weeks and not more than 4 weeks; and ``(ii) if, by the end of the 30-day period beginning on the date the order is entered, the amount of the arrearage has not decreased by at least a percentage amount specified by the State agency, to participate in a work program established by the State, for not less than 35 hours per week (or, if the program also requires job search, for not less than 30 hours per week).