This Act may be cited as the ``Military Health Care Fairness Act''.
INCLUSION OF CERTAIN COVERED BENEFICIARIES IN FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM.
FEHBP Option.--(1) Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1079a the following new section: ``Sec.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program ``(a) FEHBP Option.--(1) Subject to the availability of funds to carry out this section for a fiscal year, eligible beneficiaries described in subsection (b) shall be afforded an opportunity to enroll in any health benefits plan under the Federal Employee Health Benefits program under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, offering medical care comparable to the care authorized by section 1077 of this title to be provided under section 1076 of this title (in this section referred to as an `FEHBP plan').
The Secretary of Defense and the other administering Secretaries shall jointly enter into an agreement with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management to carry out paragraph (1).
Eligible Beneficiaries.--(1) An eligible beneficiary referred to in subsection (a) is a covered beneficiary who is a military retiree (except a military retiree retired under chapter 1223 of this title), a dependent of such a retiree described in section 1072(2)(B) or (C), or a dependent described in section 1072(2)(A), (D), or (I) of such a retiree who enrolls in an FEHBP plan, who,-- ``(A) is not guaranteed access under TRICARE to health care that is comparable to the health care benefits provided under the service benefit plan offered under the Federal Employee Health Benefits program; ``(B) is eligible to enroll in the TRICARE program but is not enrolled because of the location of the beneficiary, a limitation on the total enrollment, or any other reason; or ``(C) is entitled to hospital insurance benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395c et seq.).
In addition to the eligibility requirements described in paragraph (1), during the first two years that covered beneficiaries are offered the opportunity to enroll in an FEHBP plan under subsection (a), eligible beneficiaries shall be limited to-- ``(A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), military retirees 65 years of age or older; and ``(B) military retirees retired under chapter 61 of this title.
An eligible beneficiary shall not be required to satisfy any eligibility criteria specified in chapter 89 of title 5 as a condition for enrollment in an FEHBP plan.
Priorities; List.--(1) Eligible beneficiaries shall be permitted to enroll in an FEHBP plan based on the order in which such beneficiaries apply to enroll in the plan.
The Secretary shall maintain a list of eligible beneficiaries who apply to enroll in an FEHBP plan, but whom the Secretary is not able to enroll because of the lack of available funds to carry out this section.
Period of Enrollment.--The Secretary shall provide a period of enrollment for eligible beneficiaries in an FEHBP plan for a period of 90 days-- ``(A) before implementation of the program described in subsection (a); and ``(B) each subsequent year thereafter.
Term of Enrollment.--(1) The minimum period of enrollment in an FEHBP plan shall be three years.
A beneficiary who elects to enroll in an FEHBP plan, and who subsequently discontinues enrollment in the plan before the end of the period described in paragraph (1), shall not be eligible to reenroll in the plan.
Receipt of Care in MTF.--(1) An eligible beneficiary enrolled in an FEHBP plan may receive care at a military medical treatment facility subject to the availability of space in such facility, except that the plan shall reimburse the facility for the cost of such treatment.
The plan may adjust beneficiary copayments so that receipt of such care at a military medical treatment facility results in no additional costs to the plan, as compared with the costs that would have been incurred if care had been received from a provider in the plan.
Contributions.--(1) Contributions shall be made for an enrollment of an eligible beneficiary in a plan of the Federal Employee Health Benefits program under this section as if the beneficiary were an employee of the Federal Government.
The administering Secretary concerned shall be responsible for the Government contributions that the Director of the Office of Personnel Management determines would be payable by the Secretary under section 8906 of title 5 for an enrolled eligible beneficiary if the beneficiary were an employee of the Secretary.
Each eligible beneficiary enrolled in an FEHBP plan shall be required to contribute the amount that would be withheld from the pay of a similarly situated Federal employee who is enrolled in the same health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5.
Management of Participation.--The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall manage the participation of an eligible beneficiary in a health benefits plan of the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to an enrollment under this section.
The Director shall maintain separate risk pools for participating eligible beneficiaries until such time as the Director determines that inclusion of participating eligible beneficiaries under chapter 89 of title 5 will not adversely affect Federal employees and annuitants enrolled in health benefits plans under such chapter.
Reporting Requirements.--(1) Not later than November 1 of each year, the Secretary of Defense and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall jointly submit to Congress a report describing the provision of health care services to enrollees under this section during the preceding fiscal year.
The report shall address or contain the following: ``(A) The number of eligible beneficiaries who are participating in health benefits plans of the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to an enrollment under this section, both in terms of total number and as a percentage of all covered beneficiaries who are receiving health care through the health care system of the uniformed services.
The extent to which eligible beneficiaries use the health care services available to the beneficiaries under health benefits plans pursuant to enrollments under this section.
The cost to enrollees for health care under such health benefits plans.
The cost to the Department of Defense, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Health and Human Services, and any other departments and agencies of the Federal Government of providing care to eligible beneficiaries pursuant to enrollments in such health benefits plans under this section.
A comparison of the costs determined under paragraphs (C) and (D) and the costs that would otherwise have been incurred by the United States and enrollees under alternative health care options available to the administering Secretaries.
The effects of the exercise of authority under this section on the cost, access, and utilization rates of other health care options under the health care system of the uniformed services.
Not later than the date that is four years after the date of enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 1999, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report describing-- ``(A) whether the Secretary recommends that a health care option for retired covered beneficiaries equivalent to the option described in subsection (a) be permanently offered to such beneficiaries; and ``(B) the estimated costs of offering such an option.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1079a the following: ``1079b.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 8905 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as subsections (e), (f), and (g), respectively; and (B) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection (d): ``(d) An individual whom the Secretary of Defense determines is an eligible beneficiary under subsection (b) of section 1079b of title 10 may enroll in a health benefits plan under this chapter in accordance with the agreement entered into under subsection (a) of such section between the Secretary and the Office and with applicable regulations under this chapter.''.
Section 8906 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subsection (b)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraphs (2) and (3)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraphs (2), (3), and (4)''; and (ii) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of individuals who enroll in a health plan under section 8905(d) of this title, the Government contribution shall be determined under section 1079b(g) of title 10.
''; and (B) in subsection (g)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraphs (2) and (3)''; and (ii) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) The Government contribution described in subsection (b)(4) for beneficiaries who enroll under section 8905(d) of this title shall be paid as provided in section 1079b(g) of title 10.''.
Implementation.--The Secretary of Defense-- (1) shall begin to offer the health benefits option under section 1079b(a) of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)) not later than the date that is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) shall continue to offer such option through the year 2003, and to provide care to eligible covered beneficiaries under such section through the year 2005.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Out of funds authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for military personnel, there shall be available to offer the health benefits option under section 1079b(a) of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), the following: (1) $100 million for fiscal year 1999.
$200 million for fiscal year 2000.
$300 million for fiscal year 2001.
$400 million for fiscal year 2002.
$500 million for fiscal year 2003.
such sums as necessary for fiscal year 2004.
such sums as necessary for fiscal year 2005.