This Act may be cited as the ``Bilingual Education and Technological Advancement Act of 2000''.
GRANTS FOR COMPUTER SOFTWARE FOR BILINGUAL EDUCATION.
Grants Authorized.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary of Education may award grants, on a competitive basis, to local educational agencies to provide financial assistance to elementary and secondary schools for obtaining computer software for bilingual education.
Preference.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give preference to local educational agencies that serve an elementary or secondary school in which-- (1) a majority of the students are from families with incomes below the poverty line, as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and in effect under section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)); or (2) there is a high concentration of students with low levels of English proficiency.
Eligible Schools.--A grant under this section may be used to provide financial assistance only to an elementary or secondary school that meets the criteria of paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b).
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct an annual study of the effectiveness of the grant program under this section.
Report.--By the end of each fiscal year for which appropriations to carry out this Act are available, the Secretary shall transmit to the Congress a report that includes the following: (A) Findings on the effectiveness of this grant program, including the effectiveness of the computer software.
Recommendations for improving this grant program.
Application.--To seek a grant under subsection (a), a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for grants under this section $80,000,000 for fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
Grants Authorized.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary of Education may award grants, on a competitive basis, to local educational agencies to provide financial assistance to elementary and secondary schools for obtaining computers.
Mandatory Grants.--The Secretary shall award a grant under subsection (a) to any local educational agency that-- (1) submits an application under subsection (c); and (2) serves elementary or secondary schools in which, cumulatively, a majority of the students are from families with incomes below the poverty line, as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and in effect under section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)).
Eligible Schools.--A grant under this section may be used to provide financial assistance only to an elementary or secondary school in which-- (1) a majority of students are from families with incomes below the poverty line, as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and in effect under section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)); or (2) there are fewer computers than the greater of-- (A) 6 computers; or (B) a number of computers for that type school established by the Secretary by a regulation under this paragraph.
Application.--To seek a grant under this section, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for grants under this section $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRAINING AND BILINGUAL EDUCATION PROGRAM GRANTS.
In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretaries may make grants to eligible partnerships to pay the Federal share of the cost of establishing and carrying out-- (1) information technology training programs for former participants in information technology training programs who have not received information technology certification, minorities, women, older individuals, veterans, Native Americans, and dislocated workers; and (2) bilingual education programs.
Partnerships.--To be an eligible partnership under subsection (a), a partnership shall consist of-- (1) an institution of higher education; and (2) a private organization, such as a certified commercial information technology training provider or an information technology trade or professional association.
Application.--To seek a grant under subsection (a), an eligible partnership shall submit an application to the Secretaries at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretaries may require.
Federal Share.-- (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost described in subsection (a) shall be 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost shall be provided in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated by the Secretaries, and may include plant, equipment, or services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretaries to carry out this section $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
BONUS GRANTS FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CERTIFICATION.
In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary of Education may make grants to local educational agencies to assist such agencies in awarding bonuses to teachers who achieve information technology certification.
Limitation on Amount.--The amount of a grant to a local educational agency under subsection (a) shall not exceed the product determined by multiplying $5,000 by the number of teachers described pursuant to subsection (c)(2) in the application for the grant.
Application.-- (1) In general.--To seek a grant under this section, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Contents.--The application shall include information describing the number of teachers employed by the local educational agency who-- (A) have achieved information technology certification, including such certification for integrating information technology into the classroom or a curriculum; and (B) have not previously received a bonus under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Education to carry out this section $120,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
SCHOLARSHIPS FOR TEACHER TRAINING.
Grants Authorized.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary of Education may award grants, on a competitive basis, to institutions of higher education to provide scholarships to any eligible student.
Eligible Students.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible student'' means a student who-- (1) is preparing to enter the teaching workforce; and (2) meets the criteria established under subsection (c).
Criteria.--For purposes of subsection (b)(2), the Secretary shall establish criteria that require a student to obtain both technological and bilingual education.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
In this Act: (1) Certified commercial information technology training provider.--The term ``certified commercial information technology training provider'' means a private sector provider of educational products and services utilized for training in information technology that is certified by 1 or more software publishers or hardware manufacturers (the products of which are the subject of the training) with respect to-- (A) the curriculum that is used for the training; or (B) the technical knowledge of the instructors of such provider.
Dislocated worker.--The term ``dislocated worker'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2801).
Elementary school.--The term ``elementary school'' has the meaning given the term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Information technology certification.--The term ``information technology certification'' means certification in information technology, in accordance with such standards as-- (A)(i) the Computing Technology Industry Association or the Information Technology Training Association may issue, after consultation with chief education officers of States, State boards, entities that certify or license teachers, and other entities affected by the standards; or (ii) a State board or entity that certifies or licenses teachers may issue, after consultation with chief education officers of States, and other entities affected by the standards; and (B) the Secretaries may approve.
Information technology training program.--The term ``information technology training program'' means a program for the training of-- (A) computer programmers, systems analysts, and computer scientists or engineers (as such occupations are defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics); and (B) persons for such other occupations as are determined to be appropriate by the Secretaries, after consultation with a working group broadly solicited by the Secretaries and open to all interested information technology entities and trade and professional associations.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1002).
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Native American.--The term ``Native American'' means an Indian or a Native Hawaiian, as defined in section 166(b) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2911(b)).
Secondary school.--The term ``secondary school'' has the meaning given the term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Secretaries.--The term ``Secretaries'' means the Secretary of Education and the Secretary of Labor, acting jointly.
Veteran.--The term ``veteran'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2801).