This Act may be cited as the ``Convention Against Torture Implementation Act of 2005''.
PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN TRANSFERS OF PERSONS.
Prohibition.--No person in the custody or control of a department, agency, or official of the United States Government, or of any contractor of any such department or agency, shall be expelled, returned, or extradited to another country, whether directly or indirectly, if-- (1) the country is included on the most recent list submitted to Congress by the Secretary of State under section 3; or (2) there are otherwise substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture.
Exceptions.-- (1) Waivers.-- (A) Authority.--The Secretary of State may waive the prohibition in subsection (a)(1) with respect to a country if the Secretary certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that-- (i) the acts of torture that were the basis for including that country on the list have ended; and (ii) there is in place a mechanism that assures the Secretary in a verifiable manner that a person expelled, returned, or extradited to that country will not be tortured in that country, including, at a minimum, immediate, unfettered, and continuing access, from the point of return, to such person by an independent humanitarian organization.
Reports on waivers.-- (i) Reports required.--For each person expelled, returned, or extradited under a waiver provided under subparagraph (A), the head of the appropriate government agency making such transfer shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that includes the name and nationality of the person transferred, the date of transfer, the reason for such transfer, and the name of the receiving country.
Form.--Each report under this subparagraph shall be submitted, to the extent practicable, in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex as necessary to protect the national security of the United States.
Extradition or removal.--The prohibition in subsection (a)(1) may not be construed to apply to the legal extradition of a person under a bilateral or multilateral extradition treaty or to the legal removal of a person under the immigration laws of the United States if, before such extradition or removal, the person has recourse to a United States court of competent jurisdiction to challenge such extradition or removal on the basis that there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture in the receiving country.
Assurances Insufficient.--Written or verbal assurances made to the United States by the government of a country that persons in its custody or control will not be tortured are not sufficient for believing that a person is not in danger of being subjected to torture for purposes of subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2), or for meeting the requirement of subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii).
REPORTS ON COUNTRIES USING TORTURE.
Not later than 30 days after the effective date of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report listing each country where torture is known to be used.
The list shall be compiled on the basis of the information contained in the most recent annual report of the Secretary of State submitted to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate under section 116(d) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151n(d)).
Interim Regulations.--Not later than 60 days after the effective date of this Act, the heads of the appropriate government agencies shall prescribe interim regulations for the purpose of carrying out this Act and implementing the obligations of the United States under Article 3 of the Convention Against Torture, subject to any reservations, understandings, declarations, and provisos contained in the Senate resolution advising and consenting to the ratification of the Convention Against Torture, and consistent with the provisions of this Act.
Final Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after interim regulations are prescribed under subsection (a), and following a period of notice and opportunity for public comment, the heads of the appropriate government agencies shall prescribe final regulations for the purposes described in subsection (a).
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to eliminate, limit, or constrain in any way the obligations of the United States or the rights of any individual under the Convention Against Torture or any other applicable law.
REPEAL OF SUPERSEDED AUTHORITY.
Section 2242 of the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-277; 8 United States Code 1231 note) is repealed.
Regulations promulgated under such section that are in effect on the date this Act becomes effective shall remain in effect until the heads of the appropriate government agencies issue interim regulations under section 4(a).
Defined Terms.--In this Act: (1) Appropriate government agencies.--The term ``appropriate government agencies'' means-- (A) the intelligence community (as defined in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 401a(4))); and (B) elements of the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, the United States Secret Service, the United States Marshals Service, and any other Federal law enforcement, national security, intelligence, or homeland security agency that takes or assumes custody or control of persons or transports persons in its custody or control outside the United States, other than those elements listed or designated as elements of the intelligence community under section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 401a(4))).
Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (A) the Committees on Armed Services, Homeland Security and Government Affairs, Judiciary, Foreign Relations, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate; and (B) the Committees on Armed Services, Homeland Security, Judiciary, International Relations, and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives.
Convention against torture.--The term ``Convention Against Torture'' means the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, done at New York on December 10, 1984, entered into force on June 26, 1987, signed by the United States on April 18, 1988, and ratified by the United States on October 21, 1994 (T. Doc.
Expelled person.--A person who is expelled is a person who is involuntarily transferred from the territory of any country, or a port of entry thereto, to the territory of another country, or a port of entry thereto.
Extradited person.--A person who is extradited is an accused person who, in accordance with chapter 209 of title 18, United States Code, is surrendered or delivered to another country with jurisdiction to try and punish the person.
Returned person.--A person who is returned is a person who is transferred from the territory of any country, or a port of entry thereto, to the territory of another country of which the person is a national or where the person has previously resided, or a port of entry thereto.
Same Terms as in the Convention Against Torture.--Except as otherwise provided, the terms used in this Act have the meanings given those terms in the Convention Against Torture, subject to any reservations, understandings, declarations, and provisos contained in the Senate resolution advising and consenting to the ratification of the Convention Against Torture.
This Act shall take effect on the date that is 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
CLASSIFICATION IN UNITED STATES CODE.
This Act shall be classified to the United States Code as a new chapter of title 50, United States Code.