This Act may be cited as the ``National Trails System Willing Seller Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) In spite of commendable efforts by State and local governments and private volunteer trail groups to develop, operate, and maintain the national scenic and national historic trails designated by Act of Congress in section 5(a) of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1244(a)), the rate of progress towards developing and completing the trails is slower than anticipated.
Nine of the twelve national scenic and historic trails designated between 1978 and 1986 are subject to restrictions totally excluding Federal authority for land acquisition outside the exterior boundaries of any federally administered area.
To complete these nine trails as intended by Congress, acquisition authority to secure necessary rights-of-way and historic sites and segments, limited to acquisition from willing sellers only, and specifically excluding the use of condemnation, should be extended to the Secretary of the Federal department administering these trails.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS REGARDING MULTIJURISDICTIONAL AUTHORITY OVER THE NATIONAL TRAILS SYSTEM.
It is the sense of the Congress that in order to address the problems involving multijurisdictional authority over the National Trails System, the Secretary of the Federal department with jurisdiction over a national scenic or historic trail should-- (1) cooperate with appropriate officials of each State and political subdivisions of each State in which the trail is located and private persons with an interest in the trail to pursue the development of the trail; and (2) be granted sufficient authority to purchase lands and interests in lands from willing sellers that are critical to the completion of the trail.
AUTHORITY TO ACQUIRE LANDS FROM WILLING SELLERS FOR CERTAIN TRAILS OF THE NATIONAL TRAILS SYSTEM ACT.
Intent.--It is the intent of Congress that lands and interests in lands for the nine components of the National Trails System affected by the amendments made by subsection (b) shall only be acquired by the Federal Government from willing sellers.
Limited Acquisition Authority.-- (1) Oregon national historic trail.--Paragraph (3) of section 5(a) of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1244(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``No lands or interests therein outside the exterior boundaries of any federally administered area may be acquired by the Federal Government for the trail except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
Mormon pioneer national historic trail.--Paragraph (4) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``No lands or interests therein outside the exterior boundaries of any federally administered area may be acquired by the Federal Government for the trail except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
Continental divide national scenic trail.--Paragraph (5) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``No lands or interests therein outside the exterior boundaries of any federally administered area may be acquired by the Federal Government for the trail except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
Lewis and clark national historic trail.--Paragraph (6) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``No lands or interests therein outside the exterior boundaries of any federally administered area may be acquired by the Federal Government for the trail except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
Iditarod national historic trail.--Paragraph (7) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``No lands or interests therein outside the exterior boundaries of any federally administered area may be acquired by the Federal Government for the trail except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
North country national scenic trail.--Paragraph (8) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``No lands or interests therein outside the exterior boundaries of any federally administered area may be acquired by the Federal Government for the trail except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
Ice age national scenic trail.--Paragraph (10) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``No lands or interests therein outside the exterior boundaries of any federally administered area may be acquired by the Federal Government for the trail except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
Potomac heritage national scenic trail.--Paragraph (11) of such section is amended in the fourth sentence by inserting before the period the following: ``except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
Nez perce national historic trail.--Paragraph (14) of such section is amended in the fourth sentence by inserting before the period the following: ``except with the consent of the owner thereof.''.
Protection for Willing Sellers.--Section 7 of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1246) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(l) Protection for Willing Sellers.--If the Federal Government fails to make payment in accordance with a contract for the sale of land or an interest in land for one of the national scenic or historic trails designated by section 5(a), the seller may utilize any of the remedies available to the seller under all applicable law, including electing to void the sale.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 10(c) of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1249(c)) is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (1); and (2) by striking ``(2) Except'' and inserting ``Except''.
Passed the House of Representatives March 13, 2001.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.