This Act may be cited as the ``Free Burma Act of 1995''.
Except as provided in section 4, the following sanctions shall apply to Burma, effective 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act (or on such other date as is specified in this section): (1) Investments.--No United States national may make any investment in Burma.
United states assistance.--United States assistance for Burma is prohibited.
Trade privileges.--The President shall continue the suspension of special trade privileges pursuant to the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), and shall continue the suspension of nondiscriminatory trade treatment (most-favored- nation status), with respect to Burma.
Importation of goods.--No article which is produced, manufactured, grown, or extracted in Burma may be imported into the United States.
Trade and investment treaties.--The United States should continue to suspend carrying out obligations under bilateral trade and investment treaties with Burma.
Travel restrictions.--The Secretary of State shall prohibit the use of United States passports for travel to Burma except for travel by United States diplomatic personnel.
Diplomatic representation.--The President is urged not to accept diplomatic representation from Burma at a level greater than the level of diplomatic representation accorded the United States in Burma.
Foreign assistance.--The United States shall suspend assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and the Arms Export Control Act to any foreign government which sells or otherwise transfers arms to the Government of Burma.
International organizations contributions.--The United States shall withhold from each international organization that funds activities in Burma other than humanitarian activities an amount equal to the United States proportionate share of that funding.
Multilateral assistance.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States executive director of each financial institution to vote against any loan or other utilization of the funds of the respective bank to or for Burma.
Eminent persons group.--The President, acting through the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations, should urge the United Nations to establish an eminent persons group to report on compliance by the Government of Burma with United Nations resolutions.
International arms embargo.--The President, acting through the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations, should urge the establishment by the United Nations of an international arms embargo of Burma.
AGREEMENTS TO IMPOSE SANCTIONS ON BURMA.
Negotiations With Trading Partners.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 15 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall initiate negotiations with all foreign countries with which the United States trades for the purpose of entering into agreements with the countries-- (A) to support United States sanctions against Burma, and (B) to cease trade with and investment in Burma.
Certification of negotiations and agreements.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall certify to the Congress each country that-- (A) has failed to enter into an agreement described in paragraph (1), or (B) has entered into such an agreement but is not enforcing it.
Action by the president.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a certification is made with respect to any country under paragraph (2) the President shall withdraw-- (A) any designation of such country-- (i) as a beneficiary developing country for purposes of title V of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2461 et sequentes), (ii) as a beneficiary country for purposes of the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act (19 United States Code 2701 et sequentes), or (iii) as a beneficiary country for purposes of the Andean Trade Preference Act (19 United States Code 3201 et sequentes), (B) from such countries the benefits of any other special tariff treatment program under which the special rates of duty apply under column 1 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, and (C) most-favored-nation trade treatment with respect to any such country.
Applicability.-- (1) In general.--The provisions of this section apply to goods entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, originating in or imported from a country with respect to which an action described in subsection (a)(3) has been taken, during the period beginning on the date that is 15 days after the date of the certification described in subsection (a)(2) and ending on the date that is 15 days after the earlier of-- (A) the date the President certifies to the Congress that such country has entered into an agreement described in subsection (a)(1) and is enforcing the agreement, or (B) the date a certification described in section 4 is made.
Rate of duty during period designation is withdrawn.-- During the period described in paragraph (1), goods entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, originating in or imported from a country described in subsection (a)(3) shall be subject to duty at the rates of duty specified for such goods under column 2 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
The sanctions of section 2 shall not apply upon the determination and certification by the President to the appropriate congressional committees that the following conditions are met: (1) The Government of Burma has unconditionally released all political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi.
The Government of Burma has fully implemented the results of the 1990 elections in Burma, including the transfer of power to civilian authority, the protection of basic human rights, and guaranteeing the right of Burmese citizens to participate freely in the political process, assuring freedom of speech and the right of association and assembly.
The Government of Burma has implemented an effective counternarcotics effort.
SANCTIONS AGAINST THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States executive director of each multilateral financial institution to vote against any loan or other utilization of the facilities of the respective institution to or for the People's Republic of China until the President determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that the People's Republic of China has terminated arms sales and other arms transfers to Burma.
SANCTIONS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND.
The President shall withhold all United States assistance to the Government of Thailand until the President determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that the Government of Thailand is fully cooperating in providing support and relief for Burmese exiles and refugees.
Not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on-- (1) the chemical and biological weapons capability of Burma; (2) a plan to provide United States assistance in support of the democracy movement active inside Burma; (3) the treatment by the Government of Thailand of Burmese students, refugees, and exiles resident in Thailand; and (4) the status of arms sales and other arms transfers to the Government of Burma, including the amount of expenditures by the Government of Burma in the acquisition of arms.
As used in this Act: (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives.
Investment.--The term ``investment'' includes any contribution or commitment of funds, commodities, services, patents, processes, or techniques, in the form of-- (A) a loan or loans; (B) the purchase of a share of ownership; (C) participation in royalties, earnings, or profits; and (D) the furnishing of commodities or services pursuant to a lease or other contract.
Humanitarian activities.--The term ``humanitarian activities'' means the provision of food, medicine, medical supplies, or clothing and does not include cash transfers.
Financial institutions.--The term ``financial institutions'' includes the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the Asian Development Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
United states assistance.--The term ``United States assistance'' means assistance of any kind which is provided by grant, sale, loan, lease, credit, guaranty, or insurance, or by any other means, by any agency or instrumentality of the United States Government to any foreign country, including-- (A) assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (including programs under title IV of chapter 2 of part I of the Act); (B) sales, credits, and guaranties under the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2751 et sequentes); (C) sales under title I (7 United States Code Annotated 1701 et sequentes) or III (17 United States Code Annotated 1727 et sequentes) and donations under title II (17 United States Code Annotated 1721 et sequentes) of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 of nonfood commodities; (D) other financing programs of the Commodity Credit Corporation for export sales of nonfood commodities; and (E) financing under the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945 (12 United States Code Annotated 635 et sequentes).