This Act may be cited as the ``Family Health Insurance Program Act of 2001''.
STATE OPTION TO PROVIDE HEALTH BENEFITS COVERAGE FOR PARENTS OF CHILDREN ELIGIBLE FOR CHILD HEALTH ASSISTANCE UNDER THE STATE CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM.
In General.--Title XXI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397aa et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
OPTIONAL COVERAGE OF PARENTS OF TARGETED LOW-INCOME CHILDREN.
Optional Coverage.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a State that meets the requirements of paragraph (2) may provide for coverage, through an amendment to its State child health plan under section 2102, of parent health assistance for targeted low-income parents in accordance with this section.
Requirements.--A State may not receive payment under section 2105 for coverage provided under this subsection (or payment under section 1903 for medical assistance provided to parents described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIV)) unless the State provides assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that-- ``(A) targeted low-income parents in families with higher income are only made eligible (under title XIX or this title) if targeted low-income parents in families with lower income are also eligible; and ``(B) parents are enrolled in the same program (whether under this title or title XIX) as a child of the parents.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Parent health assistance.--The term `parent health assistance' has the meaning given the term child health assistance in section 2110(a) as if any reference to targeted low-income children were a reference to targeted low-income parents.
Targeted low-income parent.--The term `targeted low- income parent' means an individual who-- ``(A) is a parent of a targeted low-income child; and ``(B) otherwise satisfies the requirements for a child to be a targeted low-income child (as described in section 2110(b)).
Parent.--The term `parent' means an individual who is a caretaker relative of a child described in paragraph (2)(A).
Such term includes parents, stepparents with whom the child resides, appointed guardians, grandparents, and other relatives.
References to Terms and Special Rules.--In the case of, and with respect to, a State providing for coverage of parent health assistance to targeted low-income parents under subsection (a), the following special rules apply: ``(1) Any reference in this title (other than in subsection (b)) to a targeted low-income child is deemed to include a reference to a targeted low-income parent.
Any such reference to child health assistance with respect to such a parent is deemed a reference to parent health assistance.
Any such reference to a child (other than in section 2104(b)) is deemed a reference to a parent of such child.
The medicaid applicable income level is the level applicable to the child of that parent.
In applying section 2103(e)(3)(B) in the case of a parent provided parent health assistance under this section, the limitation on total annual aggregate cost-sharing shall be applied to the entire family.
Section 2105(c)(3) shall be applied without regard to subparagraph (A).
Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed-- ``(1) as affecting-- ``(A) the total amount available for allotments under section 2104(a); or ``(B) the amount of the allotment provided to a State under subsection (b) or (c) of section 2104; or ``(2) as requiring a State to provide parent health assistance to all targeted low-income parents.''.
Medicaid Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIV) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIV)) is amended by inserting ``or who are optional targeted low-income parents described in section 1905(u)(2)(C), but only if the State provides medical assistance for such optional targeted low- income children'' before the semicolon.
Section 1905(u)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(u)(2)) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``and for optional targeted low-income parents described in subparagraph (C)'' before the period; and (B) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``optional targeted low-income parent'' means an individual-- ``(i) who is a parent of an optional targeted low-income child; ``(ii) who otherwise satisfies the requirements for a child to be a targeted low-income child (as described in section 2110(b) but determined without regard to that portion of paragraph (1)(C) of such section concerning eligibility for medical assistance under this title); and ``(iii) who are not otherwise eligible for medical assistance under section 1902(a)(10)(A) or section 1931.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to parent health assistance and medical assistance furnished on or after October 1, 2001.