This Act may be cited as the ``Air Traffic Control Service Improvement Act of 1994''.
TITLE I--UNITED STATES AIR TRAFFIC SERVICE CORPORATION SEC.
In General.--There is established a wholly owned Government corporation, to be known as the ``United States Air Traffic Service Corporation'', to operate the air traffic control system of the United States after the completion of transfers of air traffic control facilities and equipment under section 201.
Limitations.--The Corporation-- (1) except as provided in subsection (c), shall not be an agency or establishment of the United States Government; (2) shall have its principal office in the District of Columbia and is deemed to be a resident thereof; (3) to the extent consistent with this Act, shall be subject to the District of Columbia Business Corporation Act (D.C. Code, Sec.
29-301 et sequentes); (4) shall be subject to safety regulatory oversight of the Federal Aviation Administration; and (5) shall be self-sufficient through revenues earned by charging fees to users of the air traffic control system.
War or National Emergency.-- (1) Transfer of functions.--In the event of a declared war or national emergency, the President may by Executive order transfer any functions, personnel, property, records, funds, and other matters relating to the Corporation to the Department of Defense.
Development of plans.--The Board, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, shall develop plans for the effective discharge of the functions of the Corporation in the event of a declared war or national emergency.
Chief Executive Officer.--Within 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall appoint an interim chief executive officer of the Corporation to handle the preliminary development of the Corporation before the appointment of the board of directors.
The interim chief executive officer shall serve as a member of the board until the board elects a permanent chief executive officer.
The chief executive officer (other than the interim chief executive officer) shall be selected by the board.
The first executive officer to be selected shall be selected not later than the 180th day following the date of the first meeting of the board.
Appointment of Transition Team.--The interim chief executive officer shall appoint a 6-member transition team which shall be responsible for getting the Corporation operational and shall serve until the Corporation is operational.
Functions of Transition Team.--The transition team appointed under this section shall-- (1) subject to approval by the President, draft and file articles of incorporation for the Corporation, draft the initial bylaws of the Corporation, and take any other actions necessary for the establishment and initial operation of the corporation; and (2) after appointment of the board, the transition team shall work under the board until the Corporation is operational.
Articles of Incorporation.--The articles of incorporation filed by the transition team in accordance with subsection (c)-- (1) shall provide for cumulative voting under section 27(d) of the District of Columbia Business Corporation Act (D.C. Code, Sec.
29-327(d)); and (2) may be amended, altered, changed, or repealed by a vote of not less than \2/3\ of the members of the board.
Budget.--The Corporation shall be subject to provisions of the Government Corporation Control Act, shall submit an annual business- type budget to Congress, and shall have an annual financial audit performed by an independent public accountant.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS.
Board of Directors.-- (1) Membership.--The Corporation shall be governed by a board of directors with 11 members.
The board shall be comprised of the chief executive officer of the Corporation, the Secretary of Transportation, and the Secretary of Defense (or their designees), and 8 members appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Appointed members.--The President shall appoint the initial 8 appointed members of the board so that thereafter the appointed members will serve on the board for 5-year staggered terms.
The 8 members of the board appointed by the President shall be as follows: (A) 3 members from among persons who represent the views of commercial aviation interests.
1 member from among persons who represent the views of airports.
1 member from among persons who represent the views of employees of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Corporation who belong to a union.
1 member from among persons who represent the views of general business interests.
2 members from among persons who represent the views of noncommercial aviation interests.
Chairperson.--The board shall elect one of its members annually to serve as Chairperson.
Compensation and expenses.--Members of the board may receive compensation in accordance with rules established by the board.
Functions of the board.--The board shall meet at least quarterly and shall be responsible for strategic planning and approving major financial decisions of the Corporation, the annual budget, and the level of user fees.
The board shall provide for public notice and comment on its fee proposals.
The board shall have authority over decisions about contracting for air traffic control facilities, including Level I towers and navigational facilities and equipment.
Function of the secretary of transportation.-- (A) User fees.--In consultation with the Attorney General, the Secretary of Transportation shall have the authority to disapprove the kind and level of user fees established by the board if such fees are not reasonable as determined by the Secretary under criteria established by the Secretary.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue regulations establishing such criteria.
In determining if fees are reasonable under this paragraph, the Secretary shall consider if the fees will harm new entrant air carriers, diminish competition among users of the air traffic control system, or lead to excessive charges for air service.
Borrowing.--The Secretary of Transportation shall have the authority to disapprove borrowing by the Corporation under the following circumstances: (i) If the Corporation seeks to borrow funds at levels which exceed a reasonable prospect for repayment as determined by the Secretary.
If the Corporation seeks to borrow funds for inappropriate, wasteful, or unreasonably speculative activities as determined by the Secretary.
Intermodal issues.--The Secretary of Transportation shall have the authority to address intermodal issues affecting the Corporation.
Function of the secretary of defense.--The Secretary of Defense shall address national security concerns as they relate to the Corporation.
Safety Committee.-- (1) Appointment.--The board shall establish a 3-member permanent safety committee from among persons who are citizens of the United States to review the operations of the Corporation to ensure the highest level of aviation safety.
Persons appointed under this paragraph shall serve at the pleasure of the board.
Compensation.--Individuals appointed under paragraph (1) shall be compensated at rates fixed by the board.
CEO.--The Corporation shall have a chief executive officer who is elected by the board and who shall serve at the discretion of the board.
The board shall fix the term of employment and compensation of the chief executive officer.
Restriction on Receipt of Other Salary.--An officer of the Corporation shall not receive any salary from any source other than the Corporation during the period of the officer's employment by the Corporation.
The Corporation may-- (1) plan, initiate, construct, own, manage, and operate, by itself or in cooperation with other entities, an air traffic control system; (2) furnish, for hire, air traffic control services to air transportation common carriers, and other operators of civil aircraft; (3) establish reasonable nondiscriminatory fees for the provision of air traffic control services; (4) enter into contracts under which other entities may operate individual air traffic control facilities on behalf of the Corporation; (5) acquire, by construction, purchase, or gift, physical facilities, equipment, and devices necessary to the operations of the Corporation, including air traffic control and associated equipment and facilities; and (6) conduct or contract for the conduct of research and development related to the operations of the Corporation and establish technical specifications of all elements of the air traffic control system.
FOREIGN BUSINESS NEGOTIATIONS OF CORPORATION.
Negotiations of Corporation.--Whenever the Corporation enters into negotiations with any foreign entity with respect to facilities, operations, and services authorized by this Act to be conducted by the Corporation-- (1) the Corporation shall notify the Secretary of State regarding the initiation, conduct, and foreign policy implications of such negotiations; and (2) the Secretary of State shall advise the Corporation of relevant foreign policy considerations and, upon request of the Corporation, shall render such assistance as may be appropriate.
Negotiations of Secretary of State.--The Secretary of State shall consult with the Corporation with respect to all negotiations conducted by the Secretary regarding matters which relate to air traffic control.
Petition for Relief.--Except as otherwise prohibited by law-- (1) if the Corporation engages in any activity, or takes any action in furtherance of any policy, which is inconsistent with the policy and purposes of this Act; or (2) if any other person-- (A) violates any provision of this Act; (B) obstructs or interferes with any activity authorized by this Act; (C) refuses, fails, or neglects to discharge any duty or responsibility under this Act; or (D) threatens any such violation, obstruction, interference, refusal, failure, or neglect; the district court of the United States for any district in which such Corporation or other person resides or may be found shall have jurisdiction, upon petition of the Attorney General of the United States, to grant such equitable relief as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or terminate such activity.
Punishment, Liability, or Sanction Under Other Provisions.-- Nothing contained in this section shall be considered to relieve any person of any liability, punishment, or sanction under any other law.
Corporation.--The Corporation shall transmit to the President and Congress, annually and at such other times as it considers appropriate, a comprehensive and detailed report of its operations, activities, and accomplishments under this Act.
Administrator.--The Administrator shall transmit to the Congress, annually and at such other times as the Administrator considers appropriate, an evaluation of the capital structure of the Corporation so as to assure the Congress that such structure is consistent with the most efficient and economical operation of the Corporation.
TRANSFER OF FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT TO CORPORATION.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date the Senate approves the appointments of the President under section 102(a), the Secretary of Transportation shall take such steps as may be necessary-- (1) to transfer to the Corporation all right, title, and interest of the United States in, and all control of the United States over, all facilities and equipment under the jurisdiction of the Administration by the operational date of the Corporation, which are part of the air traffic control system including the air route traffic centers, terminal radar control centers, VHF omnidirectional radio stations, long-range and terminal radar systems, flight service stations, and related facilities and equipment; and (2) to transfer all right of the United States in airport control towers, landing aids, and landing slots to owners of the airport where such towers and aids are located and to which such landing slots relate.
Compensation.--In consideration for property transferred by the United States pursuant to subsection (a), the Corporation shall pay into the General Fund of the Treasury such amount as the Corporation and the Secretary of Transportation agree is reasonable and shall relinquish all rights of the Corporation to amounts in the Airport and Airway Trust Fund.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other law, on and after the date of the transfers carried out by the Secretary of Transportation pursuant to section 201(a), an airport may establish and charge fees for use of airport facilities by, and provision of services to, air carriers and air transportation passengers, including-- (1) fees which air carriers must pay for landing aircraft at or taking aircraft off from such facilities; and (2) fees which passengers must pay for departing from such facilities.
Criteria.--Fees established under subsection (a)-- (1) shall be in an amount equal to the cost to the airport of providing the particular use or service for which the fee is charged, plus a reasonable profit; and (2) may vary according to time of day and demand for the facility or service.
Prohibition.--An owner, operator, or other person in charge of a public-use airport shall not deny access to and use of the facilities of such airport by any person operating an aircraft which is in compliance with all laws relating to aviation safety if the person offers to pay all fees which are usually charged for such use.
Penalty.--Any person who violates subsection (a) shall be subject to a civil penalty under section 46301 of title 49, United States Code.
The Corporation shall be treated as a Federal agency for purposes of chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code; except that judgments, awards, settlements, interest, and costs of claims resulting from air traffic control system liability, shall not be paid from amounts available under section 1304 of title 31, United States Code, but shall be paid from amounts otherwise available to the Corporation.
The Corporation may secure its own insurance for claims resulting from air traffic control system liability.
The Corporation shall be responsible for any legal or administrative costs for air traffic control-related litigation.
The Corporation may secure liability insurance for the board of directors.
The Corporation may sue or be sued in its corporate name.
The Secretary of Transportation shall identify potential environmental liabilities of facilities before their transfer to the Corporation.
As used in this Act-- (1) the terms ``airport'' and ``public-use airport'', respectively, have the meaning given such terms by section 47102 of title 49, United States Code; (2) the terms ``air carrier'', ``aircraft'', ``air transportation'', ``civil aircraft'', ``citizen of the United States'', ``person'' and ``United States'', respectively, have the meaning given such terms by section 40102 of title 49, United States Code; (3) the term ``board'' means the board of directors of the Corporation appointed under section 103; (4) the term ``Corporation'' means the corporation established by section 101 of this Act; (5) the term ``Administration'' means the Federal Aviation Administration; and (6) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration.
The Secretary of Transportation shall submit to Congress not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act such conforming amendments as the Secretary of Transportation determines are necessary to fully implement this Act.