This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Billing Abuse Prevention Act of 1995''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the General Accounting Office has reported that the use of commercial software to detect billing code abuse by medicare supplementary medical insurance program carriers may save the taxpayers $2,000,000 per day; and (2) prompt use of such software may be impeded by regulatory requirements which are not related to efficient implementation of the medicare program.
IMPLEMENTATION OF GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING MEDICARE CLAIMS PROCESSING.
In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, by regulation, contract, change order, or otherwise, require medicare carriers to acquire commercial automatic data processing equipment (in this Act referred to as ``ADPE'') meeting the requirements of section 4 to process medicare part B claims for the purpose of identifying billing code abuse.
Supplementation.--Any ADPE acquired in accordance with subsection (a) shall be used as a supplement to any other ADPE used in claims processing by medicare carriers.
Standardization.--In order to ensure uniformity, the Secretary may require that medicare carriers that use a common claims processing system acquire common ADPE in implementing subsection (a).
Implementation Date.--Any ADPE acquired in accordance with subsection (a) shall be in use by medicare carriers not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--The requirements described in this section are as follows: (1) The ADPE shall be a commercial item.
The ADPE shall surpass the capability of ADPE used in the processing of medicare part B claims for identification of code manipulation on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
The ADPE shall be capable of being modified to-- (A) satisfy pertinent statutory requirements of the medicare program; and (B) conform to general policies of the Health Care Financing Administration regarding claims processing.
Minimum Standards.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as preventing the use of ADPE which exceeds the minimum requirements described in subsection (a).
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and except as provided in subsection (b), any ADPE or data related thereto acquired by medicare carriers in accordance with section 3(a) shall not be subject to public disclosure.
Exception.--The Secretary may authorize the public disclosure of any ADPE or data related thereto acquired by medicare carriers in accordance with section 3(a) if the Secretary determines that-- (1) release of such information is in the public interest; and (2) the information to be released is not protected from disclosure under section 552(b) of title 5, United States Code.
REVIEW AND MODIFICATION OF REGULATIONS.
Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall order a review of existing regulations, guidelines, and other guidance governing medicare payment policies and billing code abuse to determine if revision of or addition to those regulations, guidelines, or guidance is necessary to maximize the benefits to the Federal Government of the use of ADPE acquired pursuant to section 3.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) The term ``automatic data processing equipment'' (ADPE) has the same meaning as in section 111(a)(2) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 759(a)(2)).
The term ``billing code abuse'' means the submission to medicare carriers of claims for services that include procedure codes that do not appropriately describe the total services provided or otherwise violate medicare payment policies.
The term ``commercial item'' has the same meaning as in section 4(12) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 403(12)).
The term ``medicare part B'' means the supplementary medical insurance program authorized under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395j-1395w-4).
The term ``medicare carrier'' means an entity that has a contract with the Health Care Financing Administration to determine and make medicare payments for medicare part B benefits payable on a charge basis and to perform other related functions.
The term ``payment policies'' means regulations and other rules that govern billing code abuses such as unbundling, global service violations, double billing, and unnecessary use of assistants at surgery.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.