This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Toxic Metals Act''.
In this Act: (1) Antimony.--The term ``antimony'' means elemental antimony (Sb) and any compounds or alloys which contain antimony.
Barium.--The term ``barium'' means elemental barium (Ba) and any compounds or alloys which contain barium.
Cadmium.--The term ``cadmium'' means elemental cadmium (Cd) and any compounds or alloys which contain cadmium.
Children's jewelry.-- (A) In general.--The term ``children's jewelry'' means any jewelry, including charms, bracelets, pendants, necklaces, earrings, or rings, that is designed or intended to be worn or used by children 12 years of age or younger and is sold or distributed at retail.
Determination of intention for wear or use by children.--In determining under subparagraph (A) whether jewelry is designed or intended for wear or use by children 12 years of age or younger, the following factors shall be considered: (i) A statement by a manufacturer about the intended use of the product if such statement is reasonable.
Any label on the product.
Whether the product is represented in its packaging, display, promotion, or advertising as appropriate for children 12 years of age or younger.
Whether the product is commonly recognized by consumers as being intended for use by children 12 years of age or younger.
The Age Determination Guidelines: Relating Children's Ages to Toy Characteristics and Play Behavior, issued by the Commission in September 2002, and any modifications to such Guidelines.
Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Sold or distributed at retail.--The term ``sold or distributed at retail'' means sold or distributed to a consumer, but does not include selling activity that is intermittent.
BAN ON CERTAIN PRODUCTS CONTAINING CADMIUM, BARIUM OR ANTIMONY.
Treatment as Banned Hazardous Substance.--Any children's jewelry that is composed in whole or in part of cadmium, barium, or antimony shall be treated as a banned hazardous substance under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1261 et sequentes).
Treatment as a Regulation Under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act.--The ban imposed under subsection (a) shall be treated as regulations of the Commission promulgated under or for the enforcement of section 2(q) of the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1261(q)).
Regulations.--The Commission may prescribe regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Penalties.-- (1) In general.--Any failure of a person subject to a requirement of section 3 to comply with such requirement shall be treated as a violation of section 4 of the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1263) and subject to the penalties set forth in section 5 of such Act (15 United States Code 1264).
Reports.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Commission shall submit to Congress a report on the actions taken by the Commission to enforce the provisions of this Act, including a summary of the criminal and civil penalties imposed under subsection (a).
Heavy metals.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit a report to Congress regarding heavy metals which should be banned from children's products.
EFFECT ON FEDERAL AND STATE LAW.
In General.--Nothing in this Act or section 18(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1261 note) shall affect the authority of any State or political subdivision of a State to establish or continue in effect a provision of the law of a State or political subdivision of a State relating to regulation of products containing cadmium, barium, or antimony, except to the extent that compliance with both State and Federal law is impossible.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify or affect any enforcement action or liability of any person under the law of any State.
Preservation of Certain State Law.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to preempt or otherwise affect any warning requirement relating to consumer products or substances that is established pursuant to State law that was in effect on August 31, 2003.
This Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply with respect to children's jewelry manufactured on or after the date that is 90 days after such date of enactment.