SHORT TITLE AND REFERENCES IN ACT.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare and Medicaid Payment Integrity Act of 1995''.
References in Act.--The amendments in this Act apply to the Social Security Act unless otherwise specifically stated.
FINDING AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSES.
Finding.--The Congress finds that the cost of fraud and abuse of health care services is a significant part of every dollar spent on those services.
Purposes.--It is the purpose of this Act to direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services to move aggressively and broadly against these drains on Federal and State health care resources, and to provide a new, cost-effective source of funding for the benefit quality assurance program.
FRAUD AND ABUSE CONTROL FUND.
In General.--Part A of title XI is amended by adding at the end the following: ``fraud and abuse control fund ``Sec.
The Secretary shall, directly or through contractual or other arrangements and with appropriate coordination with the States, take all steps necessary to assure the accuracy of payments from the trust funds established under title XVIII (referred to herein as the `Medicare Trust Funds') and the appropriation for payments to States to carry out title XIX (referred to herein as the `Medicaid appropriation') and otherwise assure the appropriateness of expenditures from such Funds and such appropriation.
To carry out this responsibility, the Secretary shall place particular emphasis on the development of and experimentation with innovative or rigorous techniques and approaches to identifying, investigating, and eliminating fraudulent or abusive practices that burden the Medicare Trust Funds or the Medicaid appropriation.
To provide a reliable source of funding to support the Secretary's activities under subsection (a) and encourage cost- effective innovation, there is established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be known as the `HHS Fraud and Abuse Control Fund' (referred to herein as the `Fund').
There shall be deposited in the Fund-- ``(1) that portion of amounts recovered in relation to section 1128A arising out of a claim under title XIX or title XVIII as remains after application of subsection (f)(1) (pertaining to reimbursement of a State's share of recoveries relating to title XIX) or subsection (f)(2) (relating to repayment of the Medicare Trust Funds) of that section, as may be applicable, ``(2) payments made pursuant to a court or administrative order or voluntary settlement agreement to reimburse for all or part of the costs of investigations, audits, and monitoring of compliance plans, conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services that relate to the programs under title XVIII or XIX, and ``(3) penalties and damages imposed (other than funds awarded to a relator or for restitution) under sections 3729 through 3732 of title 31, United States Code (pertaining to false claims) in cases involving claims relating to programs under title XVIII or XIX (to the extent the amounts deposited in the Fund under paragraphs (1) and (2) in a fiscal year are less than $2,000,000).
Amounts deposited in the Fund shall be available to the Secretary (without the necessity for any provision therefor in appropriations Acts) until expended for payment of expenses incurred in carrying out subsection (a).
No more than $2,000,000 may be deposited in the Fund in any fiscal year.''.
Initial Deposit in HHS Fraud and Abuse Control Fund.--There is authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 1996 an amount (to be deposited in the HHS Fraud and Abuse Control Fund established by section 1145(b) of the Social Security Act) for the initial implementation of activities under section 1145(a) of that Act (subject to section 1145(e) of that Act).
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1128A(f) (42 United States Code 1320a-7a(f)) is amended-- (1) by renumbering paragraph (3) as paragraph (4), and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Additional amounts (subject to section 1145(e)) shall be deposited in the HHS Fraud and Abuse Control Fund established by section 1145(b).''.
Effective Date.--Sections 1145(c) and 1128A(f)(3) of the Social Security Act (as enacted and amended by subsections (a) and (c) of this section) apply to amounts recovered, payments made, and penalties and damages imposed, after fiscal year 1995.
MEDICARE BENEFIT QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAM.
In General.--Part C of title XVIII is amended by inserting after section 1888 the following new section: ``benefit quality assurance program ``Sec.
(1) In order to improve the effectiveness of benefit quality assurance activities relating to programs under this title, and to enhance the Secretary's capability to carry out program safeguard functions and related education activities to avoid the improper expenditure of assets of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, the Secretary shall enter into contracts with organizations or other entities having demonstrated capability to carry out one or more of the functions specified in subsection (e).
The provisions of sections 1816 and 1842 shall be inapplicable to contracts under this section.
The requirements of sections 1816 and 1842 relating to activities to be carried out instead through a contract under this section shall be deemed to have been met by such contract.
The Secretary shall determine the number of separate contracts which are necessary to achieve, with the maximum degree of efficiency and cost effectiveness, the objectives of this section.
The Secretary may enter into contracts under this section at such time or times as are appropriate so long as not later than the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1998, and for each fiscal year thereafter, there are in effect contracts that, considered collectively, provide for benefit quality assurance activities with respect to all payments under this title.
A benefit quality assurance contract required under subsection (a) must provide for one or more benefit quality assurance program activities.
Each such contract shall include an agreement by the contractor to cooperate with the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Attorney General of the United States, and other law enforcement agencies, as appropriate, in the investigation and deterrence of fraud and abuse in relation to this title and in other cases arising out of the activities described in subsection (e), and shall contain such other provisions as the Secretary finds necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this part.
The provisions of section 1153(e)(1) shall apply to contracts and contracting authority under this section, except that competitive procedures must be used when entering into new contracts under this section, or at any other time when it is in the best interests of the Government.
A contract under this section may be renewed from term to term without regard to any provision of law requiring competition if the contractor has met or exceeded the performance requirements established in the current contract.
(1) In carrying out this section, the Secretary may not enter into a contract with an organization or other entity if the Secretary determines that such organization's or entity's financial holdings, interests, or relationships would interfere with its ability to perform the functions to be required by the contract in an effective and impartial manner.
The Secretary shall by regulation provide for the limitation of a contractor's liability for actions taken to carry out a contract under this section, and such regulation shall, to the extent the Secretary finds appropriate, employ the same or comparable standards and other substantive and procedural provisions as are contained in section 1157.
Obligations incurred for benefit quality assurance program activities shall be paid from amounts available for expenditure in the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, in such amounts as the Secretary shall deem fair and equitable after taking into consideration the expenses attributable to each of the programs under this title, but such obligations shall not exceed, in the aggregate, $396,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998, $408,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and $426,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
The Secretary shall make such transfers of moneys between those funds as may be appropriate to settle accounts between them in cases where expenses properly payable from one fund have been paid from the other fund.
For purposes of this section, benefit quality assurance program activities consist of the following: ``(1) Review of activities of providers of services or other persons in connection with this title, including medical and utilization review and fraud review.
Audit of cost reports.
Determinations as to whether payment should not be, or should not have been, made under this title by reason of section 1862(b), and recovery of payments that should not have been made.
Education of providers of services, beneficiaries, and other persons with respect to payment integrity and benefit quality assurance issues.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies to obligations incurred after fiscal year 1995.
REDUCTION IN DISCRETIONARY SPENDING LIMITS.
Section 601(a)(2)(F) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, and reduced by $398,000,000 in new budget authority and $366,160,000 in outlays with respect to fiscal year 1996, by $398,000,000 in new budget authority and $384,181,000 in outlays with respect to fiscal year 1997, and by $398,000,000 in new budget authority and $392,003,000 in outlays with respect to fiscal year 1998''.