This Act may be cited as the ``Teacher Victims' Family Assistance Act of 2002''.
TEACHER VICTIM FAMILY ASSISTANCE.
The Secretary of Education shall provide to each applicable recipient the following amounts and forms of assistance: (1) Funeral assistance.--A payment of up to $1,500 to the surviving spouse, dependent child, or other next of kin, as determined by the Secretary, to assist with any funeral expenses of the victim.
Death benefit.--A payment of $75,000 to the surviving spouse, dependent child, or other next of kin, as determined by the Secretary.
Living assistance.--Beginning one year after the date of death of the victim, a payment of-- (A) $900 per month to the surviving spouse, until the earlier of the spouse's death or remarriage; and (B) $225 per month to each dependent child, until reaching the age of 18 years.
Dependent undergraduate education assistance.-- (A) In general.--For each dependent child enrolled or accepted for enrollment in a part-time or full-time program of undergraduate instruction at an institution of higher education, an annual amount not to exceed the lesser of $7,500 or half the total annual cost of attendance at such institution.
Relation to other assistance.--Assistance provided under this paragraph shall not be considered for the purpose of awarding Federal assistance under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes), except that in no case shall the sum of the total amount of student financial assistance awarded to a dependent child under such title and the amount of assistance provided under this paragraph exceed the child's total cost of attendance.
Duration of assistance.--A dependent child may receive assistance under this paragraph for not more than a total of 5 years.
Good standing required.--The dependent child must maintain good standing at the institution in order to receive assistance under this paragraph.
Effect of parental death or remarriage.--The death or remarriage of the surviving spouse does not affect a dependent child's eligibility for assistance under this paragraph.
TAX PROVISIONS RELATING TO ELEMENTARY OR SECONDARY SCHOOL STAFF MEMBERS KILLED IN AN ACT OF VIOLENCE WHILE PERFORMING SCHOOL DUTIES.
Teacher's Wages in Year of Death Excluded From Income.-- (1) In general.--Part II of subchapter J of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
INCOME TAXES OF ELEMENTARY OR SECONDARY SCHOOL STAFF MEMBERS KILLED IN AN ACT OF VIOLENCE WHILE PERFORMING SCHOOL DUTIES.
``In the case of any individual who is a victim (as defined by section 2(f)(1) of the Teacher Victims' Family Assistance Act of 2002), any tax imposed by this subtitle on any amount received by such individual by reason of school employment shall not apply with respect to the taxable year in which falls the date of death of the individual.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for part II of subchapter J of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Income taxes of elementary or secondary school staff members killed in an act of violence while performing school duties.''.
Exclusion of Teacher Victim Family Assistance.-- (1) In general.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by redesignating section 139 as section 139A and by inserting after section 138 the following new section: ``SEC.
TEACHER VICTIM FAMILY ASSISTANCE.
``In the case of an individual, gross income does not include any amount received in a taxable year under section 2 of the Teacher Victims' Family Assistance Act of 2002.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for such part is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Teacher victim family assistance.
Cross references to other Acts.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.
ENTITLEMENT TO MEDICARE BENEFITS.
Basic Medicare Health Benefits.--The surviving spouse and each dependent child of a victim may elect to be deemed to be entitled to hospital insurance benefits under part A of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395c) et sequentes and to be enrolled under part B of such Act (42 United States Code 1395j) for supplementary medical insurance benefits under the medicare program.
Medigap Benefits.--A surviving spouse and dependent child referred to in subsection (a) may enroll under a medicare supplemental policy under section 1882 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ss) in the same manner and under the same terms and conditions as apply to individuals who first become entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII of such Act, or enrolled under part B of such title.
Period of Entitlement.--Each surviving spouse and dependent child making an election under subsection (a) shall be so entitled and enrolled for the period that begins on the date of election and ends on-- (1) in the case of a surviving spouse, the date on which the surviving spouse remarries; and (2) in the case of an individual who is a dependent child, the date on which the individual attains 25 years of age.
Administration of Provision.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall take such steps as are necessary to implement the provisions of this section, and provide for appropriate enrollment periods under title XVIII of the Social Security Act ( 42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) to carry out the provisions of this section.
ASSISTANCE SUPPLEMENTS, NOT SUPPLANTS OTHER BENEFITS.
No assistance provided under this Act may supplant any benefit or other compensation paid or payable to the surviving spouse, dependent child, or other next of kin of the victim by the victim's employer, school, school district, or local or State government, or by any insurance coverage of the victim.
In this Act: (1) The term ``victim'' means a teacher, administrator, employee, or paid or unpaid staff member of a public or private elementary or secondary school in the United States who was killed as a result of an act of violence committed by another person while performing school duties.
The term ``surviving spouse'' means the spouse of the victim, as determined under applicable State law, at the time of the victim's death.
The term ``dependent child'' means a son or daughter of the victim (whether natural or adopted) who is under 25 years old.
The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given that term in section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1002).
The term ``cost of attendance'' has the meaning give that term in section 472 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1087ll).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.