This Act may be cited as the ``Agricultural Mediation Act of 1994''.
As used in this Act: (1) Agricultural mediation program.--The term ``agricultural mediation program'' means a program administered by a State (in accordance with this Act) for the mediation of disputes arising under an eligible Department program.
Department.--The term ``Department'' means the United States Department of Agriculture.
Eligible department program.--The term ``eligible Department program'' means a program of the Department under which disputes may be resolved under an agricultural mediation program, as determined by the Secretary under section 4.
Mediation.--The term ``mediation'' means a process of negotiation in which an impartial third party attempts to assist parties in negotiating a mutually agreeable resolution of a dispute.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
The purposes of this Act are to provide the Secretary with the authority to-- (1) determine which programs of the Department are eligible for mediation, which has proven to be a valuable means of alternative dispute resolution; and (2) certify States to administer mediation for eligible Department programs.
DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBLE DEPARTMENT PROGRAMS.
Determination.--The Secretary is authorized to determine which programs of the Department are eligible Department programs.
Determination Factors.--In making the determination, the Secretary shall consider-- (1) the complexity and technical nature of the Department program; (2) the protection of the interests of program participants; and (3) whether mediation as a form of dispute resolution would achieve fairness for program participants and the Department.
NOTICE OF ELIGIBLE DEPARTMENT PROGRAMS.
Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register-- (1) notice of which programs of the Department are eligible Department programs; and (2) a solicitation to States to apply for certification to administer agricultural mediation programs for the eligible Department programs.
CERTIFICATION OF STATES TO ADMINISTER AGRICULTURAL MEDIATION PROGRAMS.
In General.--For purposes of this Act, a State is qualified to administer an agricultural mediation program if the Secretary certifies that a proposal by the State to administer the program satisfies the requirements of this section.
Determinations.--The Secretary shall determine whether a State is qualified to administer an agricultural mediation program of the State not later than 30 days after the Secretary receives from the State a description of the proposed agricultural mediation program and a statement certifying that the State has met all of the requirements of subsection (c).
Certification Requirements.--To obtain certification to administer an agricultural mediation program, a State must-- (1) demonstrate a need for the agricultural mediation program within the State based on the agricultural activity, and the number of participants, involved; (2) ensure that mediation services will be offered to all individuals who are or may be eligible to participate in the eligible Department program; (3) ensure that the agricultural mediation program is administered by the State or an authorized agent of the State; (4) provide for the training of mediators; (5) ensure that confidentiality of the mediation sessions will be maintained; and (6) ensure that persons and agencies of the Department affected by the program, as determined by the Secretary, receive adequate notification of the agricultural mediation program.
In General.--To retain certification to administer an agricultural mediation program, a State must-- (1) recertify the program in a manner prescribed by the Secretary; and (2) provide affected agencies of the Department with all information required by the Secretary (in consultation with interested parties) on the disputes mediated under the program, subject to the confidentiality requirements of Federal and State law.
Public Availability.--The information described in subsection (a)(2) shall be made available by the Secretary to the public.
MATCHING GRANTS TO STATES.
In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary shall provide matching grants to a State for the administration and operation of an agricultural mediation program.
Amount.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary may pay up to 70 percent of the cost of the administration and operation of an agricultural mediation program by a State.
Use.--A State that receives a matching grant to administer an agricultural mediation program under this section may use the financial assistance only to administer and operate the program.
Penalty.--If the Secretary determines that a State has not complied with subsection (c), the State shall not be eligible for additional matching grants under this section.
Information.--If the Secretary receives a request from a person for information or analysis that is relevant to a mediated dispute (as determined by the Secretary), the Secretary shall provide the information or analysis to the person.
Participation by Secretary.--Subject to subsection (c), the Secretary shall participate in each agricultural mediation program established under this Act.
Mediation Nonbinding on the Secretary.--The Secretary shall not be bound by a decision or negotiated agreement resulting from mediation conducted under an agricultural mediation program if the Secretary has not agreed to the decision or agreement.
The Secretary shall issue regulations to carry out this Act not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
The authority provided by this Act is in addition to, and in no way affects, the authority provided under title V of the Agricultural Credit Act of 1987 (7 United States Code 5101 et sequentes).
Waiver of Farm Credit Mediation Rights by Borrowers.--Section 4.14E of the Farm Credit Act of 1971 (12 United States Code 2202e) is amended by striking ``the agricultural loan'' and inserting ``an agricultural''.
Waiver of FmHA Mediation Rights by Borrowers.--Section 358 of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 United States Code 2006) is amended by striking ``the agricultural loan'' and inserting ``an agricultural''.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $7,500,000 for each of fiscal years 1995 through 1998.
Fees.--The Secretary is authorized, subject to the availability of funds appropriated in advance, to expend such funds as are necessary to pay any fees charged to an agency that administers an agricultural mediation program for mediating individual disputes to which the agency is a party.
The authority provided by this Act shall terminate on September 30, 1998.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall become effective on the date of enactment of this Act.
Transitional Provision.--During the 2-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, a State that (on the date of enactment of this Act) is certified to carry out an agricultural loan mediation program under title V of the Agricultural Credit Act of 1987 (7 United States Code 5101 et sequentes) shall be considered certified (under section 6 of this Act) to administer any agricultural mediation program.
Passed the Senate May 25 (legislative day, May 16), 1994.
Attest: MARTHA S. POPE, Secretary.