This Act may be cited as the ``Rail Safety Act of 1996''.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Federal Railroad Administration.
Passenger cab car.--The term ``passenger cab car'' means the leading cab car on a passenger train that does not have a locomotive or safety locomotive at the front of the train.
Safety locomotive.--The term ``safety locomotive'' means a cab-car locomotive (whether operational or not) that is used at the front of a rail passenger train to promote passenger safety.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Train employee.--The term ``train employee'' has the same meaning as in section 21101(5) of title 49, United States Code.
In General.-- (1) Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall promulgate regulations concerning limitations on duty hours of train employees that contain-- (A) requirements concerning hours of work for train employees and interim periods available for rest that are no less stringent than the applicable requirements under section 21103 of title 49, United States Code, as in effect on the day before the effective date of subsection (b); and (B) any other related requirements that the Secretary determines to be necessary to protect public safety.
Negotiated rulemaking.-- (A) In general.--In promulgating regulations under this subsection, the Secretary shall use negotiated rulemaking, unless the Secretary determines that the use of that process is not appropriate.
Procedures for negotiated rulemaking.--If the Secretary determines under subparagraph (A) that negotiated rulemaking is appropriate, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall carry out the negotiated rulemaking in accordance with the procedures under subchapter III of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
Repeal.-- (1) In general.--Section 21103 of title 49, United States Code, is repealed.
Effective date.--This subsection shall take effect on the date on which the Secretary promulgates final regulations under subsection (a).
SATELLITE-BASED TRAIN CONTROL SYSTEMS.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, shall conduct a study to determine the feasibility of requiring satellite- based train control systems to provide positive train control for railroad systems in the United States by January 1, 2001.
Time Frame for Operation; Automated Train Control Systems.-- (1) Regulations to cover impracticability of satellite- based train control systems.--Subject to paragraph (3), if, upon completion of the study conducted under subsection (a), the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, determines that the installation of an effective satellite-based train control system referred to in subsection (a) could not be accomplished practicably by January 1, 2001, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to require, as soon as practicable after the date of promulgation of the regulations, the use of automated train control technology that is available on that date.
Regulations to cover practicability of satellite-based train control systems.-- (A) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), if upon completion of the study conducted under subsection (a), the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, determines that the installation of an effective satellite-based train control system referred to in subsection (a) could be accomplished practicably by January 1, 2001, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall promulgate regulations to require, as soon as practicable after the date of promulgation of the regulations, the use of automated train control technology that is available on that date.
Waivers.--If the appropriate official of a railroad system establishes, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, and in a manner specified by the Secretary, that the railroad system will have in operation a satellite-based train control system by January 1, 2001, the Secretary shall issue a waiver for that railroad system to waive the application of the regulations promulgated under subparagraph (A) for that railroad system, subject to terms and conditions established by the Secretary.
Conditions.--In promulgating regulations under this subsection, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall provide for any exceptions or conditions that the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, determines to be necessary.
Monitoring.-- (A) In general.--If the Secretary issues a waiver for a railroad system under paragraph (2)(B), the railroad system shall, during the period that the waiver is in effect, provide such information to the Secretary as the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, determines to be necessary to monitor the compliance of the railroad system with the conditions of the waiver, including information concerning the progress of the railroad system in achieving an operational satellite-based train control system.
Revocation of waivers.--If, at any time during the period that a waiver issued under paragraph (2)(B) is in effect, the Secretary determines that the railroad system issued the waiver is not meeting the terms or conditions of the waiver, or is not likely to have in operation a satellite-based train control system by January 1, 2001, the Secretary shall revoke the waiver.
AUTOMATIC TRAIN ESCAPE DEVICE STUDY.
Study.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, shall conduct a study of the technical, structural, and economic feasibility of automatic train escape devices.
Report.--Upon completion of the study conducted under this section, the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, shall-- (1) prepare a report that contains the findings of the study; and (2) submit a copy of the report to the appropriate committees of the Congress.
Regulations.--If, by the date specified in subsection (a), the Secretary makes a determination (on the basis of the findings of the study) that automatic train escape devices should be required on rail passenger trains, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall, not later than 180 days after such date, promulgate regulations to require automatic train escape devices on rail passenger trains as soon as practicable after the date of promulgation of the regulations.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall establish, by regulation, minimum safety standards for fuel tanks of locomotives of rail passenger trains that take into consideration environmental protection and public safety.
Applicability.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, may limit the applicability of the regulations promulgated under subsection (a) to new locomotives (as defined by the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator) if the Secretary determines that the limitation is appropriate.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall determine whether to promulgate regulations, for the purpose of protecting public safety, to-- (1) require crash posts at the corners of rail passenger cars; (2) require safety locomotives on rail passenger trains; (3) establish minimum crash-worthiness standards for passenger cab cars; or (4) carry out any combination of paragraphs (1) through (3).
Regulations.--If, the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, determines that promulgating any of the regulations referred to in subsection (a) are necessary to protect public safety, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall, not later than 180 days after such date, promulgate such regulations in final form, to take effect as soon as practicable after the date of promulgation of the regulations.
Report.--If the Secretary determines under subsection (a) that taking any action referred to in paragraphs (1) through (3) of such subsection is not necessary to protect public safety, not later than the date of the determination, the Secretary shall submit a report to the appropriate committees of the Congress that provides the reasons for the determination.
Study.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, shall conduct a study of the placement of rail signals along railways.
In conducting the study, the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, shall determine whether regulations should be promulgated to require-- (1) that a signal be placed along a railway at each exit of a rail station; and (2) if practicable, that a signal be placed so that it is visible only to the train employee of a train that the signal is designed to influence.
Regulations.--If, upon completion of the study conducted under subsection (a), the Secretary determines that the regulations referred to in that subsection are necessary for the protection of public safety, the Secretary shall, not later than 180 days after the completion of the study, promulgate those regulations.
Report.--If, upon completion of the study conducted under subsection (a), the Secretary determines that promulgating any of the regulations referred to in subsection (a) is not necessary for the protection of public safety, not later than the date of completion of the study, the Secretary shall submit a report to the appropriate committees of the Congress that provides the reasons for that determination.