TRANSFER OF FIREARMS REGULATION FUNCTIONS OF BUREAU OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND FIREARMS.
In General.--The functions relating to the regulation of firearms which on April 29, 1993, were performed by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms are hereby transferred from that Bureau to the Attorney General.
Delegation of Functions.--The Attorney General shall delegate to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation the functions transferred under this section.
Property and Records.--The contracts, liabilities, records, property, and other assets and interests of, or made available in connection with, the functions transferred by this section are hereby transferred to the Attorney General for appropriate allocation.
Personnel.-- (1) In general.--The personnel employed in connection with the functions transferred by this section are hereby transferred to the Attorney General.
Effect.--Any full-time or part-time personnel employed in permanent positions shall not be separated or reduced in grade or compensation because of the transfer under this subsection during the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Any reference in any other Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, or delegation of authority, or any document of or pertaining to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms with respect to functions transferred by this Act-- (1) to the Secretary of the Treasury or the head of that bureau is deemed to refer to the Attorney General; and (2) to the Department of the Treasury or that bureau is deemed to refer to the Department of Justice or the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as appropriate.
Legal Documents.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, grants, contracts, certificates, licenses, and privileges-- (1) that have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by the President, by the head of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, the Secretary of the Treasury, any other Government official, or a court of competent jurisdiction, in the performance of functions of the head of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms that are transferred by this Act, and (2) that are in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act (or become effective after such date pursuant to their terms as in effect on such date), shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Attorney General or other authorized official, or a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Proceedings.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect any proceedings or any application for any benefits, service, license, permit, certificate, or financial assistance pending before the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms on the date of the enactment of this Act, but such proceedings and applications shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this Act had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceeding shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this Act had not been enacted.
Suits.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect suits commenced before the date of the enactment of this Act, and in all such suits, proceeding shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Nonabatement of Actions.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against the head of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, or by or against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer of such bureau shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act.
Continuance of Suits.--If, before the date of the enactment of this Act, any agency or officer thereof in the official capacity of such officer, is party to a suit, and under this Act any function of such agency or officer is transferred to the Attorney General or any other official of the Department of Justice, then such suit shall be continued with the Attorney General or other appropriate official of the Department of Justice substituted or added as a party.
AMENDMENTS TO INSPECTOR GENERAL ACT OF 1978.
The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) in section 8C(b)-- (A) by striking ``the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms,''; and (B) by striking ``Service,'' and inserting ``Service''; and (2) in section 9(a)(1)(L)-- (A) by striking ``the `Office of Internal Affairs, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms',''; and (B) by striking ``Service','' and inserting ``Service' ''.
REPEAL OF REQUIREMENT OF AUDIT BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES.
Repeal.--Section 713 of title 31, United States Code, is repealed.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 7 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 713.
Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall issue such regulations as are necessary to rename the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms as appropriate to reflect the transfer of functions by this Act.