This Act may be cited as the ``Permanent Emergency Agricultural Assistance Act''.
CROP DISASTER ASSISTANCE FOR 2001, 2002, AND 2003 CROP LOSSES.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall make emergency financial assistance available to producers on a farm who have incurred qualifying crop losses for the 2001, 2002, or 2003 crop, or any combination of those crops, due to damaging weather or related condition, as determined by the Secretary.
Administration.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the Secretary shall make assistance available under this section in the same manner as provided under section 815 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001 (Public Law 106-387; 114 United States Statutes at Large 1549A-55), including using the same loss thresholds for the quantity and quality losses as were used in administering that section.
Payment Rates.--The Secretary shall make a disaster payment available to producers on a farm for a crop under this section at a rate equal to-- (1) 40 percent of the established price for the crop for any deficiency in production greater than 20 percent, but less than 35 percent, for the crop; and (2) 65 percent of the established price for the crop for any deficiency in production of 35 percent or more for the crop.
Crop Insurance.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall not discriminate against or penalize producers on a farm that have purchased crop insurance under the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et sequentes).
Other Assistance.--Subject to subsection (d), the amount of assistance that producers on a farm would otherwise receive under this section shall be reduced by the amount of assistance provided to the producers on the farm for crop losses described in subsection (a) under any other Federal law.
CROP DISASTER ASSISTANCE FOR FUTURE CROP YEARS.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall make emergency financial assistance available to producers on a farm who incur qualifying crop losses for an insurable crop due to damaging weather or related condition, as determined by the Secretary, which results in the designation of the county in which the farm is located as a federally declared disaster area.
Administration.--Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), the Secretary shall make assistance available under this section in the same manner as provided under section 815 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001 (Public Law 106-387; 114 United States Statutes at Large 1549A-55), including using the same loss thresholds for the quantity and quality losses as were used in administering that section.
Payment Rate.--Subject to subsection (e), the Secretary shall make assistance available to producers on a farm for a crop under this section at a rate equal to 65 percent of the established price for the crop for any deficiency in production of 35 percent or more for the crop.
Receipt Conditioned on Having Crop Insurance.--The producers on a farm shall not be eligible for assistance under subsection (a) with respect to losses to a crop unless the producers obtained, before the losses were incurred, a policy or plan of insurance for the crop under the Federal Crop Insurance Act that provided a level of coverage equal to or greater than 60 percent.
Payment Limitation.-- (1) Limitation.--Assistance provided under subsection (a) to a producer for losses to a crop, together with the amounts specified in paragraph (2) applicable to the same crop, may not exceed 95 percent of what the value of the crop would have been in the absence of the losses, as estimated by the Secretary.
Other payments.--In applying the limitation in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall include the following: (A) Crop insurance payments made under the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et sequentes) that the producer receives for losses to the same crop.
The value of the crop that was not lost (if any), as estimated by the Secretary.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``federally declared disaster area'' is a county covered by a Presidential declaration of major disaster issued under section 301 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5170) or determined to be a disaster area by the Secretary under subpart A of part 1945 of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations.
The term does not include a contiguous county.
Effective Date.--This section applies to crop years after the 2003 crop year.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall make and administer payments for livestock losses to producers for 2001, 2002, or 2003, or any combination of those years, in a county that has received a corresponding emergency designation by the President or the Secretary, of which an amount determined by the Secretary shall be made available for the American Indian livestock program under section 806 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001 (Public Law 106-387; 114 United States Statutes at Large 1549, 1549A-51).
Administration.--The Secretary shall make assistance available under this section in the same manner as provided under section 806 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001 (Public Law 106-387; 114 United States Statutes at Large 1549, 1549A-51).
Other Assistance.--The amount of assistance that a producer would otherwise receive under this section shall be reduced by the amount of assistance provided to the producer for losses described in subsection (a) under any other Federal law.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall use the funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to carry out this Act.
Permanent Program.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated such amounts as may be necessary to reimburse the Commodity Credit Corporation for funds expended by the Secretary under section 3.
In General.--The amounts referred to in sections 2 and 4 are designated by Congress as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 502 of H. Con.
95 (108th Congress), the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2004.
Permanent Program.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in section 5(b) to reimburse the Commodity Credit Corporation shall be treated as emergency spending.
The allocation for a fiscal year otherwise made to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate pursuant to section 302(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 shall be increased by the amount appropriated pursuant to such authorization of appropriations for the same fiscal year.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture may promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Procedure.--The promulgation of the regulations and administration of this Act shall be made without regard to-- (1) the notice and comment provisions of section 553 of title 5, United States Code; (2) the Statement of Policy of the Secretary of Agriculture effective July 24, 1971 (36 Fed.
13804), relating to notices of proposed rulemaking and public participation in rulemaking; and (3) chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Paperwork Reduction Act'').
Congressional Review of Agency Rulemaking.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall use the authority provided under section 808 of title 5, United States Code.