This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Financial Services Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL COMMISSION ON FINANCIAL SERVICES.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission on Financial Services'' (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership of the Commission.-- (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 voting members and 6 nonvoting members appointed as follows: (A) Five voting members and 2 nonvoting members appointed by the President.
Two voting members and 1 nonvoting member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One voting member and 1 nonvoting member appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Two voting members and 1 nonvoting member appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
One voting member and 1 nonvoting member appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Qualifications.-- (A) Voting members.-- (i) In general.--Voting members appointed pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be appointed from among individuals who are users of the financial services system, including representatives of business, agriculture, and consumer organizations.
Prohibition.--No voting member of the Commission shall be an employee of the Federal Government or any State government.
Nonvoting members.--Nonvoting members appointed pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be appointed from among individuals who are experts in finance or in the financial services system.
Appointment.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made not later than March 31, 1994.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect the powers of the Commission and shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Chairperson.--The President shall designate 1 of the voting members of the Commission to serve as the chairperson of the Commission (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Chairperson'').
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall, after consultation in accordance with paragraph (3), conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to the strengths and weaknesses of the United States financial services system in meeting the needs of users of the system, including the needs of-- (A) individual consumers and households; (B) State and local communities; (C) agriculture; (D) small-, medium-, and large-sized businesses (including the need for debt, equity, and other financial services); (E) governmental and nonprofit entities; and (F) exporters and other users of international financial services.
Matters studied.--The study required under paragraph (1) shall include consideration of-- (A) the changes underway in the national and international economies and the financial services industry, and the impact of such changes on the ability of the financial services system to efficiently meet the needs of the United States economy and the users of the system during the next 10 years and beyond; (B) the extent to which Federal administrative and legislative policies-- (i) achieve consumer protection objectives; (ii) promote competition and prevent anticompetitive acts and practices or undue concentration; (iii) ensure that financial services are delivered in a nondiscriminatory and cost- efficient manner; and (iv) ensure access to the financial services system for users of the system, regardless of where such users are located; and (C) the extent to which Federal administrative and legislative policies are meeting their objectives in the most cost-effective and efficient manner possible.
Consultation.--Consultation in accordance with this paragraph means consultation with-- (A) the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; (B) the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision; (C) the Chairperson of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; (D) the Comptroller of the Currency; (E) the Secretary of the Treasury; (F) the Securities Exchange Commission; (G) the Commodities Futures Trading Commission; (H) the Director of the Congressional Budget Office; and (I) the Comptroller General of the United States.
Recommendations.--Based on the results of the study conducted under subsection (a), the Commission shall develop specific recommendations on how the Federal Government can improve the operation of the United States financial services system, including whether or not any changes are needed in the legislative and administrative policies that impact on-- (1) the ability of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to effectively conduct monetary policy; (2) the ability of the financial services system, or any part thereof, to respond to the needs of users of the system; (3) the systematic safety of the financial services system; (4) the cost to participants in the financial services system of providing financial services to users of the system; (5) the competitiveness of the various providers of financial services; (6) how funds are allocated to the financial services system; and (7) how funds are allocated by the financial services system to users of the system or to specific categories of users.
Report.--Not later than January 20, 1995, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate a report describing the activities of the Commission, including the study conducted under subsection (a) and any recommendations developed under subsection (b).
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information (other than information required by any statute of the United States to be kept confidential by such department or agency) as the Commission considers necessary to carry out its duties under this section.
Upon the request of the Chairperson, the head of that department or agency shall furnish such nonconfidential information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairperson may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Federal Employees.--Upon the request of the Chairperson, any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Chairperson, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of submission of the report required under section 3(c).
All records and papers of the Commission shall thereupon be delivered by the Administrator of General Services for deposit in the National Archives.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.