TERMINATION OF PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION CAMPAIGN FUND CHECK- OFF.
Section 6096 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to designation of income tax payments to Presidential Election Campaign Fund) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1991.
DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS FOR REDUCTION OF PUBLIC DEBT.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS FOR REDUCTION OF PUBLIC DEBT.
In General.--In the case of an individual, with respect to each taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the tax imposed by chapter 1, such taxpayer may designate that-- ``(1) a specified portion (not less than $1) of any overpayment of tax for such taxable year, and ``(2) any cash contribution which the taxpayer includes with such return, shall be used to reduce the public debt.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year only at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Overpayments Treated As Refunded.--For purposes of this title, any portion of an overpayment of tax designated under subsection (a) shall be treated as being refunded to the taxpayer as of the last date prescribed for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 (determined without regard to extensions) or, if later, the date the return is filed.
Forms To Include Address for Other Public Debt Reduction Contributions.--The Secretary shall include on returns of tax imposed by chapter 1 the address to which taxpayers may send at any time additional contributions to reduce the public debt.''
Transfers To Account to Reduce Public Debt.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, from time to time, transfer to the special account established by section 3113(d) of title 31, United States Code-- (1) the amounts of the overpayments of tax to which designations under section 6097 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 apply, and (2) the amounts of contributions made under such section to the United States.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of overpayments and contributions for reduction of public debt.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
INDIVIDUALS WHO DO NOT ITEMIZE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED DEDUCTION FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO REDUCE PUBLIC DEBT.
In General.--Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to charitable, etc., contributions and gifts) is amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after subsection (l) the following new subsection: ``(m) Individuals Who Do Not Itemize Deductions Allowed Deduction for Contributions To Reduce Public Debt.--In the case of an individual who does not itemize his deductions for the taxable year, the amount allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year for contributions made to the Secretary to reduce the public debt shall be taken into account as a direct public debt reduction contribution under section 63.''
Taxable Income Reduced By Contributions.--Subsection (b) of section 63 of such Code (defining taxable income) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(3) the direct public debt reduction contribution.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (f) of section 63 of such Code (defining itemized deductions) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(3) the direct public debt reduction contribution.''
Section 63 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(h) Direct Public Debt Reduction Contribution.--For purposes of this section, the term `direct public debt reduction contribution' means that portion of the amount allowable under section 170(a) which is taken as a direct public debt reduction contribution for the taxable year under section 170(m).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.