This Act may be cited as the ``Gulf War Veterans' Iraqi Claims Protection Act of 1998''.
Claims Against Iraq.--The United States Commission is authorized to receive and determine the validity and amounts of any claims by nationals of the United States against the Government of Iraq.
Decision Rules.--In deciding claims under subsection (a), the United States Commission shall apply, in the following order-- (1) applicable substantive law, including international law; and (2) applicable principles of justice and equity.
Priority Claims.--Before deciding any other claim against the Government of Iraq, the United States Commission shall, to the extent practical, decide all pending non-commercial claims of active, retired, or reserve members of the United States Armed Forces, retired former members of the United States Armed Forces, and other individuals arising out of Iraq's invasion and occupation of Kuwait or out of the 1987 attack on the USS Stark.
Applicability of International Claims Settlement Act.--To the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, the provisions of title I (other than section 2(c)) and title VII of the International Claims Settlement Act of 1949 (22 United States Code 1621-1627 and 1645-1645o) shall apply with respect to claims under this Act.
Iraq Claims Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to establish in the Treasury of the United States a fund (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Iraq Claims Fund'') for payment of claims under section 2(a).
The Secretary of the Treasury shall cover into the Iraq Claims Fund such amounts as are allocated to such fund pursuant to subsection (b).
Allocation of Proceeds From Iraqi Asset Liquidation.-- (1) In general.--The President shall allocate funds resulting from the liquidation of assets pursuant to section 4 in the manner the President determines appropriate between the Iraq Claims Fund and such other accounts as are appropriate for the payment of claims of the United States Government, subject to the limitation in paragraph (2).
Limitation.--The amount allocated pursuant to this subsection for payment of claims of the United States Government may not exceed the amount which bears the same relation to the amount allocated to the Iraq Claims Fund pursuant to this subsection as the sum of all certified claims of the United States Government bears to the sum of all claims certified under section 2(a).
As used in this paragraph, the term ``certified claims of the United States Government'' means those claims of the United States Government which are determined by the Secretary of State to be outside the jurisdiction of the United Nations Commission and which are determined to be valid, and whose amount has been certified, under such procedures as the President may establish.
AUTHORITY TO VEST IRAQI ASSETS.
The President is authorized to vest and liquidate as much of the assets of the Government of Iraq in the United States that have been blocked pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) as may be necessary to satisfy claims under section 2(a), as well as claims of the United States Government against Iraq which are determined by the Secretary of State to be outside the jurisdiction of the United Nations Commission.
REIMBURSEMENT FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
Deduction.--In order to reimburse the United States Government for its expenses in administering this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall deduct 1.5 percent of any amount covered into the Iraq Claims Fund.
Deductions Treated as Miscellaneous Receipts.--Amounts deducted pursuant to subsection (a) shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts.
In General.--The United States Commission shall certify to the Secretary of the Treasury each award made pursuant to section 2.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall make payment, out of the Iraq Claims Fund, in the following order of priority to the extent funds are available in such fund: (1) Payment of $10,000 or the principal amount of the award, whichever is less.
For each claim that has priority under section 2(c), payment of a further $90,000 toward the unpaid balance of the principal amount of the award.
Payments from time to time in ratable proportions on account of the unpaid balance of the principal amounts of all awards according to the proportions which the unpaid balance of such awards bear to the total amount in the Iraq Claims Fund that is available for distribution at the time such payments are made.
After payment has been made of the principal amounts of all such awards, pro rata payments on account of accrued interest on such awards as bear interest.
After payment has been made in full of all the awards payable out of the Iraq Claims Fund, any funds remaining in that fund shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury of the United States.
Unsatisfied Claims.--Payment of any award made pursuant to this Act shall not extinguish any unsatisfied claim, or be construed to have divested any claimant, or the United States on his or her behalf, of any rights against the Government of Iraq with respect to any unsatisfied claim.
AUTHORITY TO TRANSFER RECORDS.
The head of any Executive agency may transfer or otherwise make available to the United States Commission such records and documents relating to claims authorized to be adjudicated by this Act as may be required by the United States Commission in carrying out its functions under this Act.
STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS; DISPOSITION OF UNUSED FUNDS.
Statute of Limitations.--Any demand or claim for payment on account of an award that is certified under this Act shall be barred one year after the publication date of the notice required by subsection (b).
Publication of Notice.-- (1) In general.--At the end of the 9-year period specified in paragraph (2), the Secretary of the Treasury shall publish a notice in the Federal Register detailing the statute of limitations provided for in subsection (a) and identifying the claim numbers and awardee names of unpaid certified claims.
Publication date.--The notice required by paragraph (1) shall be published 9 years after the last date on which the Secretary of the Treasury covers into the Iraq Claims Fund amounts allocated to that fund pursuant to section 3(b).
Disposition of Unused Funds.-- (1) Disposition.--At the end of the 2-year period beginning on the publication date of the notice required by subsection (b), the Secretary of the Treasury shall dispose of all unused funds described in paragraph (2) by depositing in the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts any such funds that are not used for such additional payments.
Unused funds.--The unused funds referred to in paragraph (1) are any remaining balance in the Iraq Claims Fund.
As used in this Act: (1) Executive agency.--The term ``Executive agency'' has the meaning given that term by section 105 of title 5, United States Code.
Government of iraq.--The term ``Government of Iraq'' includes agencies, instrumentalities, and controlled entities (including public sector enterprises) of that government.
United nations commission.--The term ``United Nations Commission'' means the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolution 687 (1991).
United states commission.--The term ``United States Commission'' means the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States.