This Act may be cited as the ``Servicemembers' Rights Protection Act''.
ENFORCEMENT OF SERVICEMEMBERS CIVIL RELIEF ACT BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND BY PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION.
General Civil Liability and Enforcement.--The Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 United States Code App.
501 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE VIII--CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE ``SEC.
ENFORCEMENT BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
Enforcement by the Attorney General.--The Attorney General may commence a civil action in any appropriate United States District Court whenever the Attorney General has reasonable cause to believe-- ``(1) that any person or group of persons is engaging in, or has engaged in, a pattern or practice of conduct in violation of any provision of this Act; or ``(2) that any person or group of persons is denying, or has denied, any person or group of persons any protection afforded by any provision of this Act and that such denial raises an issue of general public importance.
Relief That May Be Granted in Civil Actions.--In a civil action under subsection (a), the court-- ``(1) may enter any temporary restraining order, temporary or permanent injunction, or other order as may be appropriate; ``(2) may award monetary damages to a servicemember, dependent, or other person protected by any provision of this Act who is harmed by the failure to comply with any provision of this Act, including consequential and punitive damages; and ``(3) may, to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil penalty against each defendant-- ``(A) in an amount not exceeding $55,000 for a first violation; and ``(B) in an amount not exceeding $110,000 for any subsequent violation.
Intervention in Civil Actions.--Upon timely application, a servicemember, dependent, or other person protected by any provision of this Act may intervene in a civil action commenced by the Attorney General that involves an alleged violation of any provision of this Act or a denial of any protection afforded by any provision of this Act with respect to which such person claims to be harmed.
The court may grant to any such intervening party appropriate relief as is authorized under subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2).
The court may also, in its discretion, grant a prevailing intervening party reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.
PRIVATE CAUSES OF ACTION.
``A servicemember, dependent, or other person protected by any provision of this Act may commence an action in any appropriate United States District Court or in a State court of competent jurisdiction to enforce any requirement imposed or protection afforded by any provision of this Act.
The court may grant to any such servicemember, dependent, or person such appropriate relief as is authorized under section 801(b)(1) or (b)(2).
The court may also, in its discretion, grant a prevailing party reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.
PRESERVATION OF OTHER REMEDIES.
``The remedies provided under sections 801 and 802 are in addition to and do not preclude any other causes of action available under Federal or State law or any other remedies otherwise available under Federal or State law, including any award for consequential and punitive damages.''.
Applicability.--Title VIII of the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act, as added by subsection (a), shall apply to any cause of action, claim, or action to enforce the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act, or to seek damages or other relief under any provision of that Act, in progress on the date of the enactment of this Act or that may be brought after such date.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 207 of such Act (50 United States Code App.
527) is amended by striking subsection (f).
Section 301(c) of such Act (50 United States Code App.
531(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Misdemeanor.--Except as provided in subsection (a), a person who knowingly takes part in an eviction or distress described in subsection (a), or who knowingly attempts to do so, shall be fined as provided in title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.''.
Section 302(b) of such Act (50 United States Code App.
532(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Misdemeanor.--A person who knowingly resumes possession of property in violation of subsection (a), or in violation of section 107 of this Act, or who knowingly attempts to do so, shall be fined as provided in title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.''.
Section 303(d) of such Act (50 United States Code App.
533(d)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Misdemeanor.--A person who knowingly makes or causes to be made a sale, foreclosure, or seizure of property that is prohibited by subsection (c), or who knowingly attempts to do so, shall be fined as provided in title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.''.
Section 305(h) of such Act (50 United States Code App.
535(h)) is amended to read as follows: ``(h) Misdemeanor.--Any person who knowingly seizes, holds, or detains the personal effects, security deposit, or other property of a servicemember or a servicemember's dependent who lawfully terminates a lease covered by this section, or who knowingly interferes with the removal of such property from premises covered by such lease, for the purpose of subjecting or attempting to subject any of such property to a claim for rent accruing subsequent to the date of termination of such lease, or attempts to do so, shall be fined as provided in title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.''.
Section 306(e) of such Act (50 United States Code App.
536(e)) is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Misdemeanor.--A person who knowingly takes an action contrary to this section, or attempts to do so, shall be fined as provided in title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.''.
Section 307(c) of such Act (50 United States Code App.
537(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Misdemeanor.--A person who knowingly takes an action contrary to this section, or attempts to do so, shall be fined as provided in title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE VIII--CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE ``Sec.
Enforcement by the attorney general.
Private causes of action.
Preservation of other remedies.