SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1997''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
Expanded definition of dealer.
Prohibited activities without license.
Provisions regarding auction sales.
EXPANDED DEFINITION OF DEALER.
Dealer.--Subsection (f) of section 2 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2132) is amended to read as follows: ``(f) Dealer.--(1) The term `dealer' means any person who (in commerce for compensation or profit) acquires, delivers for transportation or transports (except as a carrier), buys or offers to buy, sells or offers for sale, leases or offers to lease, negotiates the purchase, sale, or lease of, or otherwise transfers-- ``(A) any animal, whether alive or dead, for research, experimentation, teaching, exhibition, or use as a pet; ``(B) any dog for hunting or security purposes; or ``(C) any dog or cat for breeding purposes.
The term includes an operator of an auction sale at which any activity described in paragraph (1) takes place and any person who owns or leases premises that are used for a trade day, flea market, or similar event at which any activity described in paragraph (1) takes place.
The term includes an animal pound or shelter operated by or on behalf of a local government and any governmental entity that sells or otherwise provides animals to any dealer or research facility.''.
Clerical Amendments.--Section 2 of such Act is further amended-- (1) by striking the semicolon at the end of subsections (a), (b), (d), (e), and (g) through (k) and inserting a period; and (2) in subsection (n), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a period.
Section 3 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2133) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Issuance of Licenses.--To apply for a license under this section, a dealer or exhibitor shall submit to the Secretary an application in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe.
The Secretary shall issue licenses to dealers and exhibitors upon payment of the applicable fee established pursuant to section 23 and demonstration by the dealer or exhibitor of compliance with the regulations and standards promulgated by the Secretary pursuant to this Act.
Licensing Exemptions.-- ``(1) Exemptions authorized.--The Secretary may issue regulations exempting persons described in paragraph (2) from licensing and other requirements under this Act, subject to such conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, if, in the judgment of the Secretary-- ``(A) the licensing of such persons would not effectuate the policy of the Act; and ``(B) the activity of the persons does not involve the use of animals for research purposes.
Persons eligible for exemptions.--Persons who may be exempted from licensing and other requirements under paragraph (1) include the following: ``(A) Operators of retail pet stores (except retail pet stores which sell animals to research facilities, exhibitors, or dealers).
Persons who sell wild or exotic animals, as defined by the Secretary, with respect to such wild or exotic animals.
Persons whose business activities as dealers or exhibitors are de minimis.''.
Licenses Prohibited.--The Secretary shall not issue (or renew) a license under this section with regard to any of the following persons: ``(1) A person whose license has been suspended, revoked, or voluntarily terminated while the person was in violation of this Act or a regulation or standard promulgated under this Act.
A person who has not paid any civil penalty previously assessed by the Secretary under this Act.
A person who has been convicted of, or entered a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent to, a charge of violating any of the following: ``(A) A treaty or Federal, State, or local law involving the care or treatment of, or recordkeeping for, animals.
The Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1361 et sequentes), the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes), or any treaty, Federal, State, or local law for the protection of endangered or threatened species.''.
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES WITHOUT LICENSE.
Section 4 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2134) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
EFFECT OF FAILURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE OR EXEMPTION.
Treatment of Licensed and Exempted Persons.--Subsection (b) does not apply to a dealer or exhibitor who-- ``(1) holds a current and unsuspended license from the Secretary under section 3(a); or ``(2) is exempted by the Secretary from such licensing requirement pursuant to section 3(b).
Prohibition Against Certain Activities.--Except in the case of dealers and exhibitors described in subsection (a), a dealer or exhibitor may not-- ``(1) acquire any animal; ``(2) sell or offer for sale any animal; ``(3) lease or offer for lease any animal; ``(4) transport or offer for transportation any animal; ``(5) buy or offer to buy any animal; ``(6) exhibit or offer to exhibit; ``(7) transfer any animal; or ``(8) engage in any other business activity as a dealer or exhibitor.''.
PROVISIONS REGARDING AUCTION SALES.
Regulation.--Section 12 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2142) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
HUMANE STANDARDS AND RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS AT AUCTION SALES.
``The Secretary shall promulgate humane standards and recordkeeping and reporting requirements to govern the purchase, sale, or handling of animals by-- ``(1) dealers, research facilities, exhibitors at auction sales; and ``(2) by persons consigning animals to auction sales.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Holding period.--Section 5 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2135) is amended by striking ``Secretary: Provided, That operators of auction sales subject to section 12 of this Act'' and inserting ``Secretary, except that operators of auction sales''.
Research facility purchases.--Section 7 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2137) is amended by striking ``subject to section 12 of this Act''.
Federal purchases.--Section 8 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2138) is amended by striking ``subject to section 12 of this Act''.
Agency relationship.--Section 9 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2139) is amended by striking ``subject to section 12 of this Act''.
Enforcement and penalties.--Section 19 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2149) is amended-- (A) in subsections (b) and (c), by striking ``carrier, or operator of an auction sale subject to section 12 of this Act,'' both places it appears and inserting ``or carrier''; and (B) in subsection (d), by striking ``, exhibitor, or operator of an auction sale subject to section 12 of this Act,'' and inserting ``or exhibitor''.
Subsection (a) of section 19 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2149), is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Suspension or Refusal To Renew License.-- ``(1) Temporary and final orders.--If the Secretary has reason to believe that a person licensed under this Act has violated or is violating any provision of this Act (or the regulations or standards issued under this Act), the Secretary may suspend or refuse to renew the person's license temporarily, but not to exceed 120 days except as provided in paragraph (3).
If after notice and opportunity for hearing the violation is determined to have occurred, the Secretary may suspend or refuse to renew the person's license for such additional period as the Secretary may specify or revoke the license.
An order suspending, revoking, or refusing to renew a license after notice and opportunity for hearing shall be effective pending the final determination of the Secretary.
Notice of temporary action; licensee rights.--When the Secretary temporarily suspends or refuses to renew a license under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall promptly send written notice to the licensee informing the licensee of the following: ``(A) The nature of the alleged violation.
The time and place of the alleged violation.
The action of the Secretary in response to the alleged violation.
The right of the licensee to request a hearing on the matter only during the 10-day period beginning on the date the licensee receives the written notice.
Time for hearing.--A hearing on an alleged violation shall be held within 30 days after the date on which the Secretary receives the request for the hearing.
However, unless the licensee requests the hearing within 10 days of receipt of the written notice, the licensee shall forfeit any right to a hearing within such 30-day period, and the suspension or refusal to renew shall remain in effect until a hearing is held and the administrative law judge issues a decision and order.
Time for decision.--The administrative law judge shall issue a decision and order within 30 days after the conclusion of a hearing whenever a suspension or refusal to renew is in effect.''.
Subsection (a) of section 29 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2159) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Request for Attorney General To Apply for Injunction.-- ``(1) Request.--Whenever the Secretary has reason to believe that a person described in paragraph (2) should be enjoined from operating in violation of this Act or the regulations and standards issued under this Act, the Secretary shall notify the Attorney General.
Upon notification, the Attorney General may apply to the United States district court for the district in which the person resides or conducts business for a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction to prevent the person from operating in violation of this Act or the regulations and standards prescribed under this Act.
Circumstances for making request.--A person referred to in paragraph (1) is a dealer, exhibitor, research facility, carrier, or intermediate handler that the Secretary has reason to believe-- ``(A) is dealing in stolen animals; ``(B) is placing the health of any animal in danger in violation of this Act or the regulations or standards issued under this Act; or ``(C) is otherwise in violation of this Act or the regulations and standards issued under this Act.
Dealing in animals.--For purposes of paragraph (2), a person who engages in any of the activities described in section 2(f)(1) shall be considered to be dealing in animals.