This Act may be cited as the ``Second Chance for Ex-Offenders Act of 2000''.
EXPUNGEMENT OF CRIMINAL RECORDS FOR CERTAIN NONVIOLENT OFFENDERS.
In General.--Chapter 229 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after subchapter C the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER D--EXPUNGEMENT ``Sec.
Expungement of certain criminal records.
Reversal of expunged records.
Expungement of certain criminal records ``(a) In General.--Any individual convicted of a nonviolent criminal offense in a United States court who fulfills the requirements of section 3632 may file a petition under this subchapter to expunge the record of such conviction.
Definition of Nonviolent Criminal Offense.--In this subchapter, the term `nonviolent criminal offense' means a misdemeanor or felony that does not have as an element of the offense the use of a weapon or violence in its commission and which did not actually involve violence in its commission.
Requirements for expungement ``No individual shall be eligible for expungement under this subchapter unless, prior to filing a petition under this subchapter, such individual-- ``(1) has never been convicted of a violent misdemeanor or felony; ``(2) has remained free from dependency on or abuse of alcohol or a controlled substance for at least one year; ``(3) has obtained a high school diploma or completed a high school equivalency program; and ``(4) has completed at least one year of community service, as determined by the court referred to in section 3633(a).
Procedure for expungement ``(a) Petition.--An individual meeting the requirements of section 3632 may file a petition under this subchapter with the Attorney General to expunge the record of a conviction for a nonviolent criminal offense.
Not later than 60 days after receipt of such a petition, the Attorney General shall submit such petition with a recommendation regarding expungement to the United States district court for the district in which the conviction was obtained.
The Attorney General shall notify the petitioner of his recommendation within such 60-day period.
If the Attorney General recommends expungement, the court shall grant an order expunging the records that are the subject to the petition.
Appeal.--If the Attorney General does not recommend expungement of the records, the petitioner may, not later than 90 days after receiving notification from the Attorney General of such recommendation, appeal such denial in the United States district court for the district in which the conviction was obtained.
Effect of expungement ``(a) In General.--An order granting expungement under this subchapter shall restore the individual concerned, in the contemplation of the law, to the status such individual occupied before the arrest or institution of criminal proceedings for the crime that was the subject of the expungement.
No Disqualification; Statements.--After an order granting expungement of any individual's criminal records under this subchapter, such individual shall not be required to divulge information pertaining to the expunged conviction and the fact that such individual has been convicted of the criminal offense concerned shall not-- ``(1) operate as a disqualification of such individual to pursue or engage in any lawful activity, occupation, profession, and ``(2) held under any provision of law guilty of perjury, false answering, or making a false statement by reason of his failure to recite or acknowledge such arrest or institution of criminal proceedings, or results thereof, in response to an inquiry made of him for any purpose.
Records Expunged or Sealed.--Upon order of expungement, all official law enforcement and court records, including all references to such person's arrest for the offense, the institution of criminal proceedings against him, and the results thereof, except publicly available court opinions or briefs on appeal, shall be expunged (in the case of nontangible records) or gathered together and sealed (in the case of tangible records).
Record of Disposition To Be Retained.--A nonpublic record of a disposition or conviction that is the subject of an expungement order shall be retained only by the Department of Justice solely for the purpose of use by the courts in any subsequent adjudication.
Disclosure of expunged records ``(a) Law Enforcement Purposes.--The Department of Justice may release the record of an individual's criminal conviction expunged under this subchapter to Federal or State law enforcement agencies and United States attorneys and district attorneys-- ``(1) for the purpose of prosecuting such individual for any subsequent criminal offense and adjudicating such case; or ``(2) if such individual has made an application for employment as a law enforcement officer, if such individual is given notice of the disclosure and an opportunity to explain the conviction.
Punishment for Improper Disclosure.--Except as provided in subsection (a), whoever knowingly disseminates information relating to an expunged conviction, other than the individual whose conviction was expunged, or to such individual, shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one year and a fine of not more than $10,000 for each offense.
Reversal of expunged records ``The records expunged under this subchapter shall be restored by operation of law as public records and may be used in all court proceedings if the individual whose conviction was expunged is subsequently convicted of any misdemeanor or felony in any court of the United States.''.
Technical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 229 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following item: ``D. Expungement......................................... 3631''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply to individuals convicted of an applicable crime at any time before or after the date of enactment of this Act.