ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION ON CRIME AND VIOLENCE.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission on Crime and Violence in America'' (referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 22 members, of whom-- (A) 6 shall be appointed by the President; (B) 8 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, of whom 2 shall be appointed on the recommendation of the minority leader; and (C) 8 shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, of whom 6 shall be appointed on the recommendation of the majority leader and 2 shall be appointed on the recommendation of the minority leader.
Goals in making appointments.--In appointing members of the Commission, the President, Speaker, President pro tempore, and the majority and minority leaders shall seek to ensure that-- (A) the membership of the Commission reflects the racial, ethnic, and gender diversity of the United States; and (B) members are specially qualified to serve on the Commission by reason of their education, training, expertise, or experience in-- (i) sociology; (ii) psychology; (iii) law; (iv) law enforcement; (v) social work; and (vi) ethnography and urban poverty, including health care, housing, education, and employment.
Deadline.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed within 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Term.--Members shall serve on the Commission through the date of its termination under section 7.
Meetings.--The Commission-- (A) shall have its headquarters in the District of Columbia; and (B) shall meet at least once each month for a business session.
Quorum.--Twelve members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--Not later than 15 days after the members of the Commission are appointed, the members shall designate a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled not later than 30 days after the Commission is informed of the vacancy in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (A) No pay, allowance, or benefit.--Members of the Commission shall receive no pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel expenses.--A member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
The Commission shall-- (1) review the effectiveness of traditional criminal justice approaches in preventing and controlling crime and violence; (2) examine the impact that changes to Federal and State law have had in controlling crime and violence; (3) examine the impact of changes in Federal immigration laws and policies and increased development and growth along United States international borders on crime and violence in the United States, particularly among our Nation's youth; (4) examine the problem of youth gangs and provide recommendations on how to reduce youth involvement in violent crime; (5) examine the extent to which assault weapons and high power firearms have contributed to violence and murder in the United States; (6) convene hearings in various parts of the country to receive testimony from a cross section of criminal justice professionals, business leaders, elected officials, medical doctors, and other citizens that wish to participate; (7) review all segments of the criminal justice system, including the law enforcement, prosecution, defense, judicial, corrections components, in developing the crime control and antiviolence plan; (8) develop a comprehensive and effective crime control and antiviolence plan that will serve as a blueprint for action in the 1990's; (9) bring attention to successful models and programs in crime prevention, crime control, and antiviolence; (10) reach out beyond the traditional criminal justice community for ideas when developing the comprehensive crime control and antiviolence plan; (11) recommend improvements in the coordination of Federal, State, local, and international border crime control efforts; (12) make a comprehensive study of the economic and social factors leading to or contributing to crime and violence and specific proposals for legislative and administrative actions to reduce crime and violence and the elements that contribute to crime and violence; and (13) recommend means of allocating finite correctional facility space and resources to the most serious and violent offenders, with the goal of achieving the most cost-effective crime control and protection of the community and public safety, after-- (A) examining the issue of disproportionate incarceration rates among black males and any other minority group disproportionately represented in Federal and State correctional populations; and (B) considering increased use of alternatives to incarceration that offer a reasonable prospect of equal or better crime control at equal or less cost than incarceration.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Director.-- (1) Appointment.--After consultation with the members of the Commission, the Chairperson shall appoint a director of the Commission (referred to as the ``Director'').
Compensation.--The Director shall be paid the rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the Director may appoint such personnel as the Director considers to be appropriate.
Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service and shall be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and Consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, personnel of that agency to the Commission to assist in carrying out its duties.
Physical Facilities.--The Administrator of the General Services Administration shall provide suitable office space for the operation of the Commission.
The facilities shall serve as the headquarters of the Commission and shall include all necessary equipment and incidentals required for proper functioning.
Hearings.--The Commission may conduct public hearings or forums at its discretion, at any time and place it is able to secure facilities and witnesses, for the purpose of carrying out its duties.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.--The Commission may secure from any Federal agency or entity in the executive or legislative branch such materials, resources, statistical data, and other information as is necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission, the head of a Federal agency or entity shall furnish the information to the Commission to the extent permitted by law.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Monthly Reports.--The Commission shall submit monthly activity reports to the President and the Congress.
Interim Report.--Not later than 1 year before the date of its termination, the Commission shall submit an interim report to the President and the Congress containing-- (1) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission; (2) recommendations for legislative and administrative action based on the Commission's activities to date; (3) an estimation of the costs of implementing the recommendations made by the Commission; and (3) a strategy for disseminating the report to Federal, State, and local authorities.
Final Report.--Not later than the date of its termination, the Commission shall submit to the Congress and the President a final report with a detailed statement of final findings, conclusions, recommendations, and estimation of costs and an assessment of the extent to which recommendations included in the interim report under subsection (b) have been implemented.
Printing and Public Distribution.--Upon receipt of each report of the Commission under this section, the President shall-- (1) order the report to be printed; and (2) make the report available to the public.
The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 2 years after the date on which members of the Commission have met and designated a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.