This Act may be cited as the ``Insurance Protection for Victims of Domestic Violence Act of 1996''.
PROHIBITION OF HEALTH INSURANCE DISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
The Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 201 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE XXVII--PROHIBITION OF HEALTH INSURANCE DISCRIMINATION WITH RESPECT TO VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ``SEC.
``An insurer may not deny or cancel health insurance, or vary the terms and conditions of health insurance-- ``(1) to an individual on the basis that the individual or family member-- ``(A) is, has been, or may be the subject of an act of domestic violence; ``(B) has had prior injuries that resulted from an act of domestic violence; ``(C) seeks, has sought, or should have sought medical or psychological treatment for protection against an act of domestic violence; or ``(D) seeks, has sought, or should have sought shelter from an act of domestic violence; or ``(2) to or for a group or employer on the basis that the group includes or the employer employs, or provides or subsidizes insurance for, an individual described in paragraph (1).
LIMITATION ON DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.
Prohibition.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), regardless of the manner in which information was received, an insurer may not disclose or be compelled (by subpoena or any other means) to disclose information concerning the status of an individual as a victim of domestic violence (including the relationship of a medical condition to an incident or pattern of domestic violence), or the status of an individual as a family member, employer, associate, or person in a relationship with an individual who is the victim of domestic violence, unless the individual involved provides a written authorization.
Exception.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), information concerning the abuse status of an individual may be disclosed if such disclosure-- ``(1) is required under the specific order of a Federal or State court; or ``(2) is required by the State Insurance Commissioner.
Role of National Association of Insurance Commissioners.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall request the National Association of Insurance Commissioners to develop, in consultation with nonprofit domestic violence victim advocacy organizations, within 9 months after the date of the enactment of this title, model standards that incorporate the limitations on underwriting set forth in section 2701, and provide procedures for enforcement for such provisions, including a private right of action.
Review of standards.--If the Association develops recommended regulations specifying the standards within the period, the Secretary shall review the standards.
The review shall be completed within 90 days after the date the regulations are developed.
Unless the Secretary determines within the period that such standards do not meet the requirements, such standards shall serve as the standards under this title, with such amendments as the Secretary determines to be necessary.
Contingency.--If the Association does not develop the model regulations within the 9 month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this title, or the Secretary determines that the regulations do not specify standards that meet the requirements described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall specify, within 15 months after the date of the enactment of this title, standards to carry out the requirements.
Application of Standards.-- ``(1) In general.--Each State shall submit to the Secretary, by the deadline specified in paragraph (2), a report on actions the State is taking to implement and enforce the standards established under this section with respect to insurers and health insurance coverage offered or renewed not later than such deadline.
Deadline for report.--Each State shall file the report described in paragraph (1) not later than 1 year after the date that standards are established under subsection (a) or, in the event of the failure of the Association to develop timely model regulations, under subsection (b).
Federal Role.-- ``(1) Notice of deficiency.--If the Secretary determines that a State has failed to submit a report by the deadline specified by subsection (c), or finds that the State has not implemented and provided adequate enforcement of the standards established under subsection (a) or (b), the Secretary shall notify the State and provide the State a period of 60 days in which to submit the report.
Implementation of alternative enforcement mechanism.-- ``(A) In general.--If, after the 60-day period, the Secretary finds that such a failure has not been corrected, the Secretary shall within 30 days provide for a mechanism for the implementation and enforcement of such standards in the State as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Civil penalty.--Under any implementation and enforcement mechanism established by the Secretary pursuant to this paragraph, the Secretary shall have the authority to impose on an insurer a civil monetary penalty in the amount of $10,000 for each day during which such insurer violates the requirements described in section 2701, or the standards developed under this section.
Liability for such penalty shall begin to accrue on the 30th day after the Secretary has provided such insurer with notice of its noncompliance, if the insurer has failed to correct the deficiency by such date.
Effective period.--Any such implementation and enforcement mechanism established by the Secretary shall take effect with respect to insurers, and health insurance coverage offered or renewed, on or after 3 months after the date of the Secretary's finding under paragraph (1), and until the date the Secretary finds that such a failure has been corrected.
Federal civil right of action.-- ``(A) In general.--Any individual aggrieved as a result of conduct prohibited by section 2701 may bring a civil action in the appropriate United States district court against the insurer.
Relief.--Upon proof of such conduct by a preponderance of the evidence, the insurer shall be subject to a civil penalty that may include temporary, preliminary, or permanent injunctive relief and compensatory and punitive damages, as well as the costs of suit and reasonable fees for the aggrieved individual's attorneys.
With respect to compensatory damages, the aggrieved individual may elect, at any time prior to the rendering of final judgment, to recover in lieu of actual damages, an award of statutory damages in the amount of $5,000 for each violation.
APPLICATION TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS AND ENFORCEMENT.
Application.--Subject to subsection (b), the prohibitions in section 2701 and the standards developed under section 2702 shall apply to group health plans providing health coverage in the same manner as they apply to insurers providing health insurance coverage.
The penalty described in section 2702(d)(2)(B) may be imposed by the Secretary of Labor on group health plans that are not in compliance with the requirements of sections 2701 and 2702.
Substitution of Federal Officials.--For purposes of subsection (a), any reference in section 2702 to-- ``(1) a State or the Secretary of Health and Human Services is deemed to be a reference to the Secretary of Labor; and ``(2) an insurer or health insurance coverage is deemed to be a reference to a group health plan and health coverage, respectively.
Enforcement.--For purposes of part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C 1131 et sequentes) the provisions of this title insofar as they relate to group health plans shall be deemed to be provisions of title I of such Act irrespective of exclusions under section 4(b) of such Act.
Regulatory Authority.--With respect to the regulatory authority of the Secretary of Labor under this title pursuant to subsection (c), section 505 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1135) shall apply.
``For purposes of this title: ``(1) Act of domestic violence.--The term `act of domestic violence' means the occurrence of one or more of the following acts between family or household members, current or former sexual or intimate partners, or persons sharing biological parenthood-- ``(A) attempting to cause or intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causing bodily injury, rape, or sexual abuse as such term is defined in section 2242 of title 18, United States Code; ``(B) placing, by physical menace, another individual in reasonable fear of imminent serious bodily injury; ``(C) infliction of false imprisonment; or ``(D) physically or sexually abusing minor children.
Association.--The term `Association' means the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
Insurer.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `insurer' means a health benefit plan or a health care provider that conducts activities related to the protection of public health.
Health benefit plan.--The term `health benefit plan' means any public or private entity or program that provides for payments for health care, including-- ``(i) a group health plan (as defined in section 607 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1167)) or a multiple employer welfare arrangement (as defined in section 3(40) of such Act) that provides health benefits; and ``(ii) any other health insurance arrangement, including any arrangement consisting of a hospital or medical expense incurred policy or certificate, hospital or medical service plan contract, or health maintenance organization subscriber contract.
Health care provider.--The term `health care provider' means a provider of services (as defined in section 1861(u) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395u)), a physician, a supplier, or any other person furnishing health care, including a Federal or State program that provides directly for the provision of health care to beneficiaries.