Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) In section 1412 of the Department of Defense Authorization Act, 1986 (Public Law 99-145; 50 United States Code 1521), Congress required the Secretary of Defense to carry out the destruction of the United States stockpile of lethal chemical agents and munitions.
In subsection (c)(1)(A) of that section, Congress required that the Secretary, in carrying out the stockpile elimination, provide for maximum protection for the environment, the general public, and the personnel involved in the destruction of lethal chemical agents and munitions.
In order to carry out the statutory requirement to provide maximum protection for the general public while carrying out the destruction of the chemical munitions stockpile, the Secretary of the Army, as executive agent for the chemical munitions stockpile destruction program, established the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program (CSEPP) to enhance the capabilities of local communities to respond to an emergency arising from a chemical munitions stockpile site.
In furtherance of that emergency preparedness program, the Secretary entered into an agreement with the Federal Emergency Management Agency to provide Federal emergency response funds and assistance to State and local emergency management agencies for the purpose of that program.
The Comptroller General of the United States, in a report to Congress in February 1994 entitled ``Chemical Weapons Stockpile: Army's Emergency Preparedness Program Has Been Slow To Achieve Results'' (GAO NSIAD-94-91), reported the following: (A) Although the Army has worked for five years and spent about $200,000,000, communities near chemical weapons storage sites are not yet prepared to respond to a chemical emergency.
The Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program has experienced delays in acquiring and installing essential equipment, such as warning sirens and automated systems.
Although planning documents for the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program identify requirements for installation of warning sirens to alert surrounding communities, for tone alert radios to provide instructions on what protective actions to take, for computer automation to help local officials plan for evacuations, and for sheltering-in-place for persons who, because of their proximity to the chemical weapons storage site, would not have time to evacuate, the communities involved do not yet have the equipment needed to perform these tasks.
Weaknesses in program management have contributed to program delays.
Officials in many of the States and counties visited by investigators of the General Accounting Office for purposes of the Comptroller General's report said that, because of the lack of guidance and standards, they are unable to complete their emergency response plans.
Delays in acquiring and installing warning sirens and tone alert radios have occurred for several reasons, including disputes between some counties and the State or the Federal Emergency Management Agency over the numbers and placement of the sirens.
Although the Federal Emergency Management Agency has administered nearly 70 percent of funds allocated for the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program--$130,000,000 out of a total of $200,000,000--it could not accurately account for how those funds were spent.
Conclusion.--In light of the findings in subsection (a), Congress is greatly concerned that the funds being provided for the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program are not being allocated to provide the maximum protection for the general public as required by section 1512(c)(1)(A) of Public Law 99-145.
Report Requirement.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to the Committee on National Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate a report on expenditures for the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program since 1986.
Accounting Requirement.--The report shall contain a detailed accounting of all expenditures related to the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program, shown by expenditures for administration, personnel (including those on the State and local level), travel, contract work, communications, automation, alert and notification devices, and emergency operations centers.
Justification.--The report shall include a justification for all of the monies expended for the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program administration, as well as a detailed plan for reducing administrative costs under that program in order to allow more money to pass to the communities near chemical stockpile sites in pursuance of the statutory requirement that the Secretary of Defense, in carrying out the chemical munitions stockpile destruction program, provide for maximum protection for the general public.
PLACEMENT OF ADDITIONAL WARNING SIRENS.
In order to expedite accomplishment of the statutory requirement that the Secretary of Defense, in carrying out the chemical munitions stockpile destruction program, provide maximum protection to the general public, the Secretary of the Army shall approve immediate placement of a minimum of three additional outdoor sirens in every county in the United States that is situated within a designated Immediate Response Zone (IRZ) and Protective Action Zone (PAZ) covered by the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program.
Those sirens shall be placed within each such county at the discretion of the director of the county Emergency Management Agency.
Funds for the sirens shall be provided from funds available for the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program.