This Act may be cited as the ``Combating Fraud Against Seniors Act''.
CENTRALIZED COMPLAINT AND CONSUMER EDUCATION SERVICE FOR VICTIMS OF TELEMARKETING FRAUD.
Centralized Service.-- (1) Requirement.--The Federal Trade Commission shall, after consultation with the Attorney General, establish procedures to-- (A) log and acknowledge the receipt of complaints by individuals who certify that they have a reasonable belief that they have been the victim of fraud in connection with the conduct of telemarketing (as that term is defined in section 2325 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by subsection (d) of this section); (B) provide to individuals described in subparagraph (A), and to any other persons, information on telemarketing fraud, including-- (i) general information on telemarketing fraud, including descriptions of the most common telemarketing fraud schemes; (ii) information on means of referring complaints on telemarketing fraud to appropriate law enforcement agencies, including the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Attorney General; and (iii) information, if available, on the number of complaints of telemarketing fraud against particular companies and any record of convictions for telemarketing fraud by particular companies for which a specific request has been made; and (C) refer complaints described in subparagraph (A) to appropriate entities, including State consumer protection agencies or entities and appropriate law enforcement agencies, for potential law enforcement action.
Central location.--The service under the procedures under paragraph (1) shall be provided at and through a single site selected by the Commission for that purpose.
Commencement.--The Commission shall commence carrying out the service not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Creation of Fraud Conviction Database.-- (1) Requirement.--The Attorney General shall establish and maintain a computer database containing information on the corporations and companies convicted of offenses for telemarketing fraud under Federal and State law.
The database shall include a description of the type and method of the fraud scheme for which each corporation or company covered by the database was convicted.
Use of database.--The Attorney General shall make information in the database available to the Federal Trade Commission for purposes of providing information as part of the service under subsection (a).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Expansion of Scope of Telemarketing Fraud Subject to Enhanced Criminal Penalties.--Section 2325(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``telephone calls'' and inserting ``wire communications utilizing a telephone service''.
ENHANCED CRIMINAL PENALTIES IN CONNECTION WITH MASS MARKETING.
Section 2326 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``A person'' and inserting the following: ``(a) In General.--A person''; (2) by inserting ``or mass marketing'' after ``telemarketing''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Mass Marketing Defined.--In this section, the term `mass marketing' means a plan, program, promotion, or campaign that is conducted through solicitation by telephone, mail, the Internet, or other means to induce a large number of persons to-- ``(1) purchase goods or services: ``(2) participate in a contest or sweepstakes; or ``(3) invest for financial profit.''.
ADDITIONAL FUNDING TO COMBAT FRAUD.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Bureau of Consumer Protection of the Federal Trade Commission $20,000,000 for each fiscal year to combat telemarketing and mass marketing fraud, of which not less than $5,000,000 shall be used in each fiscal year to combat telemarketing and mass marketing fraud against the elderly.
Definitions.--In this section-- (1) the term ``mass marketing'' has the meaning given the term in section 2326 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by this Act; and (2) the term ``telemarketing'' has the meaning given the term in section 2325 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by this Act.