This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Veterans Affairs Health Professionals Education Debt Reduction Act''.
PROGRAM OF ASSISTANCE IN THE PAYMENT OF EDUCATION DEBTS INCURRED BY CERTAIN VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION EMPLOYEES.
Program.--(1) Chapter 76 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER VI--EDUCATION DEBT REDUCTION PROGRAM ``Sec.
Authority for program ``(a) The Secretary may carry out an education debt reduction program under this subchapter.
The program shall be known as the Department of Veterans Affairs Education Debt Reduction Program (hereafter in this subchapter referred to as the `Education Debt Reduction Program').
The purpose of the program is to assist personnel serving in health-care positions in the Veterans Health Administration in reducing the amount of debt incurred by such personnel in completing educational programs that qualify such personnel for such service.
Such assistance shall be in addition to the assistance available to individuals under the Educational Assistance Program established under this chapter.
Eligibility; application ``(a) An individual eligible to participate in the Education Debt Reduction Program is any individual (other than a physician or dentist)-- ``(1) who is serving in a position in the Veterans Health Administration under an appointment under section 7402(b) of this title; and ``(2) who owes-- ``(A) any amount of principal or interest under a loan the proceeds of which were used by or on behalf of the individual to pay costs relating to a course of education or training at a qualifying educational institution which course led to a degree that qualified the individual for a position referred to in paragraph (1); or ``(B) any amount of principal or interest under a loan the proceeds of which are being used by or on behalf of the individual to pay costs relating to a course of education or training at a qualifying educational institution which course leads to a degree that qualifies the individual for such a position.
Any eligible individual seeking to participate in the Education Debt Reduction Program shall submit an application to the Secretary relating to such participation.
Preference for assistance ``In selecting individuals for assistance under the Education Debt Reduction Program, the Secretary shall give preference to the following: ``(1) Individuals who have completed or are engaged in, as the case may be, a two-year or four-year course of education or training at an undergraduate institution leading to a degree that qualified or qualifies, as the case may be, the individuals for a position referred to in section 7662(a)(1) of this title.
Individuals who serve in the Veterans Health Administration-- ``(A) in areas in which the recruitment or retention of an adequate supply of qualified health- care personnel is difficult (as determined by the Secretary); or ``(B) in positions for which the recruitment or retention of such a supply of such personnel is difficult (as so determined).
Amount of assistance ``(a) Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary may pay to an individual selected to receive assistance under the Education Debt Reduction Program an amount not to exceed $4,000 (adjusted in accordance with section 7631 of this title) for each full year served by the individual in a position in the Veterans Health Administration under section 7402(b) of this title (other than a position referred to in paragraph (1) or (2) of such section) after the date of such individual's selection.
(1) An individual may receive assistance under the Education Debt Reduction Program only to assist the individual in paying amounts (including principal and interest) owed by the individual under a loan referred to in section 7662(a)(2) of this title.
An individual may receive assistance under the Education Debt Reduction Program for a year if-- ``(A) the individual serves for the full year in a position referred to in subsection (a); and ``(B) maintains an acceptable level of performance during such service.
The total amount of assistance received by an individual under the Education Debt Reduction Program may not exceed $12,000 (adjusted in accordance with section 7631 of this title).''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``SUBCHAPTER VI--EDUCATION DEBT REDUCTION PROGRAM ``7661.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 7631 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking out ``and the maximum Selected Reserve member stipend amount'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``the maximum Selected Reserve stipend amount, and the education debt reduction amount and limitation''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); and (B) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph (4): ``(4) The term `education debt reduction amount and limitation' means the maximum amount of assistance, and the limitation applicable to such assistance, for a person receiving assistance under subchapter VI of this chapter, as specified in section 7663 of this title and as previously adjusted (if at all) in accordance with this subsection.''.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall prescribe regulations necessary to carry out the Education Debt Reduction Program established under subchapter VI of chapter 76 of title 38, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)).
The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the effectiveness of the Education Debt Reduction Program and the Department of Veterans Affairs Health Professional Scholarship Program established under subchapter II of chapter 76 of title 38, United States Code, in assisting the Secretary in the recruitment and retention of qualified health-care professionals for positions in the Veterans Health Administration.
Authorization of Appropriations.--(1) There is authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Veterans Affairs $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1994 through 1998 to carry out the Education Debt Reduction Program.
No funds may be used to provide assistance under the program unless expressly provided for in an appropriation Act.
Exemption from Limitation.--Section 523(b) of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-585; 38 United States Code 7601 note) shall not apply to the Education Debt Reduction Program.