This Act may be cited as the ``School Repair and Rehabilitation Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) According to a 1991 survey conducted by the American Association of School Administrators, 74 percent of all public school buildings in the United States need to be replaced.
Almost \1/3\ of such buildings were built prior to World War II.
It is estimated that 1 of every 4 public school buildings in the United States is in inadequate condition, and of such buildings, 61 percent need maintenance or major repairs, 43 percent are obsolete, 42 percent contain environmental hazards, 25 percent are overcrowded, and 13 percent are structurally unsound.
According to the 1992 Current Population Survey conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, unemployment in the construction industry is at 13 percent for skilled workers and 22.9 percent for laborers.
ESTABLISHMENT OF GRANT PROGRAM.
Grants to States.--The Secretary of Labor shall provide grants to States for the purpose of establishing and carrying out programs that provide payments for labor and related costs associated with the repair and rehabilitation of elementary school and secondary school facilities located in such States.
Grants to Indian Tribes.-- (1) In general.--Not less than 5 percent of amounts appropriated to carry out this Act for each fiscal year shall be used by the Secretary to provide grants to Indian tribes for the purpose of establishing and carrying out programs that provide payments for labor and related costs associated with the repair and rehabilitation of Indian tribal school facilities under the jurisdiction of such tribes.
Rule of construction.--Nothing contained in paragraph (1) shall be construed to relieve the Secretary of the Interior of the responsibility to provide adequate and equitable funding under the Snyder Act (25 United States Code 13) for the operations and maintenance of Indian tribal school facilities.
In General.--The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 3 to a State or Indian tribe unless the State or Indian tribe, as the case may be, submits to the Secretary an application in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Assurances.--Such application shall include assurances the State or Indian tribe, as the case may be, will use Federal funds received from a grant under section 3 to supplement and not supplant non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under such section.
In General.--The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 3 to a State or Indian tribe unless the State or Indian tribe, as the case may be, agrees that it will use all amounts received from such grant to establish a program to provide wages and related employment benefits to individuals for the purpose of employing such individuals to repair and rehabilitate elementary school and secondary school facilities, or Indian tribal school facilities, as the case may be.
Other Requirements.-- (1) Priority to unemployed individuals.--In selecting individuals for a program established under subsection (a), a State or Indian tribe shall give priority to individuals who are unemployed, particularly to those individuals who have been unemployed for the longest periods of time.
Coordination with appropriate entities.--In carrying out a program established under subsection (a), a State shall coordinate the activities of such program with appropriate entities located in such State, including appropriate private industry councils (described in section 102 of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1512), units of general local government, nonprofit private organizations, and local educational agencies.
Nondiscrimination.--No individual shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, subjected to discrimination under, or denied employment in the administration of or in connection with any program described in section 5(a) because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, or political affiliation or belief.
Davis-Bacon Requirements.-- (1) Prevailing wages required.--All laborers and mechanics employed by contractors or subcontractors in any construction, alteration, or repair, including painting and decorating, of projects, buildings, and works which are federally assisted under this Act, shall be paid wages at rates not less than those prevailing on similar construction in the locality as determined by the Secretary in accordance with the Act of March 3, 1931 (commonly known as the Davis-Bacon Act), as amended (40 United States Code 276a-276a-5).
The Secretary shall have, with respect to such labor standards, the authority and functions set forth in Reorganization Plan Numbered 14 of 1950 (15 FR 3176; 64 United States Statutes at Large 1267) and section 2 of the Act of June 1, 1934, as amended (48 United States Statutes at Large 948, as amended; 40 United States Code 276(c)).
Funding required.--Such rates are not required to be paid to participants under this Act unless they are employed in connection with projects funded by this Act in whole or in part, exclusive of wages and benefits, or projects covered by any other statute requiring the payment of such Davis-Bacon Act wage rates.
The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 3 to a State or Indian tribe unless the State or Indian tribe, as the case may be, agrees that it will submit, for any fiscal year in which it receives a grant under such section, a report to the Secretary describing the use of such grant and any other information the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Amount of Grant.--The annual amount of a grant provided under section 3 to a State or Indian tribe, as the case may be, shall not exceed 10 percent of amounts appropriated for a fiscal year to carry out this Act.
Priority.--In providing grants under section 3, the Secretary shall give priority to those States having the most elementary school and secondary school facilities that are in need of repair and that are located in areas of high unemployment.
For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Elementary school.--The term ``elementary school'' has the meaning given such term in section 1471(8) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 2891(8)).
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians.
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given such term in section 1471(12) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 2891(12)).
Secondary school.--The term ``secondary school'' has the meaning given such term in section 1471(21) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 2891(21)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Labor.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and Palau.
State educational agency.--The term ``State educational agency'' has the meaning given such term in section 1471(23) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 2891(23)).