This title may be cited as the ``Advancing the Global Opportunities for Biotechnology in Agriculture Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Biotechnology in the agricultural sector holds the prospect for substantial benefits to mankind in a number of critical areas.
Enhanced crop yields resulting from the use of agricultural biotechnology will help in feeding a growing world population, especially in developing countries.
Healthier bio-engineered foods will assist in combating diseases specific to the developing world that arise from vitamin and other nutritional deficiencies.
Pest and disease resistant crops developed through biotechnology will preserve and improve the environment by reducing the need for herbicides and pesticides.
Greater agricultural yields will preserve the environment by minimizing the need for additional farmland to feed and clothe the world's growing population.
Ensuring that these benefits, the underlying scientific information, and the regulatory framework for managing this technology are shared globally is imperative and should be an integral part of United States foreign assistance programs.
In General.--Of the funds appropriated to carry out sections 103 through 106, and chapter 10 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 for fiscal years 2001-2002, $6,000,000 is authorized to be appropriated to the Agency for International Development for programs and projects designed to educate government officials in developing countries regarding the use of biotechnology in the agricultural sector and the regulatory procedures used by the United States with respect to agricultural products using biotechnology.
The programs and activities shall encourage acceptance by those countries of products approved under the United States regulatory system or, in the case of countries who choose to establish a national regulatory system based on science, to encourage adoption of domestic approval processes based on objective scientific principles.
The programs and activities shall include the following: (1) Technical exchange program for foreign officials.--The Agency for International Development shall carry out a technical exchange program that brings to the United States appropriate foreign officials for the purpose of educating them about the scientific process underlying biotechnology and the regulatory approval system employed in the United States for biotechnology products, and to seek answers to any questions they or their citizens may have regarding the safety of biotechnology, particularly in agricultural products.
Technical exchange program for united states biotechnology experts.--The Agency for International Development shall carry out a technical exchange program that sends United States experts in the field of biotechnology in the agriculture sector to foreign capitals to provide information on the scientific process underlying biotechnology, the regulatory approval system employed in the United States to approve agricultural products produced with biotechnology, and to respond to any questions the officials in foreign countries or their citizens may have regarding the safety of biotechnology, particularly in the agriculture sector.
DEVELOPMENT OF EXPERTISE IN BIOTECHNOLOGY IN THE AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT.
In order to carry out the programs and activities in section ____, the Agency for International Development shall establish a group of experts within the agency to carry out these programs.
To maximize its effectiveness, this group should draw on the expertise, as appropriate, of regulatory officials in the Environmental Protection Agency, the Food and Drug Administration, and the United States Department of Agriculture, as well as appropriate officials from the Department of State.
Coordination.--The President shall establish an interagency process for all relevant executive branch agencies, including the United States Department of Agriculture, the Office of the United States Trade Representative, the Department of State, the Agency for International Development, the Department of Commerce, the Food and Drug Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency, to coordinate efforts and to generate support for the acceptance of agricultural biotechnology.
United States policies must stress the prominence of science as the foundation for regulatory decision-making and work aggressively in international fora such as the World Trade Organization, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the World Health Organization, including its CODEX Alimentarius, and the United Nations, to advocate for science-based decision making.
Standards for Food Aid.--The Agency for International Development and the United States Department of Agriculture should work to ensure that all food and grain products that meet United States health and safety requirements are acceptable to foreign countries under relevant food aid programs.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the Sense of the Congress that the Secretary of State should work with United States embassies abroad to develop bilateral support from foreign governments for the approval of science-based trading regimes in multilateral forums and organizations.