This Act may be cited as the ``Capitol Visitor Center Authorization Act of 1997''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CAPITOL VISITOR CENTER.
In General.--The Architect of the Capitol, under the direction of the United States Capitol Preservation Commission, is authorized-- (1) to plan, construct, equip, administer, and maintain a Capitol Visitor Center under the East Plaza of the United States Capitol with associated improvements to the Capitol to provide access thereto; and (2) to reconstruct the East Plaza of the United States Capitol and its environs to enhance its attractiveness, safety, and security.
Purpose.--It shall be the purpose of the Capitol Visitor Center to provide reception facilities, educational exhibits, amenities, auditoriums, and other programs and facilities for members of the public visiting the United States Capitol.
Design.--The design of the Capitol Visitor Center shall be substantially in accordance with the Final Design Report dated November 10, 1995, submitted by the Architect of the Capitol to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate, and the United States Capitol Preservation Commission.
Plans for Exhibits.--Plans and specifications for the exhibits and equipping of the Capitol Visitor Center shall be completed by the Architect of the Capitol as soon as practicable after the commencement of construction.
Project Defined.--The activities and purposes set forth in subsections (a) through (d) are hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``project''.
General Authority.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Architect of the Capitol is authorized and directed to finance and develop the project in accordance with this Act and in accordance with a plan developed and approved in accordance with subsection (b).
Development and Approval of Plan.--The Architect of the Capitol shall develop and submit to the United States Capitol Preservation Commission for approval a plan that will enable the construction of the project to be completed without the appropriation of funds to the Legislative Branch for such purpose.
Performance of Activities.--The performance of any activity contemplated by a plan approved under subsection (b) (or by any special purpose entity created pursuant to this Act) of any activity is expressly authorized.
Such activities may include the following: (1) The establishment of 1 or more special purpose not-for- profit entities (corporations, partnerships, or otherwise) in connection with the project.
One or more borrowings from the Federal Financing Bank, for which purpose the Architect of the Capitol (and any special purpose entity created pursuant to the plan) shall be deemed a Federal agency within the meaning of section 3 of the Federal Financing Bank Act of 1973 (12 United States Code 2282).
Execution and delivery by the Architect of the Capitol (or by any special purpose entity created pursuant to the plan) of multiple-year agreements, contracts, leases, guaranties, instruments of indebtedness, or such other documentation as may be necessary or desirable to facilitate, support, or act as collateral for the project or to provide goods or services to or for the benefit of the project.
Use of Gifts.--Gifts received pursuant to section 5 of this Act shall be used to reduce, discharge, or provide collateral for any indebtedness incurred in connection with the project (whether incurred prior or subsequent to the receipt of such gift) until such indebtedness (including any accrued but unpaid interest thereon) has been repaid in full.
Building Codes.--The project shall meet design standards applicable under nationally recognized building codes, as determined by the Architect of the Capitol.
During construction, the Architect shall conduct periodic inspections for the purpose of assuring that such standards are being met.
Applicability of Certain Laws.--The project shall not be subject to any Federal or State law (including laws of the District of Columbia) relating to taxes, building codes, permits, or inspections.
In General.--For the purposes of carrying out the project, the Architect of the Capitol may solicit, receive, accept, hold, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Deposit of Receipts.--Subsequent to the repayment of all indebtedness and subject to the provisions of the plan approved pursuant to section 3, the Architect of the Capitol shall deposit into the account established by section 6(a) all monetary gifts received under subsection (a) and all proceeds from the disposition of nonmonetary gifts received under subsection (a).
Treatment Under Tax Laws.--Any gift accepted in accordance with the plan approved pursuant to section 3 shall be considered a gift to the United States for the purposes of income, estate, and gift tax laws of the United States.
ACCOUNT IN THE TREASURY.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a separate account entitled ``Architect of the Capitol, Capitol Buildings and Grounds, Capitol Visitor Center, Gifts and Donations'' which shall consist of amounts deposited into the account by the Architect of the Capitol under section 5(b) and amounts credited to the account pursuant to this section.
Availability of Amounts.--Funds in the account established by subsection (a) shall be available to the Architect of the Capitol for carrying out the project in such amounts as are specified in appropriations Acts.
Such funds shall not be subject to any fiscal year limitation.
Reporting of Transactions.--Receipts, obligations, and expenditures of funds in the account established by subsection (a) shall be reported in annual estimates submitted to Congress by the Architect of the Capitol for the operation and maintenance of the Capitol Buildings and Grounds.
Investment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the account established by subsection (a) as is not, in the judgment of the Secretary, required to meet current withdrawals.
Such investments may be made only in interest- bearing obligations of the United States.
For such purpose, such obligations may be acquired-- (A) on original issue at the issue price; or (B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Sale of obligations.--Any obligation acquired by the account may be sold at the market price.
Interest on certain proceeds.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the account shall be credited to and form part of the account.
To assure that only the most responsible, experienced, and qualified parties are utilized to carry out the project, notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Architect of the Capitol may establish competitive procedures for such work by the use of prequalification standards and may award contracts on the basis of contractor qualifications as well as price.
Such procedures and contract awards shall be final and conclusive upon all officers of the government.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF UNITED STATES CAPITOL PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
Delegation of Functions.--The United States Capitol Preservation Commission is authorized to delegate to the Special Committee appointed pursuant to the amendment made by subsection (b) the functions of the Commission under this Act.
Establishment.--Section 801 of the Arizona-Idaho Conservation Act of 1988 (40 United States Code 188a) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Special Committee.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Commission is authorized to establish a Special Committee consisting of 3 members as follows: ``(A) One Member of the House of Representatives to be appointed by the Commission.
One Member of the Senate to be appointed by the Commission.
One Member of the House of Representatives or the Senate or 1 knowledgeable and experienced private citizen to be appointed by the 2 members appointed pursuant to subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Chairman; functions.--The Special Committee established pursuant to paragraph (1) shall elect its own chairperson and shall provide the Architect of the Capitol with all necessary oversight and direction in the exercise of the authority granted to the Architect under the Capitol Visitor Center Authorization Act of 1996.''.
The provisions of title III of the National Visitor Center Facilities Act of 1968 (82 United States Statutes at Large 43) shall be superseded and repealed to the extent that such provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of the plan approved pursuant to section 3.