This Act may be cited as the ``Community Character Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Inadequate land use planning at the State level contributes to increased public and private capital costs for infrastructure development, loss of community character, and environmental degradation.
Although land use planning is rightfully within the jurisdiction of State and local governments, comprehensive land use planning and urban development should be supported by the Federal Government and State governments.
States should provide a proper climate and context for planning through legislation in order for appropriate comprehensive land use planning and urban development to occur.
Many States have outdated land use planning legislation, and many States are undertaking efforts to update and reform the legislation.
Efforts to coordinate State and regional investments with local plans require additional planning at the State level.
Housing is a critical component of sustainable urban development, and land use planning should provide for a range of housing options to offer choice in location, type, and affordability to all members of the community.
The Federal Government and State governments should support the efforts of tribal governments and Native Hawaiian organizations to implement land use planning and community development to improve housing and socioeconomic conditions for Indian tribes and Native Hawaiians.
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT GRANTS TO STATES TO DEVELOP OR UPDATE LAND USE PLANNING LEGISLATION.
Grant Program Authorized.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall establish a program to provide grants to States for the purpose of assisting in-- (1) as a first priority, the development or revision of land use planning legislation in those States that have inadequate or outmoded land use planning legislation; (2) the creation or revision of State comprehensive land use plans or plan elements in those States that have previously updated land use planning legislation; and (3) the development or revision of comprehensive land use plans or plan elements for multi-State regions.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), a State planning director shall submit to the Secretary an application, in such form as the Secretary may require, that demonstrates to the Secretary that the basic goals of the State regarding land use planning legislation are consistent with all of the following guidelines: (1) Citizen representation.--Citizens are notified and citizen representation is required in the developing, adopting, and updating of land use plans.
Multijurisdictional cooperation.--In order to effectively manage the impacts of urban development and to provide for resource sustainability, land use plans are created based on multi-jurisdictional governmental cooperation, when practicable, particularly in the case of land use plans based on watershed boundaries.
Implementation elements.--Land use plans contain an implementation element that-- (A) includes a timetable for action and a definition of the respective roles and responsibilities of agencies, local governments, and citizens of the State; (B) is consistent with State capital budget objectives; and (C) provides the framework for decisions relating to the siting of future infrastructure development, including development of utilities and utility distribution systems.
Comprehensive planning.--There is comprehensive planning to encourage land use plans that-- (A) promote sustainable economic development and social equity; (B) enhance community character; (C) coordinate transportation, housing, education, and other infrastructure development; (D) conserve historic resources, scenic resources, and the environment; (E) sustainably manage natural resources; and (F) provide for a range of housing options, including provisions that promote and accommodate housing affordability.
Updating.--Land use plans are routinely updated.
Standards.--Land use plans reflect an approach that is consistent with established professional planning standards.
Use of Grant Funds.--Grant funds received by a State under subsection (a) shall be used to obtain technical assistance in-- (1) drafting land use planning legislation; (2) research and development for land use planning programs and requirements relating to the development of State guide plans; (3) conducting workshops, educating and consulting policy makers, and involving citizens in the planning process; and (4) integrating State and regional concerns and land use plans with Federal land use plans.
Amount of Grant.--The amount of a grant under subsection (a) shall not exceed $1,000,000.
Cost-Sharing.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Federal share of a project funded with a grant under subsection (a) shall not exceed 90 percent.
Increased federal share.--The Secretary may increase the Federal share in the case of a grant to a tribal government or Native Hawaiian organization if the Secretary finds that the tribal government or Native Hawaiian organization does not have sufficient funds to contribute to the project.
Coordination.--The Secretary shall encourage Federal land management agencies to coordinate land use planning for Federal land with the State planning director responsible for the drafting and updating of State guide plans or guidance documents regulating land use and infrastructure development on a statewide basis.
Audits.-- (1) In general.--The Inspector General of the Department of Housing and Urban Development shall conduct an audit of a portion of the grants provided under this section to ensure that all funds provided under the grants are used for the purposes specified in this section.
Use of audit results.--The results of audits conducted under paragraph (1) and any recommendations made in connection with the audits shall be taken into consideration in awarding any future grant under this section to a State.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Land use planning legislation.--The term ``land use planning legislation'' means a statute, regulation, executive order or other action taken by a State to guide, regulate, and assist in the planning, regulation, and management of land, natural resources, development practices, and other activities related to the pattern and scope of future land use.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
State.--The term ``State'' means any of the following: (A) One of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
A Native Hawaiian organization, as defined in section 8(a)(15) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(a)(15)).
State planning director.--The term ``State planning director'' means the State official designated by statute or by the chief executive officer of the State whose principal responsibility is the drafting and updating of State guide plans or guidance documents that regulate land use and urban development on a statewide basis.
Tribal government.--The term ``tribal government'' means the tribal government of an Indian tribe, as defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.