TERMINATION OF EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUSTS FROM THE TREATMENT OF STAPLED ENTITIES.
In General.--Notwithstanding paragraph (3) of section 136(c) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984 (relating to stapled stock; stapled entities), the REIT gross income provisions shall be applied by treating the activities and gross income of members of the stapled REIT group properly allocable to any nonqualified real property interest held by the exempt REIT or any stapled entity which is a member of such group (or treated under subsection (c) as held by such REIT or stapled entity) as the activities and gross income of the exempt REIT in the same manner as if the exempt REIT and such group were 1 entity.
Nonqualified Real Property Interest.--For purposes of this section-- (1) In general.--The term ``nonqualified real property interest'' means, with respect to any exempt REIT, any interest in real property acquired after March 26, 1998, by the exempt REIT or any stapled entity.
Exception for binding contracts, etc.--Such term shall not include any interest in real property acquired after March 26, 1998, by the exempt REIT or any stapled entity if-- (A) the acquisition is pursuant to a written agreement which was binding on such date and at all times thereafter on such REIT or stapled entity, or (B) the acquisition is described on or before such date in a public announcement or in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Improvements and leases.-- (A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term ``nonqualified real property interest'' shall not include-- (i) any improvement to land owned or leased by the exempt REIT or any member of the stapled REIT group, and (ii) any repair to, or improvement of, any improvement owned or leased by the exempt REIT or any member of the stapled REIT group, if such ownership or leasehold interest is a qualified real property interest.
Leases.--Such term shall not include any lease of a qualified real property interest.
Termination where change in use.-- (i) In general.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any improvement placed in service after December 31, 1999, which is part of a change in the use of the property to which such improvement relates unless the cost of such improvement does not exceed 200 percent of-- (I) the cost of such property, or (II) if such property is substituted basis property (as defined in section 7701(a)(42) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), the fair market value of the property at the time of acquisition.
Binding contracts.--For purposes of clause (i), an improvement shall be treated as placed in service before January 1, 2000, if such improvement is placed in service before January 1, 2004, pursuant to a binding contract in effect on December 31, 1999, and at all times thereafter.
Treatment of entities which are not stapled, etc.
on march 26, 1998.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all interests in real property held by an exempt REIT or any stapled entity with respect to such REIT (or treated under subsection (c) as held by such REIT or stapled entity) shall be treated as nonqualified real property interests unless-- (A) such stapled entity was a stapled entity with respect to such REIT as of March 26, 1998, and at all times thereafter, and (B) as of March 26, 1998, and at all times thereafter, such REIT was a real estate investment trust.
Qualified real property interest.--The term ``qualified real property interest'' means any interest in real property other than a nonqualified real property interest.
Treatment of Property Held by 10-Percent Subsidiaries.--For purposes of this section-- (1) In general.--Any exempt REIT and any stapled entity shall be treated as holding their proportionate shares of each interest in real property held by any 10-percent subsidiary entity of the exempt REIT or stapled entity, as the case may be.
Property held by 10-percent subsidiaries treated as nonqualified.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any interest in real property held by a 10-percent subsidiary entity of an exempt REIT or stapled entity shall be treated as a nonqualified real property interest.
Exception for interests in real property held on march 26, 1998, etc.--In the case of an entity which was a 10-percent subsidiary entity of an exempt REIT or stapled entity on March 26, 1998, and at all times thereafter, an interest in real property held by such subsidiary entity shall be treated as a qualified real property interest if such interest would be so treated if held directly by the exempt REIT or the stapled entity.
Reduction in qualified real property interests if increase in ownership of subsidiary.--If, after March 26, 1998, an exempt REIT or stapled entity increases its ownership interest in a subsidiary entity to which paragraph (2)(B) applies above its ownership interest in such subsidiary entity as of such date, the additional portion of each interest in real property which is treated as held by the exempt REIT or stapled entity by reason of such increased ownership shall be treated as a nonqualified real property interest.
Special rules for determining ownership.--For purposes of this subsection-- (A) percentage ownership of an entity shall be determined in accordance with subsection (e)(4), (B) interests in the entity which are acquired by the exempt REIT or stapled entity in any acquisition described in an agreement, announcement, or filing described in subsection (b)(2) shall be treated as acquired on March 26, 1998, and (C) except as provided in guidance prescribed by the Secretary, any change in proportionate ownership which is attributable solely to fluctuations in the relative fair market values of different classes of stock shall not be taken into account.
Treatment of Property Secured by Mortgage Held by Exempt REIT or Member of Stapled REIT Group.-- (1) In general.--In the case of any nonqualified obligation held by an exempt REIT or any member of the stapled REIT group, the REIT gross income provisions shall be applied by treating the exempt REIT as having impermissible tenant service income equal to-- (A) the interest income from such obligation which is properly allocable to the property described in paragraph (2), and (B) the income of any member of the stapled REIT group from services described in paragraph (2) with respect to such property.
If the income referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B) is of a 10-percent subsidiary entity, only the portion of such income which is properly allocable to the exempt REIT's or the stapled entity's interest in the subsidiary entity shall be taken into account.
Nonqualified obligation.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the term ``nonqualified obligation'' means any obligation secured by a mortgage on an interest in real property if the income of any member of the stapled REIT group for services furnished with respect to such property would be impermissible tenant service income were such property held by the exempt REIT and such services furnished by the exempt REIT.
Exception for certain market rate obligations.--Such term shall not include any obligation-- (A) payments under which would be treated as interest if received by a REIT, and (B) the rate of interest on which does not exceed an arm's length rate.
Exception for existing obligations.--Such term shall not include any obligation-- (A) which is secured on March 26, 1998, by an interest in real property, and (B) which is held on such date by the exempt REIT or any entity which is a member of the stapled REIT group on such date and at all times thereafter, but only so long as such obligation is secured by such interest.
The preceding sentence shall not cease to apply by reason of the refinancing of the obligation if (immediately after the refinancing) the principal amount of the obligation resulting from the refinancing does not exceed the principal amount of the refinanced obligation (immediately before the refinancing).
Treatment of entities which are not stapled, etc.
on march 26, 1998.--A rule similar to the rule of subsection (b)(4) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
Increase in amount of nonqualified obligations if increase in ownership of subsidiary.--A rule similar to the rule of subsection (c)(3) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
Coordination with subsection (a).--This subsection shall not apply to the portion of any interest in real property that the exempt REIT or stapled entity holds or is treated as holding under this section without regard to this subsection.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) REIT gross income provisions.--The term ``REIT gross income provisions'' means-- (A) paragraphs (2), (3), and (6) of section 856(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and (B) section 857(b)(5) of such Code.
Exempt reit.--The term ``exempt REIT'' means a real estate investment trust to which section 269B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 does not apply by reason of paragraph (3) of section 136(c) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984.
Stapled reit group.--The term ``stapled REIT group'' means, with respect to an exempt REIT, the group consisting of-- (A) all entities which are stapled entities with respect to the exempt REIT, and (B) all entities which are 10-percent subsidiary entities of the exempt REIT or any such stapled entity.
10-percent subsidiary entity.-- (A) In general.--The term ``10-percent subsidiary entity'' means, with respect to any exempt REIT or stapled entity, any entity in which the exempt REIT or stapled entity (as the case may be) directly or indirectly holds at least a 10-percent interest.
Exception for certain c corporation subsidiaries of reits.--A corporation which would, but for this subparagraph, be treated as a 10-percent subsidiary of an exempt REIT shall not be so treated if such corporation is taxable under section 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
10-percent interest.--The term ``10-percent interest'' means-- (i) in the case of an interest in a corporation, ownership of 10 percent (by vote or value) of the stock in such corporation, (ii) in the case of an interest in a partnership, ownership of 10 percent of the assets or net profits interest in the partnership, and (iii) in any other case, ownership of 10 percent of the beneficial interests in the entity.
Other definitions.--Terms used in this section which are used in section 269B or section 856 of such Code shall have the respective meanings given such terms by such section.
Guidance.--The Secretary may prescribe such guidance as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section, including guidance to prevent the avoidance of such purposes and to prevent the double counting of income.
Effective Date.--This section shall apply to taxable years ending after March 26, 1998.