This Act may be cited as the ``Mothers and Newborns Health Insurance Act of 2001''.
OPTIONAL COVERAGE OF LOW-INCOME, UNINSURED PREGNANT WOMEN UNDER A STATE CHILD HEALTH PLAN.
In General.--Title XXI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397aa et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
OPTIONAL COVERAGE OF LOW-INCOME, UNINSURED PREGNANT WOMEN.
Optional Coverage.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a State child health plan may provide for coverage of pregnancy-related assistance for targeted low-income pregnant women in accordance with this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Pregnancy-related assistance.--The term `pregnancy- related assistance' has the meaning given the term `child health assistance' in section 2110(a) as if any reference to targeted low-income children were a reference to targeted low- income pregnant women, except that the assistance shall be limited to pregnancy-related services (as defined in regulation for purposes of title XIX).
Targeted low-income pregnant woman.--The term `targeted low-income pregnant woman' has the meaning given the term `targeted low-income child' in section 2110(b) as if any reference to a child were deemed a reference to a woman during pregnancy and through the end of the month in which the 60-day period (beginning on the last day of her pregnancy) ends.
References to Terms and Special Rules.--In the case of, and with respect to, a State providing for coverage of pregnancy-related assistance to targeted low-income pregnant women under subsection (a), the following special rules apply: ``(1) Any reference in this title (other than subsection (b)) to a targeted low-income child is deemed to include a reference to a targeted low-income pregnant woman.
Any such reference to child health assistance with respect to such women is deemed a reference to pregnancy- related assistance.
Any such reference to a child is deemed a reference to a woman during pregnancy and the period described in subsection (b)(2).
The reference in section 2107(e)(1)(D) to section 1920A (relating to presumptive eligibility for children) is deemed a reference to section 1920 (relating to presumptive eligibility for pregnant women).
The medicaid applicable income level is deemed a reference to the income level established under section 1902(l)(2)(A).
Subsection (a) of section 2103 (relating to required scope of health insurance coverage) shall not apply insofar as a State limits coverage to services described in subsection (b)(1) and the reference to such section in section 2105(a)(1) is deemed not to require, in such case, compliance with the requirements of section 2103(a).
There shall be no exclusion of benefits for services described in subsection (b)(1) based on any pre-existing condition, and no waiting period (including a waiting period to carry out section 2102(b)(3)(C)) shall apply.
No Impact on Allotments.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting the amount of any initial allotment provided to a State under section 2104(b).
Application of Funding Restrictions.--The coverage under this section (and the funding of such coverage) is subject to the restrictions of section 2105(c).''.
Application of Qualified Entities to Presumptive Eligibility for Pregnant Women Under Medicaid.--Section 1920(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396r-1(b)) is amended by adding at the end after and below paragraph (2) the following flush sentence: ``The term `qualified provider' includes a qualified entity as defined in section 1920A(b)(3).''.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 2102(b)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397bb(b)(1)(B)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (i); (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting ``, and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(iii) may not apply a waiting period (including a waiting period to carry out paragraph (3)(C)) in the case of a targeted low-income child who is pregnant, if the State provides for coverage of pregnancy-related assistance for targeted low-income pregnant women in accordance with section 2111.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take effect on the date of enactment of this Act and apply to allotments under title XXI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397aa et sequentes) for all fiscal years.
AUTOMATIC ENROLLMENT FOR CHILDREN BORN TO WOMEN RECEIVING PREGNANCY-RELATED ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Section 2111 of the Social Security Act, as added by section 2, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Automatic Enrollment for Children Born to Women Receiving Pregnancy-Related Assistance.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this title or title XIX, if a child is born to a targeted low-income pregnant woman who was receiving pregnancy-related assistance under this section on the date of the child's birth, the child shall be deemed to have applied for child health assistance under the State child health plan on the date of such birth, to have been found eligible for such assistance under such plan (or, in the case of a State that provides such assistance through the provision of medical assistance under a plan under title XIX to have applied for medical assistance under such title and to have been found eligible for such assistance under such title on the date of such birth) and to remain eligible for such assistance until the child attains 1 year of age, so long as the child is a member of the woman's household.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) takes effect on the date of enactment of this Act and applies to allotments under title XXI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397aa et sequentes) for all fiscal years.
EXPANDED AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS RELATED TO OUTREACH AND ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATIONS.
Section 1931(h) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396u-1(h)) is amended-- (1) by striking the subsection heading and inserting ``Increased Federal Matching Rate for Administrative Costs Related to Outreach and Eligibility Determinations''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``eligibility determinations'' and all that follows and inserting ``determinations of the eligibility of children and pregnant women for benefits under the State plan under this title or title XXI, outreach to children and pregnant women likely to be eligible for such benefits, and such other outreach- and eligibility-related activities as the Secretary may approve.