This Act may be cited as the ``Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge Complex Expansion and Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge Expansion Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The western basin of Lake Erie, as part of the Great Lakes ecosystem, the largest freshwater ecosystem on the face of the Earth, is vitally important to the economic and environmental future of the United States.
Over the past three decades, the citizens and governmental institutions of both the United States and Canada have devoted increasing attention and resources to the restoration of the water quality and fisheries of the Great Lakes, including the western basin.
This increased awareness has been accompanied by a gradual shift to a holistic ``ecosystem approach'' that highlights a growing recognition that shoreline areas--the nearshore terrestrial ecosystems--are an integral part of the western basin and the Great Lakes ecosystem as a whole.
The Great Lakes account for more than 90 percent of the surface freshwater in the nation.
The western basin receives approximately 90 percent of its flow from the Detroit River and only approximately 10 percent from tributaries.
The western basin of Lake Erie is an important ecosystem that includes a number of distinct islands, channels, rivers, and shoals that support dense populations of fish, wildlife, and aquatic plants.
The coastal wetlands of Lake Erie support the largest diversity of plant and wildlife species in the Great Lakes.
The moderate climate of Lake Erie and its more southern latitude allow for many species that are not found in or along the northern Great Lakes.
More than 300 species of plants, including 37 significant species, have been identified in the aquatic and wetland habitats of the western basin.
The shallow western basin of Lake Erie, from the Lower Detroit River to Sandusky Bay, is home to the largest concentration of marshes in Lake Erie, including Mouille, Metzger, and Magee marshes, the Maumee Bay wetland complex, the wetland complexes flanking Locust Point, and the wetlands in Sandusky Bay.
The larger United States islands in western Lake Erie have wetlands in their small embayments.
The wetlands in the western basin of Lake Erie comprise as some of the most important waterfowl habitat in the Great Lakes.
Waterfowl, wading birds, shore birds, gulls and terns, raptors, and perching birds all use the western basin wetlands for migration, nesting, and feeding.
Hundreds of thousands of diving ducks stop to rest in the Lake Erie area on their fall migration from Canada to the east and south.
The wetlands of the western basin of Lake Erie provide a major stopover for ducks such as migrating bufflehead, common goldeneye, common mergansers, and ruddy duck.
The international importance of Lake Erie is manifested in the United States congressional designation of the Ottawa and Cedar Point National Wildlife Refuges.
Lake Erie has an international reputation for walleye, perch, and bass fishing, recreational boating, birding, photography, and duck hunting.
On an economic basis, Lake Erie tourism accounts for an estimated $1,500,000,000 in retail sales and more than 50,000 jobs.
Many of the 417,000 boats that are registered in Ohio are used in the western basin of Lake Erie, in part to fish for the estimated 10,000,000 walleye that migrate from other areas of the lake to spawn.
This internationally renowned walleye fishery drives much of Ohio's $2,000,000,000 sport fishing industry.
Coastal wetlands in the western basin of Lake Erie have been subjected to intense pressure for 150 years.
Prior to 1850, the western basin was part of an extensive coastal marsh and swamp system of approximately 122,000 hectares that comprised a portion of the Great Black Swamp.
By 1951, only 12,407 wetland hectares remained in the western basin.
Half of that acreage was destroyed between 1972 and 1987.
Therefore, today only approximately 5,000 hectares remain.
Along the Michigan shoreline, coastal wetlands were reduced by 62 percent between 1916 and the early 1970s.
The development of the city of Monroe, Michigan, has had a particularly significant impact on the coastal wetlands at the mouth of the Raisin River: only approximately 100 hectares remain physically unaltered today in an area where 70 years ago marshes were 10 times more extensive.
In addition to the actual loss of coastal wetland acreage along the shores of Lake Erie, the quality of many remaining diked wetlands has been degraded by numerous stressors, especially excessive loadings of sediments and nutrients, contaminants, shoreline modification, exotic species, and the diking of wetlands.
Protective peninsula beach systems, such as the former Bay Point and Woodtick, at the border of Ohio and Michigan near the mouth of the Ottawa River and Maumee Bay, have been eroded over the years, exacerbating erosion along the shorelines and impacting the breeding and spawning grounds.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Refuge Complex'' means the Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge Complex and the lands and waters therein, as described in the document entitled ``The Comprehensive Conservation Plan for the Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge Complex'' and dated September 22, 2000, including Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge, West Sister Island National Wildlife Refuge, and Cedar Point National Wildlife Refuge.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``International Refuge'' means the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge established by the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge Establishment Act (Public Law 107-91).
Refuge Complex Boundaries.-- (1) Expansion.--The boundaries of the Refuge Complex are expanded to include lands and waters in the State of Ohio from the eastern boundary of Maumee Bay State Park to the eastern boundary of the Darby Unit, including the Bass Island archipelago, as depicted on the map entitled ``Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge Complex Expansion and Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge Expansion Act'', dated September 6, 2002.
Boundary revisions.--The Secretary may make such revisions to the boundaries of the Refuge Complex as may be appropriate to carry out the purposes of the Refuge Complex or to facilitate the acquisition of property within the Refuge Complex.
International Refuge Boundaries.--The southern boundary of the International Refuge is extended south to include additional lands and waters in the State of Michigan east of Interstate Highway 75 from the southern boundary of Sterling State Park to the Ohio State boundary, as depicted on the map referred to in subsection (a)(1).
Availability of Map.--The Secretary shall keep the map referred to in subsection (a)(1) available for inspection in appropriate offices of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF LANDS FOR REFUGE COMPLEX.
Acquisitions.--The Secretary may acquire by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange the lands and waters, or interests therein (including conservation easements), within the boundaries of the Refuge Complex as expanded by this title.
No such lands, waters, or interests therein may be acquired without the consent of the owner thereof.
Transfers From Other Agencies.--Any Federal property located within the boundaries of the Refuge Complex, as expanded by this title, that is under the administrative jurisdiction of a department or agency of the United States other than the Department of the Interior may, with the concurrence of the head of administering department or agency, be transferred without consideration to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary for the purposes of this title.
ADMINISTRATION OF REFUGE COMPLEX.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer all federally owned lands, waters, and interests therein that are within the boundaries of the Refuge Complex, as expanded by this title, in accordance with the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd et sequentes) and this title.
The Secretary may use such additional statutory authority as may be available for the conservation of fish and wildlife, and the provision of fish and wildlife dependent recreational opportunities as the Secretary considers appropriate to implement this title.
Additional Purposes.--In addition to the purposes of the Refuge Complex under other laws, regulations, executive orders, and comprehensive conservation plans, the Refuge Complex shall be managed for the following purposes: (1) To strengthen and complement existing resource management, conservation, and education programs and activities at the Refuge Complex in a manner consistent with the primary purpose of the Refuge Complex to provide major resting, feeding, and wintering habitats for migratory birds and other wildlife, and to enhance national resource conservation and management in the western basin of Lake Erie.
To conserve, enhance, and restore the native aquatic and terrestrial community characteristics of the western basin of Lake Erie (including associated fish, wildlife, and plant species), both in the United States and Canada in partnership with nongovernmental and private organizations, as well as private individuals dedicated to habitat enhancement.
To facilitate partnerships among the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Canadian national and provincial authorities, State and local governments, local communities in the United States and in Canada, conservation organizations, and other non-Federal entities to promote public awareness of the resources of the western basin of Lake Erie.
To advance the collective goals and priorities established in the ``Great Lakes Strategy 2002--A Plan for the New Millennium'', by the United States Policy Committee comprised of various Federal agencies, including the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the United States Geological Survey, the Forest Service, and the Great Lakes Fishery Commission, as well as the State governments and tribal governments in the Great Lakes.
These goals, broadly stated, include working together to protect and restore the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Great Lakes basin ecosystem.
Priority Uses.--In providing opportunities for compatible fish and wildlife dependent recreation, the Secretary, in accordance with paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 4(a) of the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd(a)), shall ensure that hunting, fishing, wildlife observation and photography, and environmental education and interpretation are the priority public uses of the Refuge Complex.
Cooperative Agreements Regarding Non-Federal Lands.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the State of Ohio or the State of Michigan, or any political subdivision thereof, and with any other person or entity for the management in a manner consistent with this title of lands that are owned by such State, subdivision, or other person or entity and located within the boundaries of the Refuge Complex and to promote public awareness of the resources of the western basin of Lake Erie and encourage public participation in the conservation of those resources.
Use of Existing Greenway Authority.--The Secretary shall encourage the State of Ohio to use existing authorities under the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century to provide funding for acquisition and development of trails within the boundaries of the Refuge Complex.
STUDY OF ASSOCIATED AREA.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, shall conduct a study of fish and wildlife habitat and aquatic and terrestrial communities of the 2 dredge spoil disposal sites referred to by the Toledo-Lucas County Port Authority as Port Authority Facility Number Three and Grassy Island, located within Toledo Harbor near the mouth of the Maumee River.
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of the Act, the Secretary shall complete such study and submit a report containing the results thereof to the Congress.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of the Interior-- (1) such sums as may be necessary for the acquisition of lands and waters within the Refuge Complex; (2) such sums as may be necessary for the development, operation, and maintenance of the Refuge Complex; and (3) such sums as may be necessary to carry out the study under section 7.