This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security KidSave Accounts Act''.
SOCIAL SECURITY KIDSAVE ACCOUNTS.
Title II of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by inserting before section 201 the following: ``Part A--Insurance Benefits''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``Part B--KidSave Accounts ``kidsave accounts ``Sec.
Establishment.--The Commissioner of Social Security shall establish in the name of each individual born on or after January 1, 1997, a KidSave Account described in subparagraph (A) of section 252(1), upon the later of-- ``(1) the date of enactment of this part, or ``(2) the date of the issuance of a Social Security account number under section 205(c)(2) to such individual.
The KidSave Account shall be identified to the account holder by means of the account holder's Social Security account number.
Contributions.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer from the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund for crediting by the Commissioner to each account holder's KidSave Account under subsection (a), an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(A) in the case of any individual born on or after January 1, 1999, $1000.00, on the date of the establishment of such individual's KidSave Account, and ``(B) in the case of any individual born on or after January 1, 1997, $500.00, on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th birthdays of such individual occurring on or after January 1, 2002.
Adjustment for inflation.--For any calendar year after 2008, each of the dollar amounts under paragraph (1) shall be increased by the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 215(i) for the calendar year.
Designations Regarding KidSave Accounts.-- ``(1) Initial designations of investment vehicle.--A person described in subsection (d) shall, on behalf of the individual described in subsection (a), designate the investment vehicle for the KidSave Account to which contributions on behalf of such individual are to be deposited.
Such designation shall be made on the application for such individual's Social Security account number.
Changes in investment vehicles or types of kidsave accounts.--The Commissioner shall by regulation provide the time and manner by which-- ``(A) an individual or a person described in subsection (d) on behalf of such individual may change 1 or more investment vehicles for a KidSave Account described in subparagraph (A) of section 252(1), and ``(B) an individual who has attained age 18, may designate a KidSave Account described in subparagraph (B) of section 252(1) to which all or a portion of the amounts in an existing KidSave Account described in subparagraph (A) of such section are to be transferred.
Treatment of Minors and Incompetent Individuals.--Any designation under subsection (c) to be made by a minor, or an individual mentally incompetent or under other legal disability, may be made by the person who is constituted guardian or other fiduciary by the law of the State of residence of the individual or is otherwise legally vested with the care of the individual or his estate.
Payment under this part due a minor, or an individual mentally incompetent or under other legal disability, may be made to the person who is constituted guardian or other fiduciary by the law of the State of residence of the claimant or is otherwise legally vested with the care of the claimant or his estate.
In any case in which a guardian or other fiduciary of the individual under legal disability has not been appointed under the law of the State of residence of the individual, if any other person, in the judgment of the Commissioner, is responsible for the care of such individual, any designation under subsection (c) which may otherwise be made by such individual may be made by such person, any payment under this part which is otherwise payable to such individual may be made to such person, and the payment of an annuity payment under this part to such person bars recovery by any other person.
``definitions and special rules ``Sec.
For purposes of this part-- ``(1) Kidsave accounts.-- ``(A) A KidSave Account described in this subparagraph is a KidSave Account in the KidSave Investment Fund (established under section 253) which is administered by the KidSave Investment Fund Board.
A Kidsave Account described in this subparagraph is any individual retirement plan (as defined in section 7701(a)(37) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), other than a Roth IRA (as defined in section 408A(b) of such Code), which is designated by an individual as a KidSave Account (in such manner as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe) and which is administered or issued by a bank or other person referred to in section 408(a)(2) of such Code.
Treatment of accounts.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B)-- ``(i) any KidSave Account described in paragraph (1)(A) shall be treated in the same manner as an account in the Thrift Savings Fund under subchapter III of chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code, and ``(ii) any KidSave Account described in paragraph (1)(B) shall be treated in the same manner as an individual retirement plan (as so defined).
Exceptions.-- ``(i) Contribution limit.--The aggregate amount of contributions for any taxable year to all KidSave Accounts of an individual shall not exceed the contribution made pursuant to section 251(b) for such year on behalf of such individual.
Rollover contributions.--No rollover contribution may be made to a KidSave Account unless it is from another KidSave Account.
A rollover described in the preceding sentence shall not be taken into account for purposes of clause (i).
Distributions.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, distributions may only be made from a KidSave Account of an individual on or after the earlier of-- ``(I) the date on which the individual begins receiving benefits under this title, or ``(II) the date of the individual's death.
``kidsave investment fund ``Sec.
Establishment.--There is established and maintained in the Treasury of the United States a KidSave Investment Fund in the same manner as the Thrift Savings Fund under sections 8437, 8438, and 8439 of title 5, United States Code.
KidSave Investment Fund Board.-- ``(1) In general.--There is established and operated in the Social Security Administration a Kidsave Investment Fund Board in the same manner as the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board under subchapter VII of chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code.
Specific investment duties.--The Kidsave Investment Fund shall be managed by the Kidsave Investment Fund Board in the same manner as the Thrift Savings Fund is managed under subchapter VIII of chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code.
``appropriations to the federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund ``Sec.
Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Federal Old- Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund such sums as are necessary to carry out this part.