This Act may be cited as the ``Imported Fire Ant Control, Management, and Eradication Act of 1997''.
Congress finds that-- (1) imported fire ants infest at least 13 southern and southeastern States and over 275,000,000 acres; (2) the annual fire ant impact on Texas alone is estimated at $300,000,000, including-- (A) an annual fire ant impact on the cattle industry in Texas of an estimated $67,000,000; (B) fire ant infestation of approximately 56,000,000 acres, or \2/3\, of Texas; and (C) an annual expenditure, in the 5 major metropolitan areas of Texas, of an estimated $93,000,000 on treatment, medical costs, and repairs from fire ant infestation; (3) the annual fire ant impact on Georgia is estimated at $46,000,000, including an annual fire ant impact on households in Georgia of an estimated $12,000,000; (4)(A) row crop farmers in southern Arkansas experience average annual losses in excess of $1,100 due to fire ants; (B) catfish farmers in Arkansas experience average annual losses of approximately $20,000 due to fire ants; (C) the annual fire ant impact on homeowners in Arkansas is estimated at $106,000,000; and (D) the annual fire ant impact on paper mills in Arkansas is estimated at $3,000,000; (5) 25 counties in North Carolina are infested with fire ants; (6) the annual fire ant impact on Tennessee is estimated at $1,330,000; (7) the annual fire ant impact on Mississippi is estimated at $12,326,000, including an annual fire ant impact on the cattle industry in Mississippi of an estimated $9,217,000; (8) the annual fire ant impact on Alabama is estimated at $16,000,000; (9) the annual fire ant impact on Louisiana is estimated at $23,818,250, including an annual fire ant impact on the feed grain industry of $790,000; and (10) demonstration of fire ant control methodology may provide property owners with timely information, helpful in reducing costs associated with fire ant damage.
BOARD AND GRANTS FOR RESEARCH ON IMPORTED FIRE ANT CONTROL, MANAGEMENT, AND ERADICATION.
Subtitle C of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 is amended by inserting after section 1419A (7 United States Code 3155) the following: ``SEC.
BOARD AND GRANTS FOR RESEARCH ON IMPORTED FIRE ANT CONTROL, MANAGEMENT, AND ERADICATION.
National Advisory and Implementation Board on Imported Fire Ant Control, Management, and Eradication.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a National Advisory and Implementation Board on Imported Fire Ant Control, Management, and Eradication.
Membership.--The Board shall consist of 12 members who are experts on entomology, ant ecology, wildlife biology, electrical engineering, economics, and agribusiness and who are appointed by the Secretary from academia, research institutes, and the private sector.
Compensation.-- ``(A) In general.--A member of the Board shall not receive any compensation by reason of service on the Board.
Expenses.--A member of the Board shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by the member in the performance of a duty of the member.
Termination.--The Board shall terminate 60 days after the date on which the national plan is submitted to the Secretary under subsection (d)(2).
Initial Grants.-- ``(1) Request for proposals.--The Board shall publish a request for proposals to colleges, universities, research institutes, Federal laboratories, and private entities for grants for research or demonstration projects related to the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants.
Selection.--Not later than 1 year after the date of publication of the request for proposals, the Board shall evaluate and select not less than 4, nor more than 13, research or demonstration projects related to the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants.
Grants.--The Secretary shall award a total of $6,000,000 in grants to colleges, universities, research institutes, Federal laboratories, or private entities selected under paragraph (2), for a term of not to exceed 5 years, for the purpose of conducting research or demonstration projects related to the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants.
Each project shall be completed not later than the end of the term of the grant.
Subsequent Grants.-- ``(1) Evaluation; selection.--The Board shall-- ``(A) evaluate all of the research or demonstration projects conducted under subsection (b)(3) for their use as the basis of a national plan for the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants by the Federal government, State and local governments, and owners and operators of land; and ``(B) on the basis of the evaluation, select 2 of the 13 grant projects for additional research or demonstration related to the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants and notify the Secretary of the selection.
Grants.--The Secretary shall award a grant of $4,000,000 to each of the 2 colleges, universities, research institutes, Federal laboratories, or private entities selected under paragraph (1)(B) for the purpose of conducting research or demonstration projects for the preparation of a national plan for the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants.
Each project shall be completed not later than 2 years after the grant is made.
National Plan.-- ``(1) Evaluation; selection.--The Board shall-- ``(A) evaluate all of the research or demonstration projects conducted under subsection (c)(2) for their use as the basis of a national plan for the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants by the Federal government, State and local governments, and owners and operators of land; and ``(B) on the basis of the evaluation, select 1 of the 2 grant projects, or a combination of both grant projects, as the basis for the plan and notify the Secretary of the decision.
Grant.--The Secretary shall award a grant of up to $5,000,000 to the sponsor or sponsors of the grant project selected under paragraph (1)(B) for the purpose of the final preparation of the national plan for the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants that is based on the project.
The national plan shall be completed, and submitted to the Secretary, not later than 1 year after the grant is made.
Report to congress.--Not later than 60 days after the plan is submitted to the Secretary under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall submit to Congress the national plan for the control, management, and possible eradication of imported fire ants.