This Act may be cited as the ``Presidio Corporation Establishment Act''.
In General.--There is established within the Department of the Interior a public benefit corporation to be known as the Presidio Corporation (referred to in this Act as the ``Corporation'').
Duties.--The Corporation shall manage the leasing, maintenance, rehabilitation, repair, and improvement of property within the Presidio transferred pursuant to section 2 in accordance with this Act, the approved General Management Plan, (referred to in this Act as the ``Plan''), and the Act entitled ``An Act to establish the Golden Gate National Recreation Area in the State of California, and for other purposes'', approved October 27, 1972 (16 United States Code 460bb).
Board of Directors.-- (1) Composition.--The powers and management of the Corporation shall be vested in a Board of Directors composed of-- (A) 9 voting members, including-- (i) the Director of the National Park Service, or a designee of such Director; (ii) the Secretary of the Army, or a designee of such Secretary; (iii) the Secretary of Transportation, or a designee of such Secretary; (iv) the Chairperson of the Golden Gate National Park Association; (v) the mayor of the city of San Francisco; (vi) 2 members to be appointed by the Secretary of the Interior (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') from recommendations by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Majority Leader of the Senate, with national visibility and knowledge and experience in one or more of the fields of environmental studies, city planning, finance, real estate, engineering, or management; and (vii) 2 members who shall be residents of, and who shall be registered voters in, the city and county of San Francisco, with knowledge and experience in city planning, finance, and real estate; and (B) 5 nonvoting members, including-- (i) the Executive Director of the National Trust for Historic Preservation; (ii) the Chairman of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area Advisory Commission; (iii) a representative from among the entities occupying property at the Presidio, to be appointed by the Secretary; and (iv) 2 members to be appointed by the Secretary, with knowledge and experience in one or more of the fields of city planning, finance, real estate, engineering, or management.
Terms.-- (A) In general.--Each member of the Board of Directors appointed under clauses (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (1)(A) shall serve for a term of 4 years, except that of the initial appointments to the Board under clause (vii) of paragraph (1)(A), one shall be appointed for a term of 2 years, and one shall be appointed for a term of 3 years.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy on the Board of Directors shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term, if any, for which the predecessor of such member was appointed.
Any member may continue to serve after the expiration of the term of such member until a successor is appointed.
No appointed member may serve more than 12 consecutive years.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The Board of Directors shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Board of Directors.
Compensation.-- (A) In general.--Each member of the Board of Directors who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation.
Each member of the Board of Directors who is an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as an officer or employee of the Federal Government.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Board of Directors shall be allowed travel expenses while away from the home or regular place of business of the member in the performance of services for the Corporation, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Meetings.--The Board of Directors shall meet at the call of the Chairperson, who shall require the Board of Directors to meet not less often than once every 90 days.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Board of Directors shall constitute a quorum.
Staff.-- (A) In general.--The Chairperson may appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary for the efficient administration of the Corporation.
In selecting persons for appointment to the staff of the Corporation, other than the executive director, priority consideration shall be given to appointing staff (other than the executive director) from among persons with knowledge and experience in the fields of finance and real estate (including property management).
Compensation.--The Chairperson may fix the compensation of the executive director and such other personnel of the Corporation without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, relating to appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51, and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code (relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates).
Procurement of services of experts and consultants.-- The Chairperson may procure the services of experts or consultants, or organizations, including urban planners, architects, engineers, and appraisers.
Capacity to sue and be sued.--The Corporation may sue and be sued in its name, except that the Directors of the Board shall not be personally liable except for gross negligence.
Rules governing corporation.--The Corporation may adopt, amend, and repeal bylaws, rules, and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be conducted and the powers vested in it may be exercised.
Perpetual succession.--The Corporation shall have perpetual succession.
Official seal.--The Corporation shall have an official seal selected by the Board which shall be judicially noticed.
Authority to negotiate.--The Corporation may negotiate directly with the State Historic Preservation Office and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation to develop agreements concerning the reuse of historic structures managed by the Corporation, to maximize the potential for securing tenants.
Use of federal personnel, facilities, and services.-- The Secretary or other Cabinet officers may provide personnel, facilities, and other administrative services to the Corporation to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Taxes.--The Corporation shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of every kind of the United States, the State of California, and its political subdivisions, including the city and county of San Francisco.
Financial records.--The financial records of the Corporation shall be available for inspection by the Secretary at any time and shall be audited by a reputable firm of certified public accountants not less frequently than once each year.
Such audit shall be made available to the Secretary and the Congress.
Application of other laws.--All general penal statutes relating to the larceny, embezzlement, or conversion of public moneys or property of the United States shall apply to the moneys and property of the Corporation.
Reversion.--In the event of failure or default, all interests and assets of the Corporation shall revert to the United States to be administered by the Secretary.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall transfer to the Corporation, under such terms and conditions as the Secretary determines appropriate, a leasehold in the following properties within the Presidio: (1) The Letterman-LAIR complex.
The structures at Crissy Field.
Such other buildings within the Presidio as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Term.--The term of the leasehold transferred pursuant to subsection (a) shall be for a period sufficient to enable the Corporation to obtain the most beneficial financing arrangements.
Buildings.--The Secretary shall not transfer to the Corporation any buildings necessary to carry out the activities of the National Park Service.
Transfer of Existing Leaseholds.--The Secretary shall transfer all leases existing on the date of enactment of this Act affecting the property that is the subject of the leasehold described in subsection (a).
Management.--The Corporation shall manage, maintain, improve, and repair the properties described in section 3.
Advertisement.--The Corporation shall publish and disseminate information to potential occupants, by advertisement, solicitation, or other means, regarding the availability of the property within the Presidio managed by the Corporation.
Plans.--The Corporation may prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans, specifications, designs, and estimates of costs for rehabilitating, improving, altering, or repairing property managed by the Corporation, and from time to time may modify such plans, specifications, designs, or estimates.
Agreements.--The Corporation may enter into contracts, including leases, cooperative agreements, or other agreements, with any governmental entity, private or nonprofit organization, individual, firm, association, organization, or corporation for the occupancy of property within the Presidio managed by the Corporation.
Bidding Procedures.--The Corporation shall establish competitive bidding procedures to be used for the issuance of leases and contracts under this Act.
Federal Procurement Laws.--The Federal procurement laws shall not apply to the Corporation.
Regulations.--The Corporation shall establish (through easements, covenants, regulations, agreements, or otherwise) such restrictions, standards, and requirements as are necessary to maintain and protect the property managed by the Corporation.
Loans.--The Corporation may make loans to the occupants of property managed by the Corporation for the preservation, restoration, maintenance, or repair of such property.
Technical Assistance.--The Corporation may provide technical assistance to occupants of property managed by the Corporation, to repair or improve the property or to apply for loans under subsection (h).
Donations.--The Corporation may solicit and accept donations of funds, property, supplies, or services from individuals, foundations, corporations, and other private entities, and from public entities, to carry out its duties.
Revenues.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Corporation may retain revenues from leases or other agreements concerning property managed by the Corporation, including preexisting leases or agreements, and donations, and use the revenues to defray the costs of administration, preservation, restoration, operation, maintenance, repair, and related expenses incurred by the Corporation with respect to such properties.
Amount transferred to secretary.--The Corporation shall transfer to the Secretary such portion of the revenues described in paragraph (1) as agreed to by the Board of Directors and the Secretary.
The Secretary shall expend the amount transferred pursuant to this paragraph for the maintenance of the common property.
Authority To Borrow Funds.-- (1) In general.--The Corporation may borrow funds from public or private sources to carry out the duties of the Corporation under this Act.
Evidence of indebtedness.--The Corporation may issue evidence of indebtedness and may provide collateral to secure such indebtedness (including a mortgage or pledge of the interest of the Corporation in revenues or the leasehold in property described in section 3).
Loans from treasury.--The Corporation may borrow funds from the Treasury of the United States, in such amounts as may be authorized in appropriations acts, to carry out the duties of the Corporation under this Act.
Loans from the Treasury shall have such maturities, terms, and conditions as agreed upon by the Corporation and the Secretary of the Treasury, and may be redeemable at the option of the Corporation before maturity.
Investment.--Except with respect to funds obtained from the Federal Government, the Corporation may invest any funds not required for immediate use or disbursement, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, in obligations of the United States Government, or obligations the principal and interest that are guaranteed by the United States Government.
Delegation of Authority.--The Corporation may execute all instruments necessary or appropriate in the exercise of any of its functions under this Act, and may delegate to the executive director such of its powers and responsibilities as are appropriate and useful for the administration of the Corporation.
Procurement of Goods and Services.--The Corporation may obtain by purchase, rental, donation, or otherwise, such goods and services as are necessary to carry out its duties under this Act.
In the event of the termination of the Corporation, all property and unexpended funds shall be transferred to the Department of the Interior.
Insurance.--The Corporation shall procure insurance against any loss in connection with the properties managed by the Corporation.
Volunteers.--The Secretary may accept, without regard to the Civil Service classification laws, rules, or regulations, the services of the Corporation, the Board, and the officers and employees of the Board, without compensation from the Department of the Interior, as volunteers in the performance of the functions authorized herein, in the manner provided for under Public Law 91-357 (16 United States Code 18g et seq.).
Savings Clause.--Nothing in this Act shall preclude the Secretary from exercising any of the lawful powers of the Secretary within the Presidio.
Affirmative Action.--The Corporation shall ensure that affirmative steps are taken, consistent with other Federal law, to afford equal access and equal opportunities for leases, concessions, contracts, subcontracts, and other contracting and employment opportunities to minorities, women, and other socially and economically disadvantaged individuals, commensurate with local availability.
Not later than January 5 of each year, and at such other times as it deems desirable, the Corporation shall transmit to the Secretary and the Congress, a comprehensive and detailed report of its operations, activities, and accomplishments under this Act.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Limitation.--The aggregate of funds made available pursuant to this Act and the Act entitled ``An Act to establish the Golden Gate National Recreation Area in the State of California, and for other purposes'', approved October 27, 1972 (16 United States Code 460bb) shall not exceed $25,000,000 in any fiscal year.