SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR COVERAGE UNDER PRIOR GROUP HEALTH PLAN AGAINST ANY PREEXISTING CONDITION LIMITATION.
In General.--Section 4980B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (i) and by inserting after subsection (f) the following new subsections: ``(g) Preexisting Condition Limitation Requirements of Group Health Plans.-- ``(1) In general.--A group health plan meets the requirements of this subsection only if the preexisting condition limitation period (if any) under the plan with respect to any individual who commences coverage under the plan after December 31, 1995, is reduced by the length of the aggregate period of qualified prior coverage (if any) applicable to such individual as of the date of such commencement.
Preexisting condition limitation period.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `preexisting condition limitation period' means, with respect to coverage of an individual under a group health plan, the period during which benefits with respect to treatment of a condition of such individual are not provided based on the fact that the condition was preexisting.
Aggregate period of qualified prior coverage.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `aggregate period of qualified prior coverage' means, with respect to commencement of coverage of an individual under a group health plan, the aggregate of the qualified coverage periods of such individual occurring before the date of such commencement.
Such period shall be treated as zero if there is more than a 60-day break in coverage under a group health plan between the date the most recent qualified coverage period ends and the date of such commencement.
Qualified coverage period.-- ``(i) In general.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified coverage period' means, with respect to an individual, any period of coverage of the individual under a group health plan.
Disregarding periods before breaks in coverage.--Such term does not include any period occurring before any 60-day break in coverage under a group health plan.
Waiting period not treated as a break in coverage.--For purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B), any period that is in a waiting period for any coverage under a group health plan shall not be considered to be a break in coverage under a group health plan.
Inclusion of continuation coverage.--For purposes of this paragraph, continuation coverage, as defined in subsection (f)(2), is treated as coverage under the group health plan to which such continuation coverage relates.
Establishment of period.--A qualified coverage period with respect to an individual shall be established through presentation of certifications described in paragraph (4) or in such other manner as may be specified in regulation.
Treatment of coverage before january 1, 1996.--In no event shall a qualified coverage period with respect to an individual include any coverage before January 1, 1996, unless such coverage is under the group health plan under which the individual was covered as of December 31, 1995.
Certification of period of prior coverage.--The plan administrator of a group health plan shall, on request made on behalf of an individual covered (or previously covered) under the plan, provide for a certification of the period of coverage of the individual under the plan and of the waiting period (if any) imposed with respect to the individual for any coverage under the plan.
Application to small employer plans.--For purposes of applying this subsection and so much of this section as relates to this subsection, subsection (d)(1) shall not apply.
Nondiscrimination in Eligibility Based on Health Status for Certain Previously Covered Individuals.-- ``(1) In general.--A group health plan meets the requirements of this subsection only if the plan does not establish eligibility, continuation, enrollment, or contribution requirements for a qualified individual based on factors directly related to the health status, medical condition, claims experience, receipt of health care, medical history, disability, or evidence of insurability of the individual.
Qualified individual defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified individual' means an individual who (at the time of determining eligibility, continuation, enrollment, or contributions with respect to a group health plan) has an aggregate period of qualified prior coverage (as defined in subsection (g)(3)(A)) of greater than zero.
Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as preventing a group health plan from establishing preexisting condition limitations and restrictions consistent with subsection (g).''
Notice.--Subsection (f)(6)(A) of section 4980B of such Code is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``and subsections (g) and (h)''.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (a) of section 4980B of such Code is amended by striking ``the requirements of'' and all that follows and inserting ``the requirements of-- ``(1) subsection (f) with respect to any qualified beneficiary, ``(2) subsection (g) with respect to any individual covered under the group health plan, or ``(3) subsection (h) with respect to any individual.''
Subsection (f) of section 4980B of such Code is further amended-- (A) in paragraph (2)(B)(i)(III), by striking ``(g)(1)(D)(iii)'' and inserting ``(i)(1)(D)(iii)'', (B) in paragraph (2)(B)(iv)(II), by striking ``(g)(1)(D)'' and inserting ``(i)(1)(D)'', (C) in the last sentence of paragraph (3), by striking ``(g)(1)(D)'' and inserting ``(i)(1)(D)'', and (D) in paragraph (5)(B), by striking ``(g)(1)'' and inserting ``(i)(1)''.
Effective Date.-- The amendments made by this section shall apply to plan years beginning after December 31, 1995.