This Act may be cited as the ``YMCA Teen Action Agenda Enhancement Act of 2001''.
Congress finds that-- (1) one in 10 teens, 2,400,000 teens across the Nation, are currently involved in a program offered by a local YMCA; (2) recognizing the unique obstacles faced by teenagers, the YMCA has launched the Teen Action Agenda, a nationwide campaign to double this number and serve 1 in 5 teens by 2005; (3) in more than 1,900 YMCAs across the United States in cities large and small, in neighborhoods rich and poor, teen groups meet regularly and engage one another in safe, wholesome, educational, and creative activities; (4) it is well-documented that teens who participate in structured activities after school are less likely to drink alcohol, carry or use weapons, smoke cigarettes, engage in early sexual activity, or skip school; (5) YMCAs serve people of all faiths, races, abilities, ages, and incomes; (6) approximately 400 YMCAs partner with juvenile courts, 300 partner with public housing developments, 1550 partner with elementary schools, and 1033 partner with high schools; (7) the YMCA is volunteer-founded and volunteer-led and depends on more than 600,000 volunteers to meet the unique needs of their communities; (8) the YMCA is especially committed to reaching teens that are most at-risk for school failure or delinquency; and (9) the prosperity of our Nation depends upon maximizing and fulfilling the potential of its young people.
In this Act: (1) Local ymca.--The term ``local YMCA'' means one of the approximately 2,400 locally incorporated and governed YMCAs in the United States.
Teen program.--The term ``teen program'' means any program primarily attended by individuals between the ages of 11 and 19.
YMCA of the usa.--The term ``YMCA of the USA'' means the private, nonprofit, national membership and service organization of approximately 2,400 local YMCAs.
GRANTS TO THE YMCA OF THE USA.
Purposes.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Attorney General shall award a grant to the YMCA of the USA for the purpose of carrying out YMCA programs for at-risk teens in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Subgrants.--From amounts awarded under subsection (a), the YMCA of the USA shall make subgrants to local YMCAs authorizing expenditures associated with providing programs, including the hiring of teachers and other personnel, procurement of goods and services (including computer equipment), or such other expenditures as are approved by the Attorney General.
In General.-- (1) Programs for at-risk teens.--Amounts granted under this Act shall be used by the YMCA of the USA to provide funding to carry out YMCA programs that have a primary purpose of serving teens who are determined to be at-risk for school failure or delinquency.
Program requirements.--Each program for which assistance is provided under this Act shall include at least 3 of the following different activities: (A) Mentoring assistance.
Recreational, fitness, and athletic activities.
Drug, alcohol, and gang prevention.
Job and life skills.
Character development and values education.
Truancy and dropout prevention.
Volunteerism and service learning.
Literary, performing, and visual arts.
Any research-based activity shown to have a positive impact on the academic and social outcomes of teens.
Additional Requirements.--In carrying out the programs under subsection (a), a local YMCA shall, to the maximum extent practicable-- (1) use volunteers from businesses, academic communities, social organizations, and law enforcement organizations to serve as mentors or to assist in other ways; (2) develop creative methods of conducting outreach to teens in the community; (3) request donations of computer equipment and other materials and equipment; and (4) work with State and local educational and recreation agencies so that activities funded with amounts made available under a grant under this Act will not duplicate activities funded from other sources in the community served.
Funding for Program Administration.--Of the amounts granted to the YMCA of the USA under this Act in each fiscal year, the YMCA of the USA shall use-- (1) not less than 2 percent for research and evaluation of the subgrants made under this Act; (2) not less than 1 percent for technical assistance related to the subgrants awarded under this Act; and (3) not more than 6 percent for the management and administration of the subgrants made under this Act.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a subgrant under this Act, an applicant shall submit an application to the YMCA of the USA.
Contents.--Each application submitted shall include-- (1) a request for a subgrant to be used for the purposes of this Act; (2) a description of the population to be served by the subgrant and information demonstrating that this population is at-risk for school failure or delinquency; (3) a description of the program to be expanded or established by the subgrant; (4) information demonstrating the manner in which the local YMCA will carry out the planning, establishment, implementation, sustainability, and evaluation of the program funded by the subgrant; (5) information demonstrating that there are non-Federal contributions (which may be in the form of an in-kind contribution of goods or services) available to cover at least 50 percent of the total cost of the project; and (6) any additional statistical or financial information that the YMCA of the USA may reasonably require.
Consideration of Subgrants.--In awarding subgrants under this Act, the YMCA of the USA shall consider-- (1) the ability of the applicant to provide the intended services; (2) the history and establishment of the applicant in providing teen activities; and (3) efforts to achieve an equitable geographic distribution of subgrant awards.
For each fiscal year for which a grant is awarded under this Act, the YMCA of the USA shall submit to the Attorney General a report that details the progress and effectiveness of the YMCA programs in reaching measurable outcomes.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Continued Availability.--Amounts made available to carry out this Act shall remain available until expended.