This Act may be cited as the ``Investor Protection Act of 2002''.
LIABILITY STANDARDS IN PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION.
In General.--Section 21D(f) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78u-4(f)) is amended to read as follows: ``(f) Civil Liability.-- ``(1) Joint and several liability for damages.--Any covered person against whom a final judgment is entered in a private action arising under this title shall be liable for damages jointly and severally.
Settlement discharge.-- ``(A) In general.--A covered person who settles any private action arising under this title at any time before final verdict or judgment shall be discharged from all claims for contribution brought by other persons.
Bar order.--Upon entry of a settlement described in subparagraph (A) by the court, the court shall enter a bar order constituting the final discharge of all obligations to the plaintiff of the settling covered person arising out of the action, which order shall bar all future claims for contribution arising out of the action-- ``(i) by any person against the settling covered person; and ``(ii) by the settling covered person against any person, other than a person whose liability has been extinguished by the settlement of the settling covered person.
Reduction.--If a covered person enters into a settlement with the plaintiff prior to final verdict or judgment, the verdict or judgment shall be reduced by the greater of-- ``(i) an amount that corresponds to the percentage of responsibility of that covered person; or ``(ii) the amount paid to the plaintiff by that covered person.
Contribution.-- ``(A) In general.--A covered person who is jointly and severally liable for damages in any private action arising under this title may recover contribution from any other person who, if joined in the original action, would have been liable for the same damages.
A claim for contribution shall be determined based on the percentage of responsibility of the claimant and of each person against whom a claim for contribution is made, as determined by the court.
Statute of limitations for contribution.--In any private action arising out of this title determining liability, an action for contribution shall be brought not later than 6 months after the date of entry of a final, nonappealable judgment in the action.
Applicability.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to create, affect, or in any manner modify, the standard for liability associated with any action arising under the securities laws.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) the term `covered person' means-- ``(i) a defendant in any private action arising under this title; or ``(ii) a defendant in any private action arising under section 11 of the Securities Act of 1933, who is an outside director of the issuer of the securities that are the subject of the action; and ``(B) the term `outside director' shall have the meaning given such term by rule or regulation of the Commission.''.
Conforming Amendment to the Securities Act of 1933.--Section 11(f)(2)(A) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 United States Code 77k(f)(2)(A)) is amended by striking ``in accordance'' and all that follows through the period and inserting ``in accordance with section 21D(f) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.''.
Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall not affect or apply to any private action arising under the securities laws commenced before and pending on the date of enactment of this Act.
PERSONS WHO AID AND ABET VIOLATIONS.
Commission Authority.--Section 20(e) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78t(e)) is amended by striking ``knowingly'' and inserting ``recklessly''.
Private Litigation.--Section 21D of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78u-4) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Persons That Aid or Abet Violations.--Any person that recklessly provides substantial assistance to another person in violation of a provision of this title, or of any rule or regulation issued under this title, shall be deemed to be in violation of such provision to the same extent as the person to whom such assistance is provided.''.
Title I of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78a et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, and notwithstanding section 9(e), an implied private right of action arising under this title may be brought not later than the earlier of-- ``(1) 5 years after the date on which the alleged violation occurred; or ``(2) 3 years after the date on which the alleged violation was discovered.
Effective Date.--The limitations period provided by this section shall apply to all proceedings commenced after the date of enactment of the Investor Protection Act of 2002.''.
REPEAL OF CERTAIN CLASS ACTION LIMITATIONS.
Securities Exchange Act of 1934.--Section 28 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78bb) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``Except as provided in subsection (f), the'' and inserting ``The''; and (2) by striking subsection (f).
Securities Act of 1933.--Section 16 of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 United States Code 77p) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``The rights and remedies provided by this title shall be in addition to any and all other rights and remedies that may exist at law or in equity.