SHORT TITLE AND REFERENCE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Class Action Jurisdiction Act of 1998''.
Reference.--Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 28, United States Code.
JURISDICTION OF DISTRICT COURTS.
Expansion of Federal Jurisdiction.--Section 1332 is amended by redesignating subsections (b), (c), and (d) as subsections (c), (d), and (e), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (a) the following: ``(b)(1) The district courts shall have original jurisdiction of any civil action, regardless of the sum or value of the matter in controversy therein, which is brought as a class action and in which-- ``(A) any member of a proposed plaintiff class is a citizen of a State different from any defendant; ``(B) any member of a proposed plaintiff class is a foreign state or a citizen or subject of a foreign state and any defendant is a citizen of a State; or ``(C) any member of a proposed plaintiff class is a citizen of a State and any defendant is a citizen or subject of a foreign state.
As used in this paragraph, the term `foreign state' has the meaning given that term in section 1603(a).
(A) In a civil action described in paragraph (1) in which-- ``(i) the substantial majority of the members of all proposed plaintiff classes are citizens of a single State of which the primary defendants are also citizens, and ``(ii) the claims asserted will be governed primarily by the laws of that State, the district court should abstain from hearing such action.
In a civil action described in paragraph (1) in which-- ``(i) all matters in controversy asserted by the individual members of all proposed plaintiff classes in the aggregate do not exceed the sum or value of $1,000,000, exclusive of interest and costs, ``(ii) the number of members of all proposed plaintiff classes in the aggregate is less than 100, or ``(iii) the primary defendants are States, State officials, or other governmental entities against whom the district court may be foreclosed from ordering relief, the district court may, in its discretion, abstain from hearing such action.
(A) Paragraph (1) and section 1453 shall not apply to any class action that is brought under the Securities Act of 1933.
Paragraph (1) and section 1453 shall not apply to a class action described in subparagraph (C) that is based upon the statutory or common law of the State in which the issuer concerned is incorporated (in the case of a corporation) or organized (in the case of any other entity).
A class action is described in this subparagraph if it involves-- ``(i) the purchase or sale of securities by an issuer or an affiliate of an issuer exclusively from or to holders of equity securities of the issuer; or ``(ii) any recommendation, position, or other communication with respect to the sale of securities of an issuer that-- ``(I) is made by or on behalf of the issuer or an affiliate of the issuer to holders of equity securities of the issuer; and ``(II) concerns decisions of those equity holders with respect to voting their securities, acting in response to a tender or exchange offer, or exercising dissenters' or appraisal rights.
As used in this paragraph, the terms `issuer', `security', and `equity security' have the meanings given those terms in section 3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1332(c) (as redesignated by this section) is amended by inserting after ``Federal courts'' the following: ``pursuant to subsection (a) of this section''.
Determination of Diversity.--Section 1332, as amended by this section, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) For purposes of subsection (b), a member of a proposed class shall be deemed to be a citizen of a State different from a defendant corporation only if that member is a citizen of a State different from all States of which the defendant corporation is deemed a citizen.''.
REMOVAL OF CLASS ACTIONS.
In General.--Chapter 89 is amended by adding after section 1452 the following: ``Sec.
Removal of class actions ``(a) In General.--A class action may be removed to a district court of the United States in accordance with this chapter, except that such action may be removed-- ``(1) by any defendant without the consent of all defendants; or ``(2) by any plaintiff class member who is not a named or representative class member of the action for which removal is sought, without the consent of all members of such class.
When Removable.--This section shall apply to any class action before or after the entry of any order certifying a class.
Procedure for Removal.--The provisions of section 1446(a) relating to a defendant removing a case shall apply to a plaintiff removing a case under this section.
With respect to the application of subsection (b) of such section, the requirement relating to the 30-day filing period shall be met if a plaintiff class member who is not a named or representative class member of the action for which removal is sought files notice of removal within 30 days after receipt by such class member, through service or otherwise, of the initial written notice of the class action provided at the district court's direction in accordance with Rule 23(c)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.''.
Removal Limitations.--Section 1446(b) is amended in the second sentence-- (1) by inserting ``, by exercising due diligence,'' after ``ascertained''; and (2) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``section 1332''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--The table of sections for chapter 89 is amended by adding after the item relating to section 1452 the following: ``1453.
Removal of class actions.''.
Application of Substantive State Law.--Nothing in this section or the amendments made by this section shall alter the substantive law applicable to an action to which the amendments made by section 2 of this Act apply.
Procedure After Removal.--Section 1447 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) If, after removal, the court determines that no aspect of an action that is subject to its jurisdiction solely under the provisions of section 1332(b) may be maintained as a class action under Rule 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the court shall strike the class allegations from the action and remand the action to the State court.
Upon remand of the action, the period of limitations for any claim that was asserted in the action on behalf of any named or unnamed member of any proposed class shall be deemed tolled to the full extent provided under Federal law.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply to any action commenced on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall, by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, conduct a study of the impact of the amendments made by this Act on the workload of the Federal courts, and report to the Congress on the results of the study.