In General.-- (1) Annual audit requirement.--The White County Bridge Commission (created by the Act approved April 12, 1941 (55 United States Statutes at Large 140) and in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'') shall provide for an annual audit of its financial transactions by an independent public accountant of recognized standing in such manner as prescribed by the Governors of the States of Indiana and Illinois and in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Availability of records.--The Commission shall make available for purposes of the audit all books, accounts, financial records, reports, files, and all other papers, documents, or property belonging to or in use by the Commission.
GAO advice.--The General Accounting Office is authorized and directed to make available its advice on any matter pertaining to an audit performed pursuant to this section.
Audit Report.--The Commission within 4 months following the close of the fiscal year for which the audit is made shall submit a copy of the audit report to the Governors of the States of Indiana and Illinois and to the Secretary of Commerce.
The report shall set forth the scope of the audit and shall include a statement of assets and liabilities, capital, and surplus or deficits; a statement of surplus or deficit analysis, a statement of income and expense; a statement of sources and application of funds; and such comments and information as may be deemed necessary to keep the Governors and the Secretary informed of the operations and financial condition of the Commission.
Additional Audits.--The Governor of the State of Indiana or Illinois or the Secretary of Commerce is authorized to provide for the conduct of further audits of the Commission if the audit report submitted under subsection (b) is not satisfactory to the Governor or the Secretary, as the case may be.
Cost.--The Commission shall bear all expenses of the annual audit of its financial transactions as required by this section.
All expenses of any additional audit required under this section shall be paid by the official or agency requesting such additional audit.
Continuation.--Each person who is a member, on the date of enactment of this Act, of the Commission shall continue in office until the expiration of his or her present term, except as provided in subsection (b).
Terms of Office.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the term of office of each person who is a member of the Commission on the date of enactment of this Act shall expire on the 90th day following such date of enactment.
The Secretary of Commerce may thereupon appoint 3 persons as members of the Commission, 1 for a term of 2 years, 1 for a term of 4 years, and 1 for a term of 6 years.
Each person appointed as a member of the Commission thereafter shall be a resident of White County, Illinois, or Posey County, Indiana, and shall be appointed for a term of 6 years, except that a person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the unexpired term of his predecessor.
Bond.--Each person appointed under this section shall give such bond as may be fixed by the Secretary, conditioned upon the faithful performance of all duties required by this Act.
The cost of such bonds shall be deemed an operating expense of the Commission.
Chairman.--The Secretary shall designate the member of the Commission who shall serve as chairman for a term of 2 years and the member who shall serve as vice chairman for a term of 2 years.
Vacancies.--Vacancies in the Commission shall not affect its powers and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments were made.
Incumbent members whose terms have expired shall hold over in office until their successors are appointed and qualified.
Rules.--The Commission shall have power to establish rules and regulations for the government of its business.
Oath.--Each member appointed under this Act shall qualify within 30 days after appointment by filing with the Secretary of Commerce an oath that he will faithfully perform the duties imposed upon him by law.
Removal for Cause.--Each member appointed under this Act shall be removable for cause by the Secretary of Commerce.
Limitation on Applicability.--This section shall not be applicable to ex officio members or State highway department members of the Commission.
Submission.--The Commission shall submit an annual report covering its operations and fiscal transactions during the preceding fiscal year and its financial condition and a statement of all receipts and expenditures during such period to the Governors of the States of Indiana and Illinois and to the Secretary of Commerce not later than 4 months following the last day of the fiscal year for which the audit required under section 1 of this Act is made.
Review.--The Secretary shall review such annual reports and audit reports submitted under section 1(b) of this Act and shall make recommendations to Congress based upon such review, or take such other action as the Secretary may consider necessary, to effectuate the intent of Congress as established by this Act and by the Act approved April 12, 1941 (55 United States Statutes at Large 140).
Authority is granted to transfer all functions, powers, duties, responsibilities, authority, assets, liability, obligations, books, records, property, and equipment of the Commission, to the highway department or other agency of the States of Indiana and Illinois, or to joint agencies established by interstate compact or agreement.
Such transfer shall be carried out in a manner as may be prescribed or authorized by the laws of the States.
Upon such transfer, the Commission shall cease to exist.
Enforcement.--All provisions of the Act approved April 12, 1941 (55 United States Statutes at Large 144), may be enforced or the violation thereof prevented by mandamus, injunction, or other appropriate remedy by the chief legal officer of either the State of Indiana or Illinois in any court having competent jurisdiction of the subject matter and of the parties.
Non-Federal Employees.--Members and employees of the Commission shall not be treated as Federal officers and employees.
Pay.-- (1) Per diem; travel expenses.--The members of the Commission shall each be entitled to a per diem compensation for their services of $20 for each day actually spent in the business of the Commission, but the maximum per diem compensation of the chairman in any 1 year shall not exceed $3,000 and of each other member in any 1 year shall not exceed $2,000.
The members of the Commission shall also be entitled to receive traveling expense allowance of the standard mileage rate for each mile actually traveled on the business of the Commission.
Treatment of payments.--Payments under the provisions of this subsection shall be in lieu of any other payments for salary or expenses authorized for service as a member of the Commission under the provisions of any other Federal law relating to the Commission, but nothing in this subsection shall affect any other Federal law with respect to the funds from which any such payments shall be made.