This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Commission on TV Violence and Children Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the United States is continuing to experience widespread increases in violence and violent crime which threaten the well-being of our society; (2) graphic and gratuitous violence continue to be a widespread and integral part of television programming; (3) an extensive, 20-year body of research exists indicating a causal relationship between violence on television and violence in society; and (4) there is a need to find solutions that limit the harmful influence of television violence and yet maintain our freedom of expression.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Presidential Commission on TV Violence and Children'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall-- (1) review and report on findings linking television violence and violence in children and society; (2) solicit opinions from children and their parents on their views concerning television violence and their suggestions for lessening its negative effects; (3) solicit opinions from public health, crime, and education experts; and broadcast, cable, film and advertising industry of television violence and their recommendations for lessening its negative effects; and (4) present a final report and recommendations for comprehensive strategies and solutions to alleviate harmful effects of television violence that continue to preserve our tradition of free expression.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of-- (1) the Surgeon General; (2) the Attorney General; and (3) 26 members appointed by the President as follows: (A) 12 shall be individuals from the following groups: broadcast television networks and their local affiliates; independent television stations; cable industry; film studios; writers and producers of television shows and film; and major advertisers.
8 shall be individuals from the following groups: parents and children; parents organizations; and leaders of community and religious groups.
6 shall be individuals from the following groups: public health experts who study television violence; crime prevention experts who study television violence; and education experts who study television violence.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Pay Prohibited.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; Vice Chairperson.--The Surgeon General shall serve as chairperson and the Attorney General shall serve as vice chairperson of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, have a Director who shall be appointed by the Commission.
The Director shall be paid at the maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-13 of the General Schedule.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel as it considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
The Commission shall transmit a final report to the President and the Congress not later than one year from the date the Commission members are appointed.
The final report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislative, administrative, and voluntary actions on the part of appropriate industry as the Commission considers appropriate to alleviate the harmful effects of television violence.
The Commission shall terminate 6 months after submitting its final report pursuant to section 8.
There is authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 to carry out this Act.
Any spending authority (as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 401(c)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 651(c)(2)(A) and (C))) authorized by this Act shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.