This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Sesquicentennial Commission Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The American Civil War was a defining experience in the development of the United States.
The people of the United States continue to struggle with issues of race, civil rights, the politics of federalism, and heritage which are legacies of the Civil War and Reconstruction.
There is a resurgence of interest in the Civil War, that is evidenced by the multitude of publications, exhibits, reenactments, research organizations, Internet and multimedia resources, historic parks, and preservation associations focused on the Civil War.
The years 2011 through 2015 mark the sesquicentennial of the Civil War.
The sesquicentennial of the Civil War presents a significant opportunity for Americans to recall and reflect upon the Civil War and its legacy in a spirit of reconciliation and reflection.
The United States Civil War Center at Louisiana State University, Louisiana and the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg College, Pennsylvania have been designated by the Federal government to plan and facilitate the commemoration of the sesquicentennial of the Civil War.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish a Civil War Sesquicentennial Commemoration Commission to-- (1) ensure a suitable national observance of the sesquicentennial of the Civil War; (2) cooperate with and assist States and national organizations with programs and activities for the observance of the sesquicentennial of the Civil War; (3) assist in ensuring that any observance of the sesquicentennial of the Civil War is inclusive and appropriately recognizes the experiences and points of view of all people affected by the Civil War; and (4) provide assistance for the development of programs, projects, and activities on the Civil War that have lasting educational value.
CIVIL WAR SESQUICENTENNIAL COMMEMORATION COMMISSION.
There is established a commission to be known as the Civil War Sesquicentennial Commemoration Commission (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall be composed of 26 members as follows: (1) Government members.--The Commission shall include-- (A) 2 Members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (B) 2 Members of the Senate appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, in consultation with the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of the Senate; (C) the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, or the designee of the Secretary; (D) the Secretary of the Department of Education, or the designee of the Secretary; (E) the Chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, or the designee of the Chairman; (F) the Archivist of the United States, or the designee of the Archivist; (G) the Librarian of Congress, or the designee of the Librarian; and (H) the Director of the National Park Service, or the designee of the Director.
Private members.--The Commission shall include-- (A) an individual appointed by the President after consultation with the Director of the United States Civil War Center at Louisiana State University, Louisiana; (B) an individual appointed by the President after consultation with the Director of the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg College, Pennsylvania; (C) 5 members appointed by the President from among individuals who are representatives of the corporate community; and (D) 9 individuals, appointed by the President, from among persons who by reason of education, training, and experience, are experts on the Antebellum, Civil War, and Reconstruction eras, including-- (i) 6 individuals with expertise in history; (ii) 1 individual with specific expertise in art history, historic preservation, or a related field; (iii) 1 individual with expertise in anthropology, cultural geography, sociology, or a related field; and (iv) 1 individual with expertise in political science, law, economics, or a related field.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Appointments.--The appointment of the members of the Commission shall be made not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than 60 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the members appointed under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 4(a)(2) shall call the first meeting of the Commission.
Subsequent meetings.--The Commission shall hold subsequent meetings at the call of the chairperson.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--At the initial meeting, the Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its voting members.
Quorum.--A majority of voting members shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold meetings.
Voting.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall act only on an affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members of the Commission.
Nonvoting members.--The individuals appointed under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 4(a)(1) shall be nonvoting members, and shall serve only in an advisory capacity.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Activities Related to the Sesquicentennial.--The Commission shall-- (1) plan, develop, and carry out programs and activities appropriate to commemorate the sesquicentennial of the Civil War; (2) encourage interdisciplinary examination of the Civil War; (3) facilitate Civil War-related activities throughout the United States; (4) encourage civic, historical, educational, economic, and other organizations throughout the United States to organize and participate in activities to expand the understanding and appreciation of the significance of the Civil War; (5) coordinate and facilitate the public distribution of scholarly research, publications, and interpretations of the Civil War; (6) provide technical assistance to States, localities, and nonprofit organizations to further the commemoration of the sesquicentennial of the Civil War; (7) develop programs and facilities to ensure that the sesquicentennial commemoration of the Civil War results in a positive legacy and long-term public benefit; (8) administer the grant program under section 7; and (9) encourage the development and conduct of programs designed to involve the international community in activities that commemorate the Civil War.
Plans and Report.-- (1) Plans.--The Commission shall prepare a strategic plan in accordance with section 306 of title 5, United States Code, and the annual plan and report required by sections 1115 and 1116, respectively, of title 31, United States Code.
Report.--Not later than December 30, 2015, the Commission shall submit to Congress a final report that contains-- (A) a summary of activities of the Commission; (B) a final accounting of funds received and expended by the Commission; and (C) the findings and recommendations of the Commission.
Grants Authorized.--The Commission shall award a grant in each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2015 to each of the following: (1) The United States Civil War Center at Louisiana State University, Louisiana.
The Civil War Institute at Gettysburg College, Pennsylvania.
Limitations.--The amount of any grant under subsection (a) in any fiscal year may not exceed $100,000, nor may the amount of such grant be less than $80,000.
Use of Funds.--Amounts awarded under subsection (a) shall be used for appropriate activities relating to the sesquicentennial of the Civil War.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission may-- (1) solicit, accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property, and acknowledge publicly the sources of such gifts and donations; (2) appoint any advisory committee as the Commission considers appropriate for the purposes of this Act; (3) authorize any voting member or employee of the Commission to take any action that the Commission is authorized to take under this Act; and (4) procure supplies and services to carry out this Act.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Compensation of Members.--Members of the Commission, and members of any advisory committee appointed under section 8(a)(2), shall serve without compensation.
Travel Expenses.--Members of the Commission, and members of any advisory committees appointed under section 8(a)(2), shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for an employee of an agency under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the home or regular place of business of the member in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
Confirmation of the executive director.--The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and any detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at daily rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 6(b)(2).
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $500,000 for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2015.
Availability.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated by subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.
Any unexpended balance of appropriations available pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in subsection (a) as of December 30, 2015 are canceled effective December 30 2020.