This Act may be cited as the ``Campaign Finance Improvement Act of 2000''.
EXPANDING REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN CONTRIBUTIONS.
Requiring Reporting of All Contributions of $200 or More Within 10 Days of Receipt.--Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) Each political committee which receives a contribution of $200 or more shall notify the Commission of the contribution not later than 10 days after receipt, and shall include the identification of the contributor, the date of receipt and amount of the contribution, and (in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate) the name of the candidate and the office sought by the candidate.
The report required under this subsection shall be in addition to all other reports required under this Act.''.
Expanding Types of Contributions to Principal Campaign Committees Subject to Expedited Reporting.--Section 304(a)(6)(A) of such Act (2 United States Code 434(a)(6)(A)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``$1,000'' and inserting ``$200''; and (2) by striking ``20th day'' and inserting ``90th day''.
REQUIRING MAJORITY OF AMOUNT OF CONTRIBUTIONS ACCEPTED BY CONGRESSIONAL CANDIDATES TO COME FROM IN-STATE RESIDENTS.
In General.--Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i)(1) The total amount of contributions accepted with respect to an election by a candidate for the office of Senator or the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress from in-State individual residents shall be at least 50 percent of the total amount of contributions accepted from all sources.
If a candidate in an election makes expenditures of personal funds (including contributions by the candidate or the candidate's spouse to the candidate's authorized campaign committee) in an amount in excess of $250,000, paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to any opponent of the candidate in the election.
In determining the amount of contributions accepted by a candidate for purposes of paragraph (1), the amounts of any contributions made by a political committee of a political party shall be allocated as follows: ``(A) 50 percent of such amounts shall be deemed to be contributions from in-State individual residents.
50 percent of such amounts shall be deemed to be contributions from persons other than in-State individual residents.
As used in this subsection, the term `in-State individual resident' means an individual who resides in the State in which the election involved is held.''.
Reporting Requirements.--Section 304 of such Act (2 United States Code 434), as amended by section 2(a), is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e)(1) Each principal campaign committee of a candidate for the Senate or the House of Representatives shall include the following information in the first report filed under subsection (a)(2) which covers the period which begins 19 days before an election and ends 20 days after the election: ``(A) The total contributions received by the committee with respect to the election involved from in-State individual residents (as defined in section 315(i)(4)), as of the last day of the period covered by the report.
The total contributions received by the committee with respect to the election involved from all persons, as of the last day of the period covered by the report.
(A) Each principal campaign committee of a candidate for the Senate or the House of Representatives shall submit a notification to the Commission of the first expenditure of personal funds (including contributions by the candidate or the candidate's spouse to the committee) by which the aggregate amount of personal funds expended (or contributed) with respect to the election exceeds $250,000.
Each notification under subparagraph (A)-- ``(I) shall be submitted not later than 24 hours after the expenditure or contribution which is the subject of the notification is made; and ``(II) shall include the name of the candidate, the office sought by the candidate, and the date of the expenditure or contribution and amount of the expenditure or contribution involved.''.
Penalty for Violation of Limits.--Section 309(d) of such Act (2 United States Code 437g(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4)(A) Any candidate who knowingly and willfully accepts contributions in excess of any limitation provided under section 315(i) shall be fined an amount equal to the greater of 200 percent of the amount accepted in excess of the applicable limitation or (if applicable) the amount provided in paragraph (1)(A).
Interest shall be assessed against any portion of a fine imposed under subparagraph (A) which remains unpaid after the expiration of the 30-day period which begins on the date the fine is imposed.''.
WAIVER OF ``BEST EFFORTS'' EXCEPTION FOR INFORMATION ON IDENTIFICATION OF CONTRIBUTORS.
Section 302(i) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 432(i)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(i) When the treasurer'' and inserting ``(i)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), when the treasurer''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to information regarding the identification of any person who makes a contribution or contributions aggregating more than $200 during a calendar year (as required to be provided under subsection (c)(3)).''.
LOWERING THRESHOLD FOR CASH CONTRIBUTIONS.
Section 321 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441g) is amended by striking ``exceed $100'' and inserting ``exceed $20''.
CONTRIBUTIONS BY DEPENDENTS NOT OF VOTING AGE.
Section 315(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9)(A) For purposes of the limitations imposed by this section, any contribution made by a dependent minor shall be treated as follows: ``(i) If the dependent minor is the dependent of one other individual, the contribution shall be treated as a contribution made by such other individual.
If the dependent minor is the dependent of another individual and such other individual's spouse, the contribution shall be allocated among such individuals in such manner as such other individuals may determine.
In this paragraph, the term `dependent minor' means an individual who-- ``(i) is a dependent of another individual; and ``(ii) has not, as of the time of making the contribution involved, attained the legal age for voting in elections for Federal office in the State in which such individual resides.''.
PROHIBITING NON-CITIZEN INDIVIDUALS FROM MAKING CONTRIBUTIONS IN CONNECTION WITH FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
Section 319(b)(2) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441e(b)(2)) is amended by striking ``and who is not lawfully admitted'' and all that follows and inserting a period.
DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN SOFT MONEY EXPENDITURES OF POLITICAL PARTIES.
Transfers of Funds by National Political Parties.--Section 304(b)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(b)(4)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (H); (2) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (I); and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(J) in the case of a political committee of a national political party, all funds transferred to any political committee of a State or local political party, without regard to whether or not the funds are otherwise treated as contributions or expenditures under this title;''.
Disclosure by State Political Parties of Information Reported Under State Law.--Section 304 of such Act (2 United States Code 434), as amended by sections 2(a) and 3(b), is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) If a political committee of a State political party is required under a State or local law, rule, or regulation to submit a report on its disbursements to an entity of the State or local government, the committee shall file a copy of the report with the Commission at the time it submits the report to such an entity.''.
PROHIBITING INVOLUNTARY ASSESSMENT OF EMPLOYEE FUNDS FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
In General.--Section 316 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441b) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) Except with the separate, prior, written, voluntary authorization of each individual, it shall be unlawful-- ``(A) for any national bank or corporation described in this section to collect from or assess its stockholders or employees any dues, initiation fee, or other payment as a condition of employment if any part of such dues, fee, or payment will be used for political activity in which the national bank or corporation is engaged; and ``(B) for any labor organization described in this section to collect from or assess its members or nonmembers any dues, initiation fee, or other payment if any part of such dues, fee, or payment will be used for political activity in which the labor organization is engaged.
An authorization described in paragraph (1) shall remain in effect until revoked and may be revoked at any time.
Each entity collecting from or assessing amounts from an individual with an authorization in effect under such paragraph shall provide the individual with a statement that the individual may at any time revoke the authorization.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `political activity' means any activity carried out for the purpose of influencing (in whole or in part) any election for Federal office, influencing the consideration or outcome of any Federal legislation or the issuance or outcome of any Federal regulations, or educating individuals about candidates for election for Federal office or any Federal legislation, law, or regulations.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to amounts collected or assessed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PROHIBITING AUTHORIZED COMMITTEES OF CANDIDATES FROM ACCEPTING CONTRIBUTIONS FROM AUTHORIZED COMMITTEES OF OTHER CANDIDATES.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), as amended by section 3(a), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the authorized committee of a candidate for election for Federal office may not accept any contribution from an authorized committee of another candidate for election for Federal office.
Paragraph (1) does not apply to the transfer of funds between an authorized committee of a candidate for election for Federal office and an authorized committee of the same candidate for election for another Federal office.''.
REQUIRING FEC TO MAKE SOFTWARE AVAILABLE FOR ELECTRONIC FILING.
Section 311(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 438(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (10) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) through competitive bidding, obtain and provide for computer software required to carry out the electronic filing of designations, statements, and reports under this Act.''.
Except as otherwise provided, the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to elections and transactions occurring after December 31, 2000.