This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Iran Sanctions Act of 1993''.
Iran's Violations of Human Rights.--The Congress makes the following findings with respect to Iran's violations of human rights: (1) As cited by the 1991 United Nations Special Representative on Human Rights, Amnesty International, and the United States Department of State, the Government of Iran has conducted assassinations outside of Iran, such as that of former Prime Minister Shahpour Bakhtiar for which the Government of France issued arrest warrants for several Iranian governmental officials.
As cited by the 1991 United Nations Special Representative on Human Rights and by Amnesty International, the Government of Iran has conducted revolutionary trials which do not meet internationally recognized standards of fairness or justice.
These trials have included such violations as a lack of procedural safeguards, trial times of 5 minutes or less, limited access to defense counsel, forced confessions, and summary executions.
As cited by the 1991 United Nations Special Representative on Human Rights, the Government of Iran systematically represses its Baha'i population.
Persecutions of this small religious community include assassinations, arbitrary arrests, electoral prohibitions, and denial of applications for documents such as passports.
As cited by the 1991 United Nations Special Representative on Human Rights, the Government of Iran suppresses opposition to its government.
Political organizations such as the Freedom Movement are banned from parliamentary elections, have their telephones tapped and their mail opened, and are systematically harassed and intimidated.
As cited by the 1991 United Nations Special Representative on Human Rights and Amnesty International, the Government of Iran has failed to recognize the importance of international human rights.
This includes suppression of Iranian human rights movements such as the Freedom Movement, lack of cooperation with international human rights organizations such as the International Red Cross, and an overall apathy toward human rights in general.
This lack of concern prompted the Special Representative to state in his report that Iran had made ``no appreciable progress towards improved compliance with human rights in accordance with the current international instruments''.
As cited by Amnesty International, the Government of Iran continues to torture its political prisoners.
Torture methods include burns, arbitrary blows, severe beatings, and positions inducing pain.
Iran's Acts of International Terrorism.--The Congress makes the following findings, based on the records of the Department of State, with respect to Iran's acts of international terrorism: (1) As cited by the Department of State, the Government of Iran was the greatest supporter of state terrorism in 1992, supporting over 20 terrorist acts, including the bombing of the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires that killed 29 people.
As cited by the Department of State, the Government of Iran is a sponsor of radical religious groups that have used terrorism as a tool.
These include such groups as Hezballah, HAMAS, the Turkish Islamic Jihad, and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC).
As cited by the Department of State, the Government of Iran has resorted to international terrorism as a means of obtaining political gain.
These actions have included not only the assassination of former Prime Minister Bakhitiar, but the death sentence imposed on Salman Rushdie, and the assassination of the leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran.
As cited by the Department of State and the Vice President's Task Force on Combatting Terrorism, the Government of Iran has long been a proponent of terrorist actions against the United States, beginning with the takeover of the United States Embassy in Tehran in 1979.
Iranian support of extremist groups have led to the following attacks upon the United States as well: (A) The car bomb attack on the United States Embassy in Beirut killing 49 in 1983 by the Hezballah.
The car bomb attack on the United States Marine Barracks in Beirut killing 241 in 1983 by the Hezballah.
The assassination of American University President in 1984 by the Hezballah.
The kidnapping of all American hostages in Lebanon from 1984-1986 by the Hezballah.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (c), effective on the date of enactment of this Act, a total trade embargo shall be in force between the United States and Iran.
Covered Transactions.--As part of such embargo the following transactions are prohibited: (1) Any transaction in the currency exchange of Iran.
The transfer of credit or payments between, by, through, or to any banking institution, to the extent that such transfers or payments involve any interest of Iran or a national thereof.
The importing from, or exporting to, Iran of currency or securities.
Any acquisition, holding, withholding, use, transfer, withdrawal, transportation, importation or exportation of, or dealing in, or exercising any right, power, or privilege with respect to, or any transaction involving, any property in which Iran or any national thereof has any interest; by any person, or with respect to any property, subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.
The licensing for export to Iran, or for export to any other country for reexport to Iran, by any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States of any item or technology controlled under the Export Administration Act of 1979, the Arms Export Control Act, or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
The importation into the United States of any good or service which is, in whole or in part, grown, produced, manufactured, extracted, or processed in Iran.
Extraterritorial Application.--In addition to the transactions described in subsection (b), the trade embargo imposed by this Act prohibits any transaction described in paragraphs (1) through (4) of that subsection when engaged in by a United States national abroad.
Exceptions.--This section shall not apply to any transaction involving the furnishing, for humanitarian purposes, of food, clothing, medicine, or medical supplies, instruments, or equipment to Iran or to any national thereof.
Penalties.--Any person who violates this section or any license, order, or regulation issued under this section shall be subject to the same penalties as are applicable under section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1705) to violations of licenses, orders, or regulations under that Act.
Application to Existing Law.--This section shall apply notwithstanding any other provision of law or international agreement.
OPPOSITION TO MULTILATERAL ASSISTANCE.
International Financial Institutions.--(1) The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States executive director of each international financial institution described in paragraph (2) to oppose and vote against any extension of credit or other financial assistance by that institution to Iran.
The international financial institutions referred to in paragraph (1) are the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the Asian Development Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
United Nations.--It is the sense of the Congress that the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations should oppose and vote against the provision of any assistance by the United Nations or any of its specialized agencies to Iran.
The provisions of sections 3 and 4 shall not apply if the President determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that Iran-- (1) has substantially improved its adherence to internationally recognized standards of human rights; (2) has ceased its efforts to acquire a nuclear explosive device; and (3) has ceased support for acts of international terrorism.
Beginning 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 90 days thereafter, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report describing-- (1) the nuclear and other military capabilities of Iran; and (2) the support, if any, provided by Iran for acts of international terrorism.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``act of international terrorism'' means an act-- (A) which is violent or dangerous to human life and that is a violation of the criminal laws of the United States or of any State or that would be a criminal violation if committed within the jurisdiction of the United States or any State; and (B) which appears to be intended-- (i) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; (ii) to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or (iii) to affect the conduct of a government by assassination or kidnapping.
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; (3) the term ``Iran'' includes any agency or instrumentality of Iran; (4) the term ``United States'' means the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, Guam, the Virgin Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States; and (5) the term ``United States national'' means-- (A) a natural person who is a citizen of the United States or who owes permanent allegiance to the United States; (B) a corporation or other legal entity which is organized under the laws of the United States, any State or territory thereof, or the District of Columbia, if natural persons who are nationals of the United States own, directly or indirectly, more than 50 percent of the outstanding capital stock or other beneficial interest in such legal entity; and (C) any foreign subsidiary of a corporation or other legal entity described in subparagraph (B).