This Act may be cited as the ``Golden Spike/Crossroads of the West National Heritage Area Act of 1999''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the industrial, cultural, and natural heritage legacies of linking the United States by rail in northern Utah at the Crossroads of the West are nationally significant; (2) in the areas of northern Utah (including and in proximity to Ogden, Utah), linking the United States by rail at the Crossroads of the West helped establish and expand the industrial power of the United States; (3) the economic strength of the United States is connected integrally to the vitality of the intercontinental railways, which employ millions of workers; (4) the industrial and cultural heritage of the intercontinental railways at the Crossroads of the West includes social history and living cultural traditions of several generations; (5) the National Historic District in Ogden, Utah, is a prime example of the cultural heritage of the linking of the United States by rail at the Crossroads of the West; (6)(A) the Department of the Interior is responsible for protecting and interpreting the cultural and historic resources of the United States; and (B) there are significant examples of cultural and historic resources in Ogden, Utah, and northern Utah that merit the involvement of the Federal Government to develop programs and projects in cooperation with the city of Ogden, Utah, and other local and governmental bodies, to adequately conserve, protect, and interpret the heritage for the education and recreational benefit of people of the United States; (7) the city of Ogden, Utah, would be an appropriate entity to oversee the development of the Heritage Area; and (8) a 1993 National Park Service study, entitled ``Golden Spike Rail Feasibility Study'', demonstrated that sufficient historical resources exist to establish the Heritage Area.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to establish the Golden Spike/Crossroads of the West National Heritage Area-- (1) to foster a close working relationship with all levels of government, the private sector, and the local communities in Utah; (2) to empower communities in Utah to conserve their Golden Spike heritage while strengthening future economic opportunities; and (3) to conserve, interpret, and develop the historical, cultural, natural, and recreational resources related to the industrial and cultural heritage of the Heritage Area.
In this Act: (1) City.--The term ``City'' means the city of Ogden, Utah.
Heritage area.--The term ``Heritage Area'' means the Golden Spike/Crossroads of the West National Heritage Area established by section 4.
Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan for the Heritage Area required under section 6(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
GOLDEN SPIKE/CROSSROADS OF THE WEST NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is established in the State of Utah the Golden Spike/Crossroads of the West National Heritage Area.
Boundaries.--The boundaries of the Heritage Area-- (1) shall be those specified in the management plan approved under section 6; and (2) shall include land in Utah related to-- (A) Union Pacific Station in Ogden, Utah; and (B) 24th and 25th Street Historic District in Ogden, Utah.
Map.-- (1) Preparation.--The Secretary shall prepare a map of the Heritage Area.
Availability.--The map described in subparagraph (A) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director of the National Park Service.
Administration.--The Heritage Area shall be administered in accordance with this Act.
Study.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the City, shall conduct a study to determine the feasibility of establishing a national heritage corridor from the City to Promontory Point.
Additions of Lands.--The Secretary may add land to the Heritage Area in response to a request from the City.
DESIGNATION OF CITY AS MANAGEMENT ENTITY.
In General.--The City shall be the management entity for the Heritage Area.
Federal Funding.-- (1) Authorization to receive funds.--Subject to paragraph (2), the City may receive amounts appropriated to carry out this Act.
Disqualification.--If a management plan for the Heritage Area is not submitted to the Secretary in accordance with section 6, the City shall cease to be authorized to receive Federal funding under this Act until the date on which a management plan is submitted to the Secretary.
Authorities of City.--The City may, for purposes of preparing and implementing the management plan, use Federal funds made available under this Act-- (1) to make grants and loans to the State of Utah (including political subdivisions), nonprofit organizations, and other persons; (2) to enter into cooperative agreements with or provide technical assistance to Federal agencies, the State of Utah (including political subdivisions), nonprofit organizations, and other persons; (3) to hire and compensate staff; (4) to obtain money from any source under any program or law requiring the recipient of the money to make a contribution in order to receive the money; (5) to contract for goods and services; and (6) for such other activities as are necessary to carry out the duties of the City under this Act.
Prohibition of Acquisition of Real Property.--The City shall not use Federal funds received under this Act to acquire real property or any interest in real property.
MANAGEMENT DUTIES OF THE CITY.
Heritage Area Management Plan.-- (1) Submission for review by secretary.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the City shall submit to the Secretary a management plan for the Heritage Area.
Plan requirements, generally.--A management plan submitted under this section shall-- (A) present comprehensive recommendations for the conservation, funding, management, and development of the Heritage Area; (B) be prepared with public participation; (C) take into consideration existing Federal, State, county, and local plans; (D) involve residents, public agencies, and private organizations in the management of the Heritage Area; (E) include a description of recommended actions that units of government and private organizations should take to protect the resources of the Heritage Area; and (F) specify existing and potential sources of Federal and non-Federal funding for the conservation, management, and development of the Heritage Area.
Additional plan requirements.--The management plan shall include, as appropriate, the following: (A) An inventory of resources contained in the Heritage Area that-- (i) shall include a list of property in the Heritage Area that should be conserved, restored, managed, developed, or maintained because of the natural, cultural, or historic significance of the property as it relates to the themes of the Heritage Area; and (ii) shall not include property that is privately owned, unless the owner of the property consents in writing to the inclusion.
Recommendations for the interpretation of the Heritage Area, including recommendations for the development of intergovernmental cooperative agreements to manage the historical, cultural, and natural resources and recreational opportunities of the Heritage Area in a manner that maintains appropriate and compatible economic viability.
A program for implementation of the management plan, including-- (i) plans for restoration and construction; and (ii) a description of any commitments that have been made by persons interested in management of the Heritage Area.
An analysis of the means by which Federal, State, and local programs may best be coordinated to promote the purposes of this Act.
An interpretive plan for the Heritage Area.
Approval and disapproval of the management plan.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after submission of the management plan by the City, the Secretary shall approve or disapprove the plan.
No action on plan.--If the Secretary does not approve or disapprove the plan in accordance with subsection (A), the plan shall be considered approved.
Disapproval.--If the Secretary disapproves the plan under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall, in writing-- (i) advise the City of the reasons for the disapproval; and (ii) make recommendations to the City for the revision of the plan.
Proposed revisions to plan.--Not later than 60 days after receipt from the City of proposed revisions to the plan, the Secretary shall approve or disapprove the proposed revisions.
No action on proposed revisions.--If the Secretary does not approve or disapprove the proposed revisions to the plan in accordance with subparagraph (D), the plan and proposed revisions shall be considered approved.
Priorities.--The City shall give priority to the implementation of actions, goals, and policies set forth in the management plan for the Heritage Area, including-- (1) the conservation of the Heritage Area; (2) the establishment and maintenance of interpretive exhibits in the Heritage Area; (3) the development of recreational opportunities in the Heritage Area; (4) the increase in public awareness of and appreciation for the natural, historical, and cultural resources of the Heritage Area; (5) the restoration of historic buildings that are located within the boundaries of the Heritage Area and related to the theme of the Heritage Area; (6) the placement of clear, consistent, and environmentally appropriate signs identifying access points and sites of interest throughout the Heritage Area; and (7) the encouragement of economic viability in the affected communities by appropriate means, in accordance with the goals of the management plan.
Consideration of Interests of Local Groups.--The City shall, in preparing and implementing the management plan, consider the interests of diverse units of government, businesses, private property owners, and nonprofit groups in the Heritage Area.
Public Meetings.--The City shall conduct public meetings at least annually regarding the implementation of the management plan.
Annual Reports.--The City shall, for each fiscal year in which the City receives Federal funds under this Act, submit to the Secretary an annual report that describes-- (1) the accomplishments of the City; (2) the expenses and income of the City; and (3) each entity to which the City made a loan or grant during the year.
Cooperation With Audits.--The City shall, for any fiscal year in which the City receives Federal funds under this Act, make available for audit by Congress, the Secretary, and appropriate units of government-- (1) all records and other information pertaining to the expenditures of Federal funds by other organizations that the receiving organizations make available for audit; and (2) all records and other information pertaining to the expenditure of Federal funds.
Delegations.-- (1) In general.--The City may delegate the responsibilities and actions under this section for each area or district identified in section 4(b)(2).
Review and approval.--All responsibilities and actions delegated under paragraph (1) shall be subject to review and approval by the City.
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Technical Assistance and Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may provide technical assistance and, subject to the availability of appropriations, grants, to assist in implementation of the management plan, to-- (A) the City; and (B) on request of the City, units of government, nonprofit organizations, and other persons.
Prohibition of certain requirements.--The Secretary shall not, as a condition of the award of technical assistance or grants under this section, require any recipient of the technical assistance or grant to enact or modify land use restrictions.
Determinations regarding assistance.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall determine whether, and in what amount, technical assistance or a grant shall be awarded under paragraph (1), giving preference to projects that provide a greater leverage of Federal funds.
Criteria for determination.--A determination under subparagraph (A) shall be based on the relative degree to which the technical assistance or grant effectively-- (i) fulfills the objectives contained in the management plan; and (ii) achieves the purposes of this Act.
Provision of Information.--In cooperation with other Federal agencies, the Secretary shall provide the general public with information regarding the location and character of the Heritage Area.
Other Assistance.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with public and private organizations for the purposes of implementing this section.
Duties of Other Federal Agencies.--Any Federal entity conducting any activity directly affecting the Heritage Area shall-- (1) consider the potential effect of the activity on the management plan; and (2) consult with the City with respect to the activity to minimize the adverse effects of the activity on the Heritage Area.
LACK OF EFFECT ON LAND USE REGULATION AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
Lack or Effect on Authority of Local Government.--Nothing in this Act modifies or otherwise affects any authority of Federal, State, or local governments to regulate any use of land under any other law (including a regulation).
Lack of Zoning or Land Use Powers.--Nothing in this Act grants powers of zoning or land use control to the City.
Local Authority and Private Property Not Affected.--Nothing in this Act affects or authorizes the City to interfere with-- (1) the rights of any person with respect to private property; or (2) any local zoning ordinance or land use plan of the State of Utah (including a political subdivision).
The Secretary shall not make a grant or provide any assistance under this Act after September 30, 2016.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $1,000,000 for each fiscal year, except that the total amount authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act shall not exceed $10,000,000.
50 Percent Match.--Federal funding provided under this Act may not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of any activity carried out with Federal funds.