This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Educational Opportunities Enhancement Act of 2001''.
PERMITTING AN ELECTION TO REDUCE BASIC PAY OVER A PERIOD OF TWO YEARS.
In General.--The first sentence of sections 3011(b) and 3012(c) of title 38, United States Code, are each amended by striking ``$100 for each of the first 12 months'' and inserting ``$50 for each of the first 24 months''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to individuals who first become a member of the Armed Forces or first enter on active duty as a member of the Armed Forces on or after the date that is 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PERMITTING WITHDRAWAL OF ELECTION NOT TO ENROLL UNDER THE MONTGOMERY GI BILL.
In General.--Chapter 30 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 3018C the following new sections: ``Sec.
Opportunity for active-duty personnel to withdraw election not to enroll ``(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, each qualified individual (described in subsection (b)) may withdraw an election made under section 3011(c)(1) or 3012(d)(1) of this title not to receive educational assistance under this chapter during an open period (described in subsection (c)).
The qualified individual shall withdraw such election in accordance with this section and on such form as the Secretary of Defense shall prescribe for such purpose.
A qualified individual referred to in subsection (a) is an individual who meets each of the following requirements: ``(1) The individual first became a member of the Armed Forces or first entered on active duty as a member of the Armed Forces on or after the date of the enactment of this section.
The individual continues to serve, without a break in service, the period of service which, at the beginning of the open period, such individual was obligated to serve.
The individual-- ``(A) serves the obligated period of service described in paragraph (2); ``(B) before completing such obligated period of service, is discharged or released from active duty for (i) a service-connected disability, (ii) a medical condition which preexisted such service and which the Secretary determines is not service connected, (iii) hardship, or (iv) a physical or mental condition that was not characterized as a disability and did not result from the individual's own willful misconduct but did interfere with the individual's performance of duty, as determined by the Secretary of each military department in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense (or by the Secretary of Transportation with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service of the Navy); or ``(C) before completing such obligated period of service, is (i) discharged or released from active duty for the convenience of the Government after completing not less than 20 months of continuous active duty under that period of obligated service, if such period was less than three years, or 30 months of continuous active duty under that period of obligated service, if such period was at least three years, or (ii) involuntarily discharged or released from active duty for the convenience of the Government as a result of a reduction in force, as determined by the Secretary concerned in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense (or by the Secretary of Transportation with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy).
Before applying for benefits under this section, the individual-- ``(A) completes the requirements of a secondary school diploma (or equivalency certificate); or ``(B) successfully completes (or otherwise receives academic credit for) the equivalent of 12 semester hours in a program of education leading to a standard college degree.
Upon completion of such obligated period of service, the individual-- ``(A) is discharged from service with an honorable discharge, is placed on the retired list, is transferred to the Fleet Reserve or Fleet Marine Corps Reserve, or is placed on the temporary disability retired list; ``(B) continues on active duty; or ``(C) is released from active duty for further service in a reserve component of the Armed Forces after service on active duty characterized by the Secretary concerned as honorable service.
The open period referred to in subsection (a) with respect to a qualified individual is as follows: ``(1) Subject to paragraph (2), such period is the 90-day period preceding the date of the termination of the initial obligated period of active duty required of the individual under section 3011 or 3012 of this title.
In the case of a discharge or release under subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection (b)(3), such period is the 90-day period preceding the anticipated date of such discharge or release.
(1) Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection, with respect to a qualified individual who withdraws, under subsection (a), an election under section 3011(c)(1) or 3012(d)(1) of this title-- ``(A) the basic pay of the qualified individual shall be reduced (in a manner determined by the Secretary concerned) until the total amount by which such basic pay is reduced equals $1,200; or ``(B) to the extent that basic pay is not so reduced before the qualified individual's discharge or release from active duty as specified in subsection (b)(5), the Secretary concerned shall collect from the qualified individual an amount equal to the difference between $1,200 and the total amount of reductions under subparagraph (A), which shall be paid into the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts.
In the case of an individual described in clause (B) or (C) of subsection (b)(3) whose discharge or release from active duty prevents the reduction of the basic pay of such individual by $1,200, an amount less than $1,200.
With respect to qualified individuals referred to in subsection (d)(1)(B), no amount of educational assistance allowance under this chapter shall be paid to the qualified individual until the earlier of the date on which the Secretary concerned collects the applicable amount under clause (i) of such subsection.
A withdrawal under subsection (a) is irrevocable.
The Secretary concerned shall provide for notice of the opportunity under this section to withdraw an election made under section 3011(c)(1) or 3012(d)(1) of this title.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Sections 3011(c)(1) and 3012(d)(1) of such title are each amended by striking ``Any individual'' in the third sentence and inserting ``Subject to section 3018D, any individual''.
Section 3017(b)(1) of such title is amended to read as follows: ``(1) the total of-- ``(A) the amount reduced from the individual's pay under section 3011(b), 3012(c), 3018(c), 3018A(b), 3018B(b), 3018C(b), 3018C(e), or 3018D(d) of this title; ``(B) the amount reduced from the individual's retired pay under section 3018C(e) or 3018D(d) of this title; ``(C) the amount collected from the individual by the Secretary under section 3018B(b), 3018C(b), 3018C(e), or 3018D(d) of this title; and ``(D) the amount of any contribution made by the individual under section 3011(e) or 3012(f) of this title, less''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 30 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3018C the following new item: ``3018D.
Opportunity for active-duty personnel to withdraw election not to enroll.''.
OPPORTUNITY FOR CERTAIN ACTIVE-DUTY PERSONNEL TO ENROLL UNDER THE MONTGOMERY GI BILL.
In General.--Chapter 30 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 3(a), is further amended by inserting after section 3018D the following new section: ``Sec.
Opportunity for certain active-duty personnel to enroll ``(a)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, during the one-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this section, a qualified individual (described in subsection (b)) may make an irrevocable election under this section to become entitled to basic educational assistance under this chapter.
The Secretary of each military department shall provide for procedures for a qualified individual to make an irrevocable election under this section in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense for the purpose of carrying out this section or which the Secretary of Transportation shall provide for such purpose with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy.
A qualified individual referred to in subsection (a) is an individual who meets each of the following requirements: ``(1) The individual first became a member of the Armed Forces or first entered on active duty as a member of the Armed Forces before July 1, 1985.
The individual has served on active duty without a break in service since the date the individual first became such a member or first entered on active duty as such a member.
The individual is serving on active duty during the one-year period referred to in subsection (a)(1).
The individual, before applying for benefits under this section, has completed the requirements of a secondary school diploma (or equivalency certificate) or has successfully completed (or otherwise received academic credit for) the equivalent of 12 semester hours in a program of education leading to a standard college degree.
The individual, when discharged or released from active duty, is discharged or released therefrom with an honorable discharge.
(1) Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection, with respect to a qualified individual who makes an election under this section to become entitled to basic educational assistance under this chapter-- ``(A) the basic pay of the qualified individual shall be reduced (in a manner determined by the Secretary concerned) until the total amount by which such basic pay is reduced is $2,700; and ``(B) to the extent that basic pay is not so reduced before the qualified individual's discharge or release from active duty as specified in subsection (b)(5), at the election of the qualified individual-- ``(i) the Secretary concerned shall collect from the qualified individual; or ``(ii) the Secretary concerned shall reduce the retired or retainer pay of the qualified individual by, an amount equal to the difference between $2,700 and the total amount of reductions under subparagraph (A), which shall be paid into the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts.
(A) The Secretary concerned shall provide for an 18-month period, beginning on the date the qualified individual makes an election under this section, for the qualified individual to pay that Secretary the amount due under paragraph (1).
Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall be construed as modifying the period of eligibility for and entitlement to basic educational assistance under this chapter applicable under section 3031 of this title.
With respect to qualified individuals referred to in subsection (c)(1)(B), no amount of educational assistance allowance under this chapter shall be paid to the qualified individual until the earlier of the date on which-- ``(1) the Secretary concerned collects the applicable amount under clause (i) of such subsection; or ``(2) the retired or retainer pay of the qualified individual is first reduced under clause (ii) of such subsection.
The Secretary, in conjunction with the Secretary of Defense, shall provide for notice of the opportunity under this section to elect to become entitled to basic educational assistance under this chapter.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 3017(b)(1) of such title, as amended by section 3(b), is further amended in each of subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C)-- (1) by striking ``or'' before ``3018D(d)''; and (2) by inserting ``, or 3018E(c)'' before ``of this title''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 30 of such title, as amended by section 3(c), is further amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3018D the following new item: ``3018E.
Opportunity for certain active-duty personnel to enroll.