This Act may be cited as the ``Aviation Industry Revitalization Act of 1993''.
Congress finds and declares the following: (1) The United States commercial airline industry is currently suffering severe financial distress.
Sustained record losses and excessive debt burdens are causing air carriers to cancel new aircraft options and orders which, in turn is threatening the economic viability of the United States aerospace manufacturing industry.
Many air carriers are increasingly unable to obtain financing at reasonable interest rates for purchasing new equipment.
The inability of many air carriers to acquire new, quieter, more fuel efficient Stage 3 aircraft may jeopardize the planned phaseout of noisier stage 2 aircraft.
The national goal of conserving scarce natural resources and the airline industry goal of reducing soaring fuel costs would both be enhanced by increasing the average fuel-efficiency of aircraft fleets.
States and local communities, the traveling public, aerospace manufacturing companies and workers, airline employees, and airline shareholders would all benefit from stronger, healthy air carriers operating modern, fuel- efficient, quieter aircraft.
Prudent investment to facilitate modernization of the industry's aircraft fleet can provide vitally needed economic stimulus for carriers and manufacturers and will ensure that both industries remain competitive into the next century.
A revolving fund should, therefore, be established for the purpose of carrying out a Federal loan guarantee program to support the financing of new aircraft in a way that assures the phasing out of less fuel-efficient, noisier, and older aircraft at the same time.
AUTHORIZATION TO GUARANTEE FINANCING OF NEW AIRCRAFT.
The Airport Noise and Capacity Act of 1990 (49 App.
United States Code 2151 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
9310. FINANCING OF NEW AIRCRAFT.
Authorization of Loan Guarantee Program.--The Secretary is authorized to guarantee loans for the financing of new aircraft for use by air carriers that meet the terms and conditions set forth in subsection (d) and that agree to pay (directly if the carrier is the loan guarantee recipient, or indirectly if another person is loan guarantee recipient) subsidy fees, annual administrative fees, and surcharges assessed under subsection (g).
Subject to subsection (d), such guarantees may be made with respect to loans to an air carrier that will use such new aircraft or loans to a person purchasing such new aircraft for lease to and use by an air carrier.
Establishment of Fund.--There is established in the Treasury a fund, to be known as the `New Aircraft Guarantee Program Fund', for the purpose of carrying out the loan guarantee program authorized by subsection (a).
The Fund shall consist of amounts paid for subsidy fees, annual administrative fees, and surcharges required under subsection (g).
Amounts in the Fund shall be available to the Secretary without further appropriations to carry out the purposes of the Fund and shall remain available until expended.
Initial Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated for deposit in the Fund such sums as are necessary for the Secretary to pay the initial administrative expenses of the loan guarantee program under this section.
Within 2 years after such an appropriation, the Secretary shall ensure that an amount from the Fund equal to the appropriated amount, together with interest thereon, is deposited in the treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
Terms and Conditions.--A loan guarantee under this section shall be subject to the following terms and conditions: ``(1) The loan guarantee must lead to the delivery of new aircraft to an air carrier certificated under part 121 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, and such delivery shall occur no later than December 31, 1999.
The loan guarantee must be made for the purpose of financing the acquisition of new aircraft that comply with stage 3 noise standards.
The loan guarantee shall only be available for the purchase of new aircraft from companies that both-- ``(A) publish independently audited financial disclosure information and financial results; and ``(B) also are domiciled in countries that comply with all major international agreements governing aerospace trade, including but not limited to the GATT Civil Aircraft Agreement, the GATT Subsidies Code, the United States-European Community bilateral aircraft agreement, the OECD Large Aircraft Sector Understanding, and bilateral air services agreements with the United States.
In the case of any air carrier taking delivery of a new aircraft financed under this section which owns or operates either aging aircraft or Stage 2 aircraft, such air carrier as borrower or lessee must, except as provided in paragraph (5), agree that no later than the sixtieth day after the aircraft being financed is placed on the air carrier's operations specifications under part 121 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, or December 31, 1999, whichever occurs first, it will remove from service within the contiguous United States-- ``(A) the number of aging aircraft or Stage 2 aircraft which, in the aggregate and pursuant to rules promulgated by the Secretary, are certified as equaling or exceeding 200 percent of the number of seats (or in the case of all-cargo aircraft 200 percent of cargo capacity) of the new aircraft being financed; or ``(B) all of its remaining aging aircraft and Stage 2 aircraft, whichever number of aircraft is less.
When an air carrier described in paragraph (4) is taking delivery of only all-cargo aircraft, the carrier may, in lieu of removing Stage 2 all-cargo aircraft from service, modify on or after April 15, 1993, such Stage 2 aircraft in order to meet Stage 3 noise standards on the same number of such Stage 2 aircraft that otherwise would have had to be removed from service under paragraph (4); except that such modified aircraft must remain configured for all-cargo service and shall not be converted to passenger-cargo combination service.
Each aircraft removed from service by an air carrier under paragraph (4) shall be taken off the registry of certificated aircraft by the Secretary unless the air carrier continues to use such aircraft solely outside the contiguous United States and may not subsequently be registered in the United States; except that-- ``(A) the Secretary may continue to keep an aircraft on the registry of certificated aircraft if such aircraft is not based in any of the several States of the United States and is engaged in common carriage entirely outside the several States; and ``(B) in a case where the aircraft removed from service is owned by a person not affiliated with such air carrier and was operated by such air carrier under lease on or before April 1, 1993, the Secretary may continue to keep such aircraft on the registry of certificated aircraft if such owner brings such aircraft into compliance with Stage 3 noise standards prior to its lease or sale to another air carrier or lessor.
An air carrier which is to take delivery of a new aircraft financed under this section must warrant that it did not after April 1, 1993, and will not on and after the date of enactment of this section, place in service any aging aircraft or Stage 2 aircraft to its fleet, except-- ``(A) as incidental to a merger with or acquisition of another air carrier that as of April 1, 1993, was certificated under part 121 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations; ``(B) as incidental to the purchase of a route or routes and necessary associated assets; ``(C) in the case of aircraft that the air carrier has agreed to lease pursuant to a signed term sheet executed no later than April 30, 1993; or ``(D) for the provision of air transportation solely outside the contiguous United States.
An air carrier's violation of the warranty under paragraph (7) shall constitute a revocation of all outstanding loan guarantees under this section that were made for the purpose of financing delivery of new aircraft to such air carrier.
The Secretary may not grant a waiver, to any air carrier that takes delivery of an aircraft financed by a loan guarantee under this section, that would allow such air carrier to operate Stage 2 aircraft beyond December 31, 1999, in interstate air transportation.
Regulations.--No later than sixty days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations implementing the loan guarantee program authorized by this section.
Fiduciary Duties of Secretary.--To implement this section, the Secretary-- ``(1) shall apply reasonable and prudent fiduciary standards in determining whether to make any specific loan guarantee, and is authorized to take such action as may be appropriate to enforce any right accruing to the United States or any officer or agency thereof as a result of making a loan guarantee under this section; ``(2) shall make loan guarantees on rates, terms, and conditions which, in the judgment of the Secretary, offer reasonable assurance of repayment; ``(3) may require that loans guaranteed under this section be secured by the aircraft being financed, to provide sufficient collateral; and ``(4) may not guarantee a loan amount that is more than 85 percent of the manufacturer's price to the air carrier of the aircraft being financed.
Assessment of Fees.-- ``(1) In general.--A loan guarantee under this section shall remain in effect only so long as the loan guarantee recipient pays the subsidy fee assessed under paragraph (2), any annual administrative fee assessed under paragraph (3), and any surcharge assessed under paragraph (4).
Subsidy fee.--For each loan guarantee under this section, the Secretary shall assess and collect a subsidy fee from the loan guarantee recipient that is equal to the cost, as defined by section 502(5) of the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990 (2 United States Code 661a(5)), of such guarantee.
Annual administrative fee.--Each year the Secretary shall assess and collect an administrative fee for each loan guarantee under this section.
Such fees shall be set at a level adequate to cover anticipated expenses for administering the loan guarantee program authorized under this section.
Adjustments.--After completion of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall calculate whether the administrative fee collections were adequate, inadequate, or in excess of the amounts needed to cover the actual administrative expenses for such year.
To the extent that the administrative fees were inadequate or excessive, the Secretary shall assess a surcharge to cover any shortfall, or shall provide a rebate from the Fund or reduce future administrative fees to cover any overcharges.
Annual Report.--The Secretary shall, not later than March 1 of each year, submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Public Works and Transportation of the House of Representatives a report that-- ``(1) describes the progress of the loan guarantee program authorized by this section; ``(2) identifies any problems with such program; and ``(3) describes the loan guarantees made under this section, including the identity of the air carriers and other persons receiving loans to which such guarantees apply.
Definitions.--As used in this section, the following definitions apply: ``(1) Aging aircraft.--The term `aging aircraft' means one or more airplanes that were placed into service more than fifteen years prior to the date of enactment of this section.
Air carrier; united states.--The terms `air carrier' and `United States' have the meaning such terms have in section 101 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code App.
Fund.--The term `Fund' means the New Aircraft Guarantee Program Fund established by subsection (b).
New aircraft.--The term `new aircraft' means one or more newly manufactured airplanes, including associated spare parts and engines included in the original purchase, that have not been previously registered or placed into service.
Remove from service.--The term `remove from service' means to-- ``(A) eliminate, permanently and irrevocably, aircraft from the fleet of an air carrier on or after April 15, 1993; ``(B) transfer aircraft to another air carrier, after April 1, 1993, but before the date of enactment of this section, for use in common carriage entirely outside the several States of the United States; or ``(C) remove aircraft permanently and entirely from use in common carriage in the United States.
Stage 2 aircraft.--The term `Stage 2 aircraft' means one or more airplanes as defined by section 36.1(f)(4) of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of enactment of this section.
Stage 3 aircraft.--The term `Stage 3 aircraft' means one or more airplanes as defined by section 36.1(f)(6) of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of enactment of this section.