This Act may be cited as the ``Boot Camp Prison Act of 1993''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Federal prisons are greatly overcrowded.
Although the Federal prison system had a maximum capacity of only 50,707 inmates as of December 17, 1992, on that date it housed 72,191 inmates.
The prisoner populations of both Federal and State prisons have been increasing rapidly and are expected to continue to increase in part because of the effect of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.
In fiscal year 1993, the Federal prison population will be approximately 79,000, growing to about 92,000 in fiscal year 1995 and 109,000 in fiscal year 1998.
The average cost of constructing a medium security Federal prison is $53,173 per bed.
The average cost of housing a Federal inmate is $20,072 per year.
This country needs to find an effective and affordable alternative to our current prison situation.
Boot camp prisons are an excellent solution to this problem.
Instituted originally in 1984 in the State prison systems of Oklahoma and Georgia, the concept of boot camp prisons has now spread to 25 States.
Although incarceration in a boot camp costs more per year because of counseling and educational services, an inmate stays for a shorter period of time (between 90 and 120 days), thus reducing total costs and overcrowding.
The boot camp prison system in the New York Department of Correctional Services saved that State's taxpayers an estimated $150,000,000 as of December 31, 1991.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall establish within the Bureau of Prisons 10 military-style boot camp prisons (referred to in this section as ``boot camps'').
Locations.--The boot camps shall be located on closed military installations on sites to be chosen by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons.
Regimen.--The boot camps shall provide-- (1) a highly regimented schedule of strict discipline, physical training, work, drill, and ceremony characteristic of military basic training; (2) remedial education; (3) counseling as appropriate; and (4) treatment for substance abuse.
Capacity.--Each boot camp shall be designed to accommodate between 200 and 300 inmates for periods of not less than 90 days and not greater than 120 days.
Not more than 20 percent of the inmates shall be Federal prisoners.
The remaining inmates shall be State prisoners who are accepted for participation in the boot camp program pursuant to subsection (f).
Federal Prisoners.--Section 3582 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Boot Camp Prison as a Sentencing Alternative.--(1) The court, in imposing sentence in the circumstances described in paragraph (2), may designate the defendant as eligible for placement in a boot camp prison.
The Bureau of Prisons shall determine whether a defendant so designated will be assigned to a boot camp prison.
A defendant may be designated as eligible for placement in boot camp prison if-- ``(A) the defendant-- ``(i) is under 25 years of age; ``(ii) is able-bodied; ``(iii) has been convicted of a serious but nonviolent offense; ``(iv) has no serious prior conviction for which he or she has served more than 10 days of incarceration; and ``(v) consents to the designation; and ``(B) the sentencing court finds that the defendant's total offense level under the Federal sentencing guidelines is level 15 or less.
If the Director of the Bureau of Prisons finds that an inmate placed in a boot camp prison pursuant to this subsection has willfully refused to comply with the conditions of confinement in the boot camp, the Director may transfer the inmate to any other correctional facility in the Federal prison system.
Successful completion of assignment to a boot camp shall constitute satisfaction of any period of active incarceration, but shall not affect any aspect of a sentence relating to a fine, restitution, or supervised release.''.
State Prisoners.--(1) The head of a State corrections department or the head's designee may apply for boot camp placement for any person who has been convicted of a criminal offense in that State, or who anticipates entering a plea of guilty of such offense, but who has not yet been sentenced.
Such application shall be made to the Bureau of Prisons and shall be in the form designated by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons and shall contain a statement certified by the head of the State corrections department or the head's designee that at the time of sentencing the applicant is likely to be eligible for assignment to a boot camp pursuant to paragraph (2).
The Bureau of Prisons shall respond to such applications within 30 days so that the sentencing court is aware of the result of the application at the time of sentencing.
In responding to such applications, the Bureau of Prisons shall determine, on the basis of the availability of space, whether a defendant who becomes eligible for assignment to a boot camp prison at the time of sentencing will be so assigned.
A person convicted of a State criminal offense shall be eligible for assignment to a boot camp if he or she-- (A) is under 25 years of age; (B) has no prior conviction for which he or she has served more than 10 days incarceration; (C) has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment that will be satisfied under the law of the sentencing State if the defendant successfully completes a term of not less than 90 days nor more than 120 days in a boot camp; (D) has been designated by the sentencing court as eligible for assignment to a boot camp; and (E) has consented to the designation.
If the Director of the Bureau of Prisons finds that an inmate placed in a boot camp prison pursuant to this subsection has willfully refused to comply with the conditions of confinement in the boot camp, the Director may transfer the inmate back to the jurisdiction of the State sentencing court.
A State that refers a prisoner to a boot camp shall reimburse the Bureau of Prisons for the full cost of the incarceration of the prisoner, except that if the prisoner successfully completes the boot camp program, the Bureau of Prisons shall return to the State 20 percent of the amount paid for that prisoner.
The total amount returned to each State under this paragraph in each fiscal year shall be used by that State to provide the aftercare supervision and services required by paragraph (e).
Post-Release Supervision.--(1) Any State seeking to refer a State prisoner to a boot camp prison shall submit to the Director of the Bureau of Prisons an aftercare plan setting forth the provisions that the State will make for the continued supervision of the prisoner following release.
The aftercare plan shall also contain provisions for educational and vocational training and drug or other counseling and treatment where appropriate.
The Bureau of Prisons shall develop an aftercare plan setting forth the provisions that will be made for the continued supervision of Federal prisoners following release.
The aftercare plan shall also contain provisions for educational and vocational training and drug or other counseling and treatment where appropriate.
Evaluation and Report.--(1) Not later than 7 years and 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall evaluate the boot camp prisons and report to Congress on the performance of the boot camp prisons.
The report under paragraph (1) shall include an assessment of-- (A) the rate of recidivism of boot camp prisoners as compared with similar defendants in conventional prisons; (B) the cost-effectiveness of boot camp prisons as compared to conventional prisons; and (C) the program's effect on the overcrowding of conventional prisons.
Termination.--The boot camp prison program shall be terminated on the date that is 8 years after the date of establishment of the first boot camp.
Authorization of Appropriations.--In addition to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated to the Bureau of Prisons, there are authorized to be appropriated $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, to remain available until expended, of which-- (1) not more than $12,500,000 shall be used to convert each closed military base to a boot camp prison; and (2) not more than $2,500,000 shall be used to operate each boot camp for 1 fiscal year.