This Act may be cited as the ``Freedom's Way National Heritage Area Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the cultural and natural legacies of the region encompassing 34 communities in Massachusetts and 6 communities in New Hampshire have made important and distinctive contributions to the national character of America; (2) these legacies were the foundation of communities in this region, and by according appropriate recognition and protection these legacies can help sustain the quality of life in the future; (3) particularly significant legacies are-- (A) the early settlement of the United States and the early evolution of democratic forms of government; (B) the development of intellectual traditions of the philosophies of freedom, democracy, and conservation; (C) the evolution of social ideas and religious freedom; (D) the role of immigrants and industry in contributing to ethnic diversity; (E) Native American and African American resources; and (F) the role of innovation and invention in the cottage industries; (4) the communities in this region know the value of their legacy, but need a cooperative framework and technical assistance to achieve important goals by working together; (5) the National Park Service is responsible for advocating the protection and interpretation of the Nation's cultural and historic resources; (6) within this distinctive area of New Hampshire and Massachusetts there is a Federal interest to support the development of a regional framework to assist the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the State of New Hampshire, other local organizations and governments, and private citizens to conserve, protect, and bring recognition to this heritage for the educational and recreation benefit of this and future generations of Americans; (7) significant examples of such resources include-- (A) Walden Pond State Reservation; (B) Minute Man National Historical Park; (C) Shaker Villages in Shirley and Harvard; (D) Wachusett Mountain State Reservation, Fitchburg Art Museum, and Barrett House in New Ipswich; and (E) Beaver Brook Farms and Lost City of Monson in Hollis; (8) the Freedom's Way Heritage Association, Inc., would be an appropriate entity to oversee the development of the Freedom's Way National Heritage Area; and (9) the study entitled ``Freedom's Way Heritage Area Feasibility Study'', prepared by the Freedom's Way Heritage Association, Inc., and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Management, demonstrates the sufficient assemblage of nationally distinctive historical resources necessary to establish the Freedom's Way National Heritage Area.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to foster a close working relationship with all levels of government, the private sector, and the local communities in Massachusetts and New Hampshire; (2) to empower communities and organizations in these 2 States to preserve the special historic identity of the region and with it the identity of the Nation; and (3) to provide for the management, preservation, protection, and interpretation of the natural, historical, and cultural resources of the region for the educational and inspirational benefit of future generations.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Association.--The term ``Association'' means the Freedom's Way Heritage Association, Inc. (2) Heritage area.--The term ``Heritage Area'' means the Freedom's Way National Heritage Area established by section 4.
Plan.--The term ``Plan'' means the Cultural Heritage and Management Plan required by section 6.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
FREEDOM'S WAY NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is established in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and in the State of New Hampshire the Freedom's Way National Heritage Area.
Boundaries.--Except as otherwise provided in section 6, the boundaries of the Heritage Area shall include all of those lands depicted on a map entitled ``Freedom's Way National Heritage Area'', numbered ____ and dated ____.
The map shall be on file in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register, as soon as practical after the date of the enactment of this Act, a detailed description and map of the boundaries established under this subsection.
Boundaries may be revised if proposed in the Plan, approved by the Secretary as provided in section 8(b), and placed on file in accordance with this subsection.
Administration.--The Heritage Area shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Management Entity.--The management entity of the Heritage Area shall be the Freedom's Way Heritage Association, Inc. SEC.
Plan Requirements.--The Association shall prepare and submit for review and approval by the Secretary, a Cultural Heritage and Management Plan for the Heritage Area that presents comprehensive recommendations and strategies for the conservation, funding, management, and development of the Heritage Area.
The Plan shall-- (1) take into consideration current Federal, State, county, and local plans and involve residents, public agencies, and private organizations in the Heritage Area, but shall coordinate those plans and present a unified historic preservation and interpretation plan; (2) include a description of actions that units of government and private organizations are recommended to take to protect the resources of the Heritage Area; and (3) identify existing and potential sources of Federal and non-Federal funding for the conservation, management, and development of the Heritage Area, and include-- (A) an inventory which includes any property in the Heritage Area that should be conserved, restored, managed, developed, or maintained because of the natural, cultural, recreational or historic significance to the themes of the Heritage Area; (B) a recommendation of policies for resource management and protection that consider and detail the application of appropriate land and water management techniques, including the development of intergovernmental cooperative agreements to manage and protect the historical, cultural, and natural resources and recreation opportunities of the Heritage Area in a manner consistent with supporting compatible economic revitalization efforts; (C) a program of strategies and actions to implement the Plan, including identification of the roles of agencies and organizations which are party to the implementation of the Plan, identification of specific restoration and construction plans or goals, and identification of a program of public involvement, annual work plans and reports, and the role of the Association; (D) an analysis of ways in which Federal, State, and local programs may best be coordinated to promote the purposes of this Act; (E) an interpretive and educational plan for the Heritage Area; (F) any revisions proposed by the Association to the boundaries of the Heritage Area and requested by the affected local government; and (G) a process to provide public access to the Association for the purpose of attempting to informally resolve any disputes arising from the Plan.
Approval of Plan.--The Secretary shall approve or disapprove the Plan in accordance with section 8(b).
AUTHORITIES, PROHIBITIONS, AND DUTIES OF THE ASSOCIATION.
Authorities.--The Association may, for purposes of preparing and implementing the Plan, use Federal funds made available through this Act-- (1) to make grants to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, its political subdivisions, or both, the State of New Hampshire, its political subdivisions, or both, nonprofit organizations, and other persons; (2) to enter into cooperative agreements with or provide technical assistance to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, its political subdivisions, or both, the State of New Hampshire, its political subdivisions, or both, nonprofit organizations, and other organizations; (3) to hire and compensate staff; (4) to obtain money from any source and to participate in any program or law requiring the recipient of such money to make a contribution in order to receive such money; and (5) to contract for goods and services.
Prohibition of Acquisition of Real Property.--The Association may not use Federal funds received under this Act to acquire real property or any interest in real property.
Nothing in this Act shall preclude the Association from acquiring real property or any interest in real property using other funds intended for that purpose.
Duties of the Association.--The Association shall carry out the following duties: (1) Prepare and submit to the Secretary for approval a plan as described in section 6 not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
If the Plan is not submitted to the Secretary as required under this paragraph within the specified time, the Heritage Area shall no longer qualify for Federal funding until the Plan is submitted and approved by the Secretary.
Give priority to the implementation of actions, goals, and strategies set forth in the Plan, including assisting units of government and others in-- (A) carrying out the programs that recognize and protect important resource values within the Heritage Area; (B) encouraging, by appropriate means, economic viability in the Heritage Area consistent with the goals of the Plan; (C) establishing and maintaining interpretive exhibits in the Heritage Area; (D) developing recreational and educational opportunities in the Heritage Area; (E) increasing public awareness of and appreciation for the natural, historical, and cultural resources of the Heritage Area; (F) restoring historic buildings that are located within the boundaries of the Heritage Area relating to the themes of the Heritage Area; and (G) ensuring that clear, consistent, and appropriate signs identifying public access points and sites of interest are posted throughout the Heritage Area.
Prepare and implement the Plan while considering the interests of diverse units of government, businesses, private property owners, and nonprofit groups within the Heritage Area.
Conduct Association meetings open to the public at least quarterly regarding the development and implementation of the Plan.
Submit an annual report to the Secretary for any fiscal year in which the Association receives Federal funds under this Act, setting forth its accomplishments, its expenses and income, including the entities to which it made grants during the year for which the report is made.
Make available for audit for any fiscal year in which it receives Federal funds under this Act, by the Congress, the Secretary, and appropriate units of government, all records and other information pertaining to the expenditure of such funds and any matching funds; and require, for all agreements authorizing expenditure of Federal funds by other organizations, that the receiving organizations make available for such audit all records and other information pertaining to the expenditure of such funds.
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF THE SECRETARY.
Technical and Financial Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may, upon the request of the Association, provide technical and financial assistance to the Heritage Area to develop and implement the approved Plan.
In assisting the Heritage Area, the Secretary shall give priority to actions that in general assist in-- (A) conserving the significant natural, historic, and cultural resources of the Heritage area; and (B) providing educational, interpretive, and recreational opportunities consistent with the purposes of the Heritage Area.
Spending for nonfederally owned property.--Federal funds made available by the Secretary to the Association may be spent directly on nonfederally owned property identified in the Plan, or listed or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
Other assistance.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with public and private organizations for the purposes of implementing this subsection.
Approval and Disapproval of Plan.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall approve or disapprove the Plan not later than 90 days after receiving the Plan.
Criteria for approval.--In determining whether to approve the Plan, the Secretary shall consider whether-- (A) the Association has afforded adequate opportunity, including public hearings, for public and governmental involvement in the preparation of the Plan; (B) the resource protection and interpretation strategies contained in the Plan, if implemented, would adequately protect the historic and cultural resources of the Heritage Area; and (C) the Secretary has received adequate assurances from the appropriate state and local officials whose support is needed to ensure the effective implementation of the State and local aspects of the Plan.
Action following disapproval.--If the Secretary disapproves the Plan, the Secretary shall advise the Association in writing of the reasons therefor and shall make recommendations for revisions to the Plan.
The Secretary shall approve or disapprove a proposed revision within 60 days after the date it is submitted.
Approval of Amendments.--Substantial amendments to the Plan shall be reviewed by the Secretary and approved in the same manner as provided for the original Plan.
The Association shall not use Federal funds authorized by this Act to implement any amendments until the amendments are approved by the Secretary.
DUTIES OF OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Any Federal entity conducting or supporting activities directly affecting the Heritage Area shall consider the potential effect of the activity on the purposes and the Plan, and shall consult with the Association with respect to the activity, and to the extent practicable conduct or support such activities to avoid adverse effects on the purposes of the Heritage Area.
RELATIONSHIP TO LAND USE REGULATION AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
Land Use Regulation.--The Association shall provide assistance and encouragement to State and local governments and to private organizations and individuals to protect and promote the resources and values of the Heritage Area.
Nothing in this Act is intended to abrogate in any way the authority of State or local governments.
Nothing in this Act may be construed to provide any authority to the Association to regulate any use of land under this or any other law, nor to grant any zoning or land use authority to the Association.
Private Property.--The Association shall be an advocate for land management practices consistent with the purposes of the Heritage Area.
This Act provides no authority to the Association to abridge the rights of any person with regard to private property.
Nothing in this Act is intended to abrogate in any way any State or local authority regarding private property.
Nothing in this Act shall impose any additional burden on any property owner by the listing of his property pursuant to section 6(a)(3)(A).
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the purposes of this Act not more than $1,000,000 for any fiscal year.
Not more than a total of $10,000,000 may be appropriated for the Heritage Area under this Act.
Matching Funds.--Federal funding provided under this Act may not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of any assistance or grant provided or authorized under this Act.
The authority of the Secretary to provide assistance under this Act shall terminate on the day occurring 15 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.