This Act may be cited as the ``Communications Opportunity Act of 1994''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Section 309(j)(3) of the Communications Act of 1934 requires the Federal Communications Commission to disseminate licenses among a wide variety of applicants, including small businesses, rural telephone companies, and businesses owned by members of minority groups and women (hereinafter in this Act referred to as ``designated entities'').
Section 309(j)(4) of such Act requires the Commission to ensure that small businesses, rural telephone companies, and businesses owned by minority groups and women are given the opportunity to participate in the provision of spectrum-based services, and, for such purposes, requires the Commission to consider the use of tax certificates, bidding preferences, and other procedures.
License set-asides and installment payments are additional policy tools available to the Commission for ensuring that licenses are disseminated to designated entities.
Designated entities are greatly underrepresented in all of the telecommunications industries.
In particular, businesses owned by members of minority groups and women suffer numerous barriers to participating in the provision of telecommunications services.
Market entry is greatly complicated by historically low participation and by a lack of access to capital markets for businesses owned by members of minority groups and women.
Because the electromagnetic spectrum is a public resource and because minorities and women face discrimination and other barriers to entering the telecommunication market, there is a compelling public interest to promote diversity in the participation in the telecommunications industries in order to promote the goals of competitive prices for services, service innovation, full employment, and diversity of opinions and viewpoints in public discourse.
Because of the extremely capital intensive nature of developing and deploying systems in new telecommunications industries, and the ability of large corporations to amass financial resources swiftly and efficiently, allocation of the electromagnetic spectrum under a purely competitive approach will greatly hinder access to licenses by designated entities, especially business owned by members of minority groups and women, wanting to provide telecommunications services.
Without the use of certain bidding preferences, in particular set- asides, business owned by members of minority groups and women will not make significant progress in participating in the telecommunications industries.
PARTICIPATION BY DESIGNATED ENTITIES.
General Requirement.--The Commission shall ensure the participation of small businesses, rural telephone companies, and businesses owned by members of minority groups and women in the provision of spectrum-based services, particularly through licenses controlled by them.
Licensing Plan.-- (1) Requirements applicable to competitive bidding.--If the Commission decides to use competitive bidding to grant 3 or more licenses which serve a market, the Commission shall reserve at least one license, of up to 30 megahertz, for bidding by designated entities only.
If more than 6 licenses serving a market are to be conferred through competitive bidding, the Commission shall reserve at least 2 licenses, one of which is at least 30 megahertz, for bidding by designated entities only.
In addition, the Commission shall provide bidding preferences to designated entities which choose to bid on other licenses, but may not substitute such preferences for the license reservation required in this paragraph, or provide such reservations to entities which are not designated entities.
Additional requirements.--To the maximum extent feasible, the Commission shall equalize licenses to be bid on initially by size and area, and shall not discriminate between designated entity licenses and other licenses.
Access to capital.--In developing rules regarding other licenses and licensees for the same service, the Commission shall take into account the impact of those rules on the competitiveness and access to financing of designated entities.
To the extent possible the Commission should provide incentives for nondesignated entities to invest as minority equity holders in designated entity concerns.
To the extent possible, the Commission shall ensure that its preferences are not abused.
Simple procedures required.--Particularly for rural areas, the Commission shall provide a simple regulatory approval process to allow and encourage voluntary partitioning of licenses between overall license holders and rural telephone companies and others which wish to serve smaller portions of the license area.
Competitive Bidding and Bid Financing.-- (1) Considerations required.--The Commission shall carefully consider the practical effect of its auction and related requirements on designated entities, and shall seek wherever possible to remove or lessen regulatory and business barriers to successful participation by designated entities, and to provide flexibility to designated entities.
This consideration shall include-- (A) lower application fees; (B) the initial payment or downpayment shall be no more than 10 percent of a winning bid for successful designated entity bidders; and (C) installment payments of the balance due over the term of the license.
Flexibility.--The Commission shall extend similar flexibility to requirements of financial capability for designated entities which have won licenses.
Good faith efforts to pursue financing and construction shall meet the requirements of title II and regulations enacted pursuant thereto.
Additional methods.--The Commission shall consider additional methods to maximize effective participation of designated entities in auctions and the resulting marketplace.
These methods may include devices such as tax certificates.
Rules Applying to Designated Entities With Licenses.-- (1) Waivers.--In general, designated entities should be subject to the same rules as all other parties.
The Commission shall institute a waiver process whereby a designated entity licensee can demonstrate why the public interest will be served by granting flexibility to such an entity.
Transfers.--Designated entity licensees may freely transfer a license to a third party, which qualifies as a designated entity, without additional financial penalties or obligations.
A designated entity may transfer its license to a nondesignated entity if the parties comply with the requirements of paragraph (3).
Payments by transferees.--Any party which is not a designated entity but which buys a controlling interest in a license from a designated entity must pay the government the balance due of the spectrum bid immediately.
Until 3 years after award, a nondesignated entity must pay, in addition, the difference, if any, between the amount initially bid by the designated entity and the market price for such licenses, based on the average of nondesignated entity bids for similar licenses in that market.
The Commission shall establish a formula for calculating this difference taking into consideration any bidding credits.