This Act may be cited as the ``Steel Industry National Historic Site Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) certain sites and structures in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania symbolize in physical form the heritage of the United States steel industry; (2) a very large proportion of the buildings and other structures in the Commonwealth are nationally significant historical resources, including the United States Steel Homestead Works, the Carrie Furnace complex, and the Hot Metal Bridge; and (3) despite substantial efforts by the Commonwealth, as well as individuals and public and private entities in the Commonwealth, to preserve and interpret these significant historical and cultural buildings and structures, such buildings and structures may be lost without the assistance of the Federal Government.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to provide for the preservation, interpretation, visitor enjoyment, and maintenance of the nationally significant historical and cultural sites and structures described in subsection (a) for the benefit and inspiration of present and future generations.
In this Act: (1) Commonwealth.--The term ``Commonwealth'' means the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Historic site.--The term ``historic site'' means the Steel Industry National Historic Site established by section 4.
Plan.--The term ``plan'' means the management plan for the historic site required under section 7.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
STEEL INDUSTRY NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
Establishment.--There is established as a unit of the National Park System the Steel Industry National Historic Site in the Commonwealth.
Components.--The historic site shall consist of land and interests in land relating to the former United States Steel Homestead Works, including-- (1) the Battle of Homestead site in the borough of Munhall, Pennsylvania, consisting of approximately 3 acres of land, including the pumphouse and water tower and related structures, within the property bounded by the Monongahela River, the CSX railroad, Waterfront Drive, and the Damascus-Marcegaglia Steel Mill; (2) the Carrie Furnace complex in the boroughs of Swissvale and Rankin, Pennsylvania, consisting of approximately 35 acres of land, including blast furnaces 6 and 7, the ore yard, the cast house, the blowing engine house, the AC power house, and related structures, within the property bounded by the proposed southwesterly right-of-way line needed to accommodate the Mon/ Fayette Expressway and the relocated CSX railroad right-of-way, the Monongahela River, and a property line drawn northeast to southwest approximately 100 yards east of the AC power house; (3) the Hot Metal Bridge, consisting of the Union railroad bridge and its approaches, spanning the Monongahela River and connecting the mill sites in the boroughs of Rankin and Munhall; and (4) all other property included in the historic site-- (A) by Federal law; or (B) acquired by the Secretary for inclusion in the historic site under section 5 or other Federal law.
Real Property.--To further the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may acquire for inclusion in the historic site-- (1) land and interests in land described in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 4(b); and (2) not more than 10 acres of land adjacent to, or in the general vicinity of, the property described in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 4(b), for the development of visitor, administrative, museum, curatorial, and maintenance facilities.
Personal Property.--The Secretary may acquire personal property associated with, and appropriate for, the interpretation of the historic site.
Means.--An acquisition of real property or personal property shall be made by donation.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the historic site in accordance with this Act and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including-- (1) the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes); and (2) the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with any interested individual, public or private agency, organization, or institution to further the purposes of the historic site.
Reimbursement.--A payment made by the Secretary under the terms of a cooperative agreement entered into under this subsection shall be subject to an agreement that if at any time the project assisted is converted, used, or disposed of in a manner that is contrary to the purposes of this Act, as determined by the Secretary, the interested entity or individual shall reimburse the Secretary for the greater of-- (A) the amount of assistance provided for the project; or (B) the portion of the increased value of the project that is attributable to that assistance, determined as of the date of the conversion, use, or disposal.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may provide to any person technical assistance for-- (1) preserving historic structures of the historic site; (2) maintaining the natural and cultural landscape of the historic site; and (3) local preservation planning for the historic site.
In General.--Not later than 3 fiscal years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) prepare a plan for the historic site; and (2) submit the plan to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Consultation With Local Officials.--In preparing the plan under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall consult with-- (1) a representative of each political subdivision of the Commonwealth that has jurisdiction over all or a portion of the historic site; and (2) a representative of the Steel Industry Heritage Corporation.