This Act may be cited as the ``Energy for Schools Act''.
GRANTS TO STATE EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
Grants to State Educational Agencies.--From the amounts appropriated under section 8, the Secretary of Education shall award grants to State educational agencies for the purpose of awarding subgrants to local educational agencies to assist public schools with the increased costs of fuel for school buses and energy for public school buildings in accordance with sections 5 and 6.
Grant Application.--To receive a grant under subsection (a), a State educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary in such form, manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
SUBGRANTS TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
Subgrants to Local Educational Agencies.-- (1) In general.--A State educational agency that receives a grant under section 2 shall award subgrants to local educational agencies to assist public schools with the increased costs of fuel for school buses and energy for public school buildings in accordance with sections 5 and 6.
Administrative costs.--A State educational agency that receives a grant under section 2 shall use not more than 5 percent of such grant for the administrative costs of carrying out the subgrant program.
Subgrant Application.--To receive a subgrant under subsection (a), a local educational agency shall submit an application to the State educational agency serving such local educational agency in such form, manner, and containing such information as such State educational agency may require.
GRANTS TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
Grants to Local Educational Agencies.--From the amounts appropriated under section 8, the Secretary shall award grants to local educational agencies that did not receive a subgrant under section 3 to assist public schools with the increased costs of fuel for school buses and energy for public school buildings in accordance with sections 5 and 6.
Application.--To receive a grant under subsection (a), a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary in such form, manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
A local educational agency that receives a subgrant under section 3 or a grant under section 4, shall use such funds to assist public schools within the jurisdiction of such local educational agency-- (1) to pay for the increase in the cost of fuel for school buses that serve such public schools; and (2) to pay for the increase in the cost of energy to heat, to cool, or to provide electricity to the buildings of such public schools.
To the extent practicable, a local educational agency that receives a subgrant under section 3 or a grant under section 4 shall distribute the funds allotted to cover the increase in the cost of fuel for school buses to the public schools within the jurisdiction of such local educational agency proportionally, based on such local educational agency's estimate of the total miles traveled by school buses that serve such public schools.
The Secretary is authorized to prescribed regulations necessary to implement this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
In this Act: (1) In general.--The terms ``local educational agency'' and ``State educational agency'' have the meanings given the terms in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Increase in the cost of fuel for school buses.--The phrase ``increase in the cost of fuel for school buses'' means the amount of increase in the cost of fuel for school buses from the date one calendar year prior to the date of the enactment of this Act to the date of the enactment of this Act.
Increase in the cost of energy.--The phrase ``increase in the cost of energy'' means the amount of increase in energy prices from the date one calendar year prior to the date of the enactment of this Act to the date of the enactment of this Act.
Public school.--The term ``public school'' has the meaning given the term in section 5145 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7217d).
School bus.--The term ``school bus'' means a bus or any other vehicle used to transport students to and from their homes to school, or to and from school-related activities and events.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means Secretary of Education.