This Act may be cited as the ``Campaign Finance Reform Act of 1995''.
ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF COMMISSION.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Campaign Finance Reform Commission'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The purposes of the Commission are to study the laws relating to elections for Federal office and to recommend reforms in those laws.
Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 13 members appointed from among individuals who are not officers or employees of any government and who are specially qualified to serve on the Commission by reason of education, training, or experience.
Of the members of the Commission-- (1) 3 members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the House of Representatives, and one of those members shall be an independent; (2) 3 members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate, and one of those members shall be an independent; (3) 3 members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives, and one of those members shall be an independent; (4) 3 members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate, and one of those members shall be an independent; and (5) 1 member, who shall be designated as Chairman of the Commission, shall be jointly appointed by the President and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Independent Defined.--An independent member of the Commission shall not have registered in or declared officially his affiliation with a political party or voted in the primary election of a political party in the last 7 years, and shall never have held appointed or elected public or party office.
Terms.--The members of the Commission shall serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than 4 members of the Commission may be of the same political party.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Quorum.--Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Any member of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take under this section.
REPORT AND RECOMMENDED LEGISLATION.
Not later than 10 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a report of the activities of the Commission, together with a draft of legislation (including technical and conforming provisions) recommended by the Commission to reform the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) and any other laws relating to elections for Federal office.
MATTERS TO BE CONSIDERED BY THE COMMISSION.
In formulating its draft of legislation under section 5, the Commission shall consider ways to-- (1) increase confidence in the Federal electoral system; (2) increase voter participation; (3) create a more equitable electoral system for challengers and incumbents; and (4) remove the negative and insidious aspects of campaign financing.
Rules of House of Representatives and Senate.--This section is enacted by the Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such they shall be considered as part of the rules of each House, respectively, or of that House to which they specifically apply, and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to such House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Definitions.--As used in this section, the term ``Federal election bill'' means only a bill of either House of Congress which is introduced as provided in subsection (c) to carry out the recommendations of the Commission as set forth in the draft of legislation referred to in section 5.
Introduction and Referral.--Within 3 days after the Commission submits its draft legislation under section 5, a Federal election bill shall be introduced (by request) in the House by the majority leader of the House or his designee and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the majority leader of the Senate or his designee.
Such bills shall be referred to the appropriate committees.
Amendments Prohibited.--No amendment to a Federal election bill shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate; and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in order in either House; nor shall it be in order in either House to entertain a request to suspend the application of this subsection by unanimous consent.
Period for Committee and Floor Consideration.-- (1) If the committee of either House to which a Federal election bill has been referred has not reported it at the close of the 20th day after its introduction, such committee shall be automatically discharged from further consideration of the bill and it shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
If prior to the passage by one House of a Federal election bill of that House, that House receives the same Federal election bill from the other House, then-- (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no Federal election bill had been received from the other House; but (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the Federal election bill of the other House.
For purposes of paragraph (1), in computing a number of days in either House, there shall be excluded the days on which that House is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain or an adjournment of the Congress sine die.
Floor Consideration in the House.-- (1) A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of a Federal election bill shall be highly privileged except that a motion to proceed to consider may only be made on the second legislative day after the calendar day on which the Member making the motion announces to the House his intention to do so.
The motion to proceed to consider is not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Consideration of a Federal election bill in the House of Representatives shall be in the House with debate limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill.
The previous question on the Federal election bill shall be considered as ordered to final passage without intervening motion.
It shall not be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which a Federal election bill is agreed to or disagreed to.
Floor Consideration in the Senate.-- (1) A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of a Federal election bill shall be privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the Senate on a Federal election bill, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection with a Federal election bill shall be limited to not more than one hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of a Federal election bill, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
The Commission shall cease to exist 3 months after the date of the submission of its report under section 5.