This Act may be cited as the ``Violence Reduction Training Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Domestic violence and sexual assault represent serious threats to the health and well-being of millions of women in the United States.
Violence against women has serious health consequences for its victims, including fatality, severe trauma, repeated physical injuries, and chronic stress-related disorder.
Violence against women has serious mental health consequences for its victims, including substance abuse, severe psychological trauma, and suicide.
Approximately 4,000,000 women in the United States are victims of domestic violence each year.
One of two women is a victim of domestic violence or sexual assault during her lifetime.
Battering is the leading cause of injury to women.
It has been estimated that 1 in 6 pregnant women are battered, resulting in increased rates of miscarriage, stillbirths, and low-birthweight babies.
Domestic violence may account for as much as one-third of emergency-room visits by women, an annual total of approximately 28,700 such visits.
Estimates based on the National Crime Survey provide that domestic violence accounts for 21,000 hospitalizations, 99,800 days of hospitalization, and 39,900 visits to a physician each year.
Fewer than 5 percent of injured women are correctly diagnosed by medical personnel as being victims of domestic violence.
Hospitals and clinics do not have a uniform set of protocols for the identification and referral of victims of domestic violence and sexual assault, or for the training of health care professionals to perform such functions.
A national surveillance system for monitoring the health effects of domestic violence and sexual assault should be established to determine the nature and extent of such violence and assault in the United States.
The Surgeon General has identified domestic violence as a public health problem to which all health care providers must actively and vigorously respond.
Estimates of the percentage of male batterers who also abuse their children range from 50 percent to 75 percent.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTAIN HEALTH PROGRAMS REGARDING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes), as amended by section 308 of Public Law 102-531 (106 United States Statutes at Large 3495), is amended by inserting after section 317D the following section: ``health programs regarding domestic violence and sexual assault ``Sec.
Demonstration Projects for Identification and Referrals of Victims.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may award grants, contracts and cooperative agreements to public and nonprofit private entities for the purpose of carrying out demonstration projects in which health care providers are trained to-- ``(A) appropriately interview and identify individuals whose medical condition or statements indicate that the individuals are victims of domestic violence or sexual assault; and ``(B) refer the individuals to entities that provide services regarding such violence and assault, including referrals for counseling, housing (including temporary housing), legal services, and services of community organizations.
Application.--A grant, contract or cooperative agreement may not be made or entered into under this section unless an application for such grant, contract or agreement has been submitted to and approved by the Secretary.
Approval.--A grant, contract or cooperative agreement under this section shall be awarded in accordance with such regulations as the Secretary may promulgate.
To be approved by the Secretary, an application submitted under paragraph (2) shall-- ``(A) demonstrate that the applicant intends to use protocols developed by or under development by entities with demonstrated expertise in domestic violence or sexual assault; and ``(B) demonstrate that, in providing such training, the applicant is willing to work with local groups that have expertise in treatment and prevention of domestic violence and sexual assault.
Considerations.--In awarding a grant, contract or cooperative agreement under this section, the Secretary shall take into account-- ``(A) the number of health care providers to be trained; ``(B) the diversity of health care providers to be trained; and ``(C) the extent to which a hospital is actively complying with the standards of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals and Organizations to promote improved recognition and treatment of possible victims of abuse in hospitals, emergency departments, and ambulatory care units, when training hospital-based health care providers.
Reports.--The Secretary may award a grant, contract or cooperative agreement under paragraph (1) only if the applicant for the grant, contract or cooperative agreement agrees to submit to the Secretary a report describing the activities of the project under such paragraph for the fiscal year for which the grant, contract or cooperative agreement is awarded.
Public Education.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall carry out a program to educate health care providers and the public on the consequences to the public health of domestic violence and sexual assault.
Epidemiological Research.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall provide for the conduct of epidemiological research on domestic violence and sexual assault.
In providing for such research, the Secretary shall ensure that, with respect to such violence and assault, data is collected on-- ``(A) the incidence of cases and the effect of the cases on the costs of health care in the United States; ``(B) the type and severity of injuries sustained and the type and severity of any other resulting health conditions; ``(C) the extent to which victims seek treatment, including a comparison of the incidence of cases with the incidence of seeking treatment; ``(D) a description of common circumstances influencing victims not to seek treatment; ``(E) the types of medical facilities and health care providers from which victims seek treatment; and ``(F) the demographic characteristics of the individuals from whom data described in subparagraphs (A) through (E) is collected.
National system.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall cooperate with the States for the purpose of establishing, to the extent practicable, a national system for the collection of data regarding domestic violence and sexual assault.
Confidentiality.--Standards of confidentiality under section 308(d) shall apply to data collected under paragraph (1) to the same extent and in the same manner as such section applies to information obtained under section 304, 306, or 307.
Report.--Not later than February 1, 1996, and every 2 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report summarizing the data collected under paragraph (1) for the preceding 2 years.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1997.
Allocation for demonstration projects.--Of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall make available not less than 60 percent for grants, contracts or cooperative agreements under subsection (a).