This Act may be cited as the ``War Crimes Prosecution Facilitation Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) In May 1993, the United Nations established the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
The mandate of the Tribunal is to prosecute ``genocide, crimes against humanity, grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, and violations of the laws and customs of war'' committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia from January 1, 1991, until ``a date to be determined after restoration of peace''.
Parties to the Dayton Agreement, as well as subsequent agreements, agreed to cooperate fully with the ``investigation and prosecution of war crimes and other violations of international humanitarian law''.
All members of the international community are required by the Tribunal Statute to cooperate in ``the identification and location of persons'', ``the arrest or detention of persons'', and ``the surrender or the transfer of the accused'' to the Tribunal.
Although 76 persons have been publicly indicted by the Tribunal, 66 remain at large.
Of those publicly indicted, there are 51 Bosnian Serbs, 1 Croatian Serb, 3 Serbian Yugoslav Army officers, 18 Bosnian Croats, and 3 Bosniacs.
Credible reports indicate that some of the indicted war criminals are living in areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina that are under the effective control of Croatia or Serbia- Montenegro.
Many of the indicted war criminals have been sighted living openly and freely in Croatia, the Croat- controlled areas of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Republika Srpska, and Serbia-Montenegro.
An estimated 2,000,000 persons have been forced from their homes by the war, many of whom remain displaced and unable to return to their homes, in violation of the Dayton Accords, because their homes are in a jurisdiction controlled by a different ethnic group.
The fighting in Bosnia has ceased for more than a year, and international efforts are now focused on the economic reconstruction and implementation of the civilian aspects of the Dayton Accords.
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund, and individual donor countries, including the United States, have begun disbursing funds toward meeting an identified goal of $5,100,000,000 for reconstruction of Bosnia.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
In General.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be achieved if indicted war criminals remain at large and refugees and displaced persons are unable to return to their homes; (2) reconstruction without reconciliation will not be effective in ensuring stability in the long run because, absent individual accountability, victimized communities will assign collective responsibility, thus perpetuating the cycle of hatred; and (3) the Government of the United States should ensure that multilateral and bilateral assistance is provided to parties to the Dayton Agreement only if doing so would promote reconciliation as well as reconstruction, including the transfer of war criminals to the Tribunal, the return of refugees and displaced persons, and freedom of movement.
Additional Provision.--It is further the sense of the Congress that the Tribunal, consistent with its mandate, should continue to investigate and bring indictments against persons who have violated international humanitarian law.
Bilateral Assistance.-- (1) In general.--No assistance may be provided under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 or the Arms Export Control Act for any country described in subsection (d).
Application to prior appropriations.--The prohibition on assistance contained in paragraph (1) includes the provision of assistance from funds appropriated prior to the date of enactment of this Act.
Multilateral Assistance.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States executive directors of the international financial institutions to work in opposition to, and vote against, any extension by such institutions of any financial or technical assistance or grants of any kind to any country described in subsection (d).
Exceptions.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to the provision of-- (A) humanitarian assistance; (B) democratization assistance; or (C) assistance for physical infrastructure projects involving activities in both a sanctioned country and nonsanctioned contiguous countries, if the nonsanctioned countries are the primary beneficiaries.
Further limitations.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1)-- (A) no assistance may be made available under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 or the Arms Export Control Act for a program, project, or activity in any country described in subsection (d) in which an indicted war criminal has any financial or material interest or through any organization with which the indicted individual is affiliated; and (B) no assistance (other than emergency food or medical assistance or demining assistance) may be made available under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 or the Arms Export Control Act to any program, project, or activity in any area in any country described in subsection (d) in which local authorities are not complying with the provisions of Article IX and Annex 4, Article II of the Dayton Agreement relating to war crimes and the Tribunal, or with the provisions of Annex 7 of the Dayton Agreement relating to the right of refugees and displaced persons to return to their homes of origin.
Sanctioned Countries.--A country described in this section is a country the authorities of which fail to apprehend and transfer to the Tribunal all persons who have been indicted by the Tribunal and are in a territory that is under the effective control of those authorities.
Waiver.-- (1) Authority.--The President may waive the application of subsection (a) or subsection (b) with respect to a country if the President determines and certifies to the appropriate committees of Congress within six months after the date of enactment of this Act that a majority of the indicted persons who are within a territory that is under the effective control of the country have been arrested and transferred to the Tribunal.
Period of effectiveness.--Any waiver made pursuant to this subsection shall be effective for a period of six months.
Termination of Sanctions.--The sanctions imposed pursuant to subsection (a) or subsection (b) with respect to a country shall cease to apply only if the President determines and certifies to Congress that the authorities of that country have apprehended and transferred to the Tribunal all persons who have been indicted by the Tribunal and are in a territory that is under the effective control of those authorities.
As used in this Act: (1) Country.--The term ``country'' shall not include the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the provisions of this Act shall be applied separately to its constituent entities of Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Dayton agreement.--The term ``Dayton Agreement'' means the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, together with annexes relating thereto, done at Dayton, November 10 through 16, 1995.
Democratization assistance.--The term ``democratization assistance'' includes electoral assistance and assistance used in establishing the institutions of a democratic and civil society.
Humanitarian assistance.--The term ``humanitarian assistance'' includes disaster and food assistance and assistance for demining, refugees, housing, education, health care, and other social services.
Tribunal.--The term ``Tribunal'' means the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.