COMMEMORATIVE COINS IN HONOR OF THE FOUNDING OF BILOXI, MISSISSIPPI.
Coin Specifications.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue each of the following coins: (1) $10 gold coins.--Not more than 100,000 $10 coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 16.718 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.06 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
$1 silver coins.--Not more than 500,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Half dollar clad coins.--Not more than 750,000 half dollar coins each of which shall-- (A) weigh 11.34 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) be minted to the specifications for half dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this section shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Sources of Bullion.--The Secretary shall obtain gold and silver for minting coins under this section pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under other provisions of law, including authority relating to the use of silver stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stockpiling Act, as applicable.
Design of Coins.-- (1) Design requirements.-- (A) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this section shall be emblematic of the landing of Pierre LeMoyne Sieur D'Iberville on the shores of present day Biloxi, Mississippi, on February 13, 1699.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this section there shall be-- (i) a designation of the value of the coin; (ii) an inscription of the year 1999; and (iii) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this section shall be-- (A) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Board of Directors of the Biloxi Tricentennial Commission and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (B) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Period for Issuance of Coins.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this section only during the period beginning on January 1, 1999, and ending on December 31, 1999.
Sale of Coins.-- (1) Sale price.--The coins issued under this section shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (A) the face value of the coins; (B) the surcharge provided in paragraph (4) with respect to such coins; and (C) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this section at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid orders.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this section before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under subparagraph (A) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of-- (A) $35 per coin for the $10 coin; (B) $10 per coin for the $1 coin; and (C) $1 per coin for the half dollar coin.
General Waiver of Procurement Regulations.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out this section.
Equal employment opportunity.--Paragraph (1) does not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this section from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
Treatment as Numismatic Items.--For purposes of sections 5134 and 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this subsection shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Distribution of Surcharges.-- (1) In general.--Subject to section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this section shall be promptly paid by the Secretary-- (A) to the Biloxi Tricentennial Commission, Inc., for the purpose of planning and implementing the 1999 Tricentennial Celebration in Biloxi, Mississippi; and (B) upon dissolution of the Biloxi Tricentennial Commission, Inc., to Biloxi First, Inc., for the purpose of funding educational projects directly related to local history instruction for students in the public school system in Biloxi, Mississippi.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Biloxi Tricentennial Commission, Inc., and Biloxi First, Inc., as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under paragraph (1).
Financial Assurances.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this section will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.