Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Designation of Responsibilities Act''.
Findings.-- (1) Since World War II, hundreds of thousands of men and women have served the Nation in building its nuclear defense.
In the course of their work, they overcame previously unimagined scientific and technical challenges.
However, thousands of these courageous Americans paid a high price for their service, developing disabling or fatal illnesses as a result of exposure to silica, beryllium, ionizing radiation, and other hazards unique to nuclear weapons production and testing.
Too often, these workers were neither adequately protected from, nor informed of, the occupational hazards to which they were exposed.
Over the past 20 years more than 2 dozen scientific findings have emerged that indicate that Department of Energy workers are experiencing increased risks of dying from cancer and nonmalignant diseases at numerous facilities that provided for the Nation's nuclear deterrent.
Several of these studies also establish a correlation between excess diseases and exposure to silica, radiation, and beryllium.
Federal workers' compensation programs have generally not included these workers.
Further, because of long latency periods, the uniqueness of the hazards to which they were exposed, and inadequate exposure data, many of these individuals have been unable to obtain State workers' compensation benefits.
This problem has been exacerbated by the past policy of the Department of Energy and its predecessors of encouraging and assisting its contractors in opposing the claims of workers who sought those benefits.
The civilian men and women who performed duties uniquely related to the Department of Energy's nuclear weapons production program over the last 50 years should have efficient, uniform, and adequate compensation for beryllium- related health conditions, radiation-related health conditions, and silica-related health conditions in order to assure fairness and equity.
The Federal Government should provide necessary information and otherwise help employees of the Department of Energy or its contractors to determine if their illnesses are associated with conditions of their nuclear weapons-related work.
It should provide workers and their survivors with all pertinent and available information necessary for evaluating and processing claims.
It should also ensure that this program minimizes the administrative responsibilities to accomplish these goals.
This situation is sufficiently unique to the Department of Energy's nuclear weapons production program that it is appropriate for congressional action.
ALLOCATION OF RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ADMINISTERING PROGRAM.
Secretary of Labor.--The Secretary of Labor shall have primary responsibility for administering the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Program'') established under section 3611 of the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act of 2000 (as enacted by Public Law 106-398; 114 United States Statutes at Large 1654A-497) (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``2000 Act'').
Specifically, the Secretary shall immediately and forthwith carry out the following with respect to the Program: (1) Administer and decide all questions arising under the 2000 Act not assigned to other agencies by that Act or this Act, including determining the eligibility of individuals with covered occupational illnesses and their survivors and adjudicating claims for compensation and benefits.
Not later than May 31, 2001, promulgate regulations for the administration of the Program, except for functions assigned to other agencies pursuant to the 2000 Act or this Act.
Not later than July 31, 2001, ensure the availability, in paper and electronic format, of forms necessary for making claims under the Program.
Develop informational materials, in coordination with the Secretary of Energy and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to help potential claimants understand the Program and the application process, and provide these materials to individuals upon request and to the Secretary of Energy and the Attorney General for dissemination to potentially eligible individuals.
Secretary of Health and Human Services.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall carry out the following with respect to the Program: (1) Not later than May 31, 2001, promulgate regulations establishing-- (A) guidelines, pursuant to section 3623(c) of the 2000 Act, to assess the likelihood that an individual with cancer sustained the cancer in the performance of duty at a Department of Energy facility or an atomic weapons employer facility, as defined by that Act; and (B) methods, pursuant to section 3623(d) of the 2000 Act, for arriving at and providing reasonable estimates of the radiation doses received by individuals applying for assistance under the Program for whom there are inadequate records of radiation exposure.
In accordance with procedures developed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, consider and issue determinations on petitions by classes of employees to be treated as members of the Special Exposure Cohort.
With the assistance of the Secretary of Energy, apply the methods promulgated under subsection (b)(1)(B) to estimate the radiation doses received by individuals applying for assistance.
Upon request from the Secretary of Energy, appoint members for a physician panel or panels to consider individual workers' compensation claims as part of the Worker Assistance Program under the process established pursuant to subsection (c)(5).
Provide the Advisory Board established under section 3 with administrative services, funds, facilities, staff, and other necessary support services and perform the administrative functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 United States Code App.
), with respect to the Advisory Board.
Secretary of Energy.--The Secretary of Energy shall carry out the following with respect to the Program: (1) Provide the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Advisory Board on Radiation and Worker Health access, in accordance with law, to all relevant information pertaining to worker exposures, including access to restricted data, and any other technical assistance needed to carry out their responsibilities under subsection (b)(2) and section 3(b), respectively.
Upon request from the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the Secretary of Labor, and as permitted by law, require a Department of Energy contractor, subcontractor, or designated beryllium vendor, pursuant to section 3631(c) of the 2000 Act, to provide information relevant to a claim under the Program.
Identify and notify potentially eligible individuals of the availability of compensation under the Program.
Designate, pursuant to sections 3621(4)(B) and 3622 of the 2000 Act, atomic weapons employers and additions to the list of designated beryllium vendors.
Pursuant to Subtitle D of the 2000 Act, negotiate agreements with the chief executive officer of each State in which there is a Department of Energy facility, and other States as appropriate, to provide assistance to a Department of Energy contractor employee on filing a State workers' compensation system claim, and establish a Worker Assistance Program to help individuals whose illness is related to employment in the Department of Energy's nuclear weapons complex, or the individual's survivor if the individual is deceased, in applying for State workers' compensation benefits.
This assistance shall include-- (A) submittal of reasonable claims to a physician panel, appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services and administered by the Secretary of Energy, under procedures established by the Secretary of Energy, for determination of whether the individual's illness or death arose out of and in the course of employment by the Department of Energy or its contractors and exposure to a toxic substance at a Department of Energy facility; and (B) for cases determined by the physician panel and the Secretary of Energy under section 3661(d) and (e) of the 2000 Act to have arisen out of and in the course of employment by the Department of Energy or its contractors and exposure to a toxic substance at a Department of Energy facility, providing assistance to the individual in filing for workers' compensation benefits.
The Secretary shall not contest these claims and, to the extent permitted by law, shall direct a Department of Energy contractor who employed the applicant not to contest the claims.
Report on the Worker Assistance Program by making publicly available on at least an annual basis claims-related data, including the number of claims filed, the number of illnesses found to be related to work at a Department of Energy facility, job location and description, and number of successful State workers' compensation claims awarded.
Attorney General.--The Attorney General shall carry out the following with respect to the Program: (1) Develop procedures to notify, to the extent possible, each claimant (or the survivor of that claimant if deceased) whose claim for compensation under section 5 of the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act has been or is approved by the Department of Justice, of the availability of supplemental compensation and benefits under the Program.
Identify and notify eligible covered uranium employees or their survivors of the availability of supplemental compensation under the Program.
Upon request by the Secretary of Labor, provide information needed to adjudicate the claim of a covered uranium employee under the Program.
ESTABLISHMENT OF ADVISORY BOARD ON RADIATION AND WORKER HEALTH.
Establishment.--Pursuant to Public Law 106-398, there is hereby established an Advisory Board on Radiation and Worker Health.
The Advisory Board shall consist of not more than 20 members to be appointed by the President.
Members shall include affected workers and their representatives, and representatives from scientific and medical communities.
The President shall designate a Chair for the Board among its members.
Duties.--The Advisory Board shall-- (1) advise the Secretary of Health and Human Services on the development of guidelines under section 2(b)(1)(A); (2) advise the Secretary of Health and Human Services on the scientific validity and quality of dose reconstruction efforts performed for the Program; and (3) upon request by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, advise the Secretary on whether there are individuals or classes of employees at any Department of Energy facility who were exposed to radiation but for whom it is not feasible to estimate their radiation dose with sufficient accuracy, and on whether such radiation dose may have endangered the health of members of the class.
The Secretaries of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Energy shall, as part of their annual budget submissions, report to the Office of Management and Budget on their activities under the Program, including total expenditures related to benefits and program administration.
Each such report shall include, among other things, a description of the administrative structure established within their agencies to implement the 2000 Act.
In addition, the Secretary of Labor shall annually report on the total number and types of claims for which compensation was considered and other data pertinent to evaluating the Federal Government's performance in fulfilling the requirements of the 2000 Act.