This Act may be cited as the ``Stabilizing Workforce and Towns Act of 1998''.
COORDINATED FEDERAL RESPONSE FOR COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE.
Establishment of SWAT Team Response.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the President's Economic Adjustment Committee, shall ensure that a Stabilizing Workforce and Towns Team (in this Act referred to as a ``SWAT Team'') is mobilized and that such team travels to a community in need (as defined in section 3) not later than 3 days after an application for assistance is received by that Secretary in accordance with paragraph (2).
Application.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the application for assistance shall be submitted by the Governor of the State in which the community that is requesting assistance under this Act is located and shall contain such information as the Secretary of Commerce may require in order to determine whether the area is a community in need.
Determination.--The Secretary shall not provide a SWAT Team response under this Act unless the Secretary determines that the area under consideration for such response is a community in need.
SWAT Team Membership.-- (1) In general.--A SWAT Team shall be composed of a representative from each of the following agencies: (A) The Department of Commerce.
The Department of Education.
The Department of Health and Human Services.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The Department of Justice.
The Department of Labor.
The Department of Veterans Affairs.
The Small Business Administration.
The representative of the Department of Commerce shall be the team leader of the SWAT Team.
Additional members.--In addition to the representatives described in paragraph (1), a SWAT Team shall be composed of a representative from any of the following agencies if the team leader of the team determines that such representation is appropriate in order to carry out the duties of the SWAT Team: (A) The Department of Agriculture.
The Department of Energy.
The Department of the Interior.
The Department of Treasury.
The Office of Management and Budget.
Any other Federal agency.
Duties of SWAT Team.--The SWAT Team shall have the following duties: (1) To establish operations in a public building in the community in need and maintain such operations for a minimum of 5 days.
To provide to individuals residing in the community in need information and materials that describe all relevant Federal assistance programs available and the process for applying for such assistance.
The SWAT Team shall also make available the applications for such assistance.
To provide information to individuals residing in the community in need regarding additional resources available to such individuals to address their economic needs.
To designate a member of the SWAT Team as a liaison to the community in need.
Such member shall be designated before the SWAT Team terminates operations in the community and shall continue to provide advise to the community regarding the long- term recovery of the community.
DEFINITION OF COMMUNITY IN NEED.
In General.--In this Act, the term ``community in need'' means an area that the Secretary of Commerce determines, using the criteria described in subsection (b), is experiencing a sudden and severe dislocation because of the closure or significant downsizing of a plant or industry located in the area.
Criteria for determination of sudden and severe economic dislocation.--The criteria described in this subsection are that an area must show actual or threatened permanent job losses that exceed the following threshold criteria: (1) Areas located in metropolitan statistical areas.--For an area located in a Metropolitan Statistical Area, if the unemployment rate of the Metropolitan Statistical Area in which the area is located-- (A) is greater than the national average, the dislocation must be equal to or greater than the lesser of-- (i) 0.5 percent of the employed population in the area; or (ii) 4,000 direct jobs; or (B) is equal to or less than the national average, the dislocation must be equal to or greater than the lesser of-- (i) 1 percent of the employed population in the area; or (ii) 8,000 direct jobs.
Areas not located in metropolitan statistical areas.-- For an area that is not located in a Metropolitan Statistical Area, if the unemployment rate of the Labor Market Area in which the area is located-- (A) is greater than the national average, the dislocation must be equal to or greater than the lesser of-- (i) 2 percent of the employed population in the area; or (ii) 500 direct jobs; or (B) is equal to or less than the national average, the dislocation must be equal to or greater than the lesser of-- (i) 4 percent of the employed population in the area; or (ii) 1,000 direct jobs.
Percent of job loss ratio.--At least 50 percent of the job loss ratio threshold is the result of the action of a single employer, or at least 80 percent of the job loss threshold occurs in a single standard industry classification.
In General.--Not later than 60 days after the completion of a SWAT Team response in a community in need, the SWAT Team shall submit a report to Congress, the community in need's congressional delegation, and the President's Economic Adjustment Committee.
Contents.--The report described in subsection (a) shall contain a detailed description of the assistance provided by the SWAT Team, recommendations regarding assistance to be provided by SWAT Teams in future responses, information regarding the long-term recovery plan for the community in need, and any other information regarding the provision of Federal assistance to communities in need, including community applications for Federal assistance, that the team determines to be appropriate.
Report on File.--A copy of the report described in subsection (a) shall be maintained on file by the Secretary of Commerce for use as a resource to assist similarly impacted communities in the future.
Centralized Location.--The Secretary of Commerce shall maintain all SWAT Team reports in a centralized location and shall make such reports available to the public.