This Act may be cited as the ``Madera Water Supply Enhancement Act''.
The term ``District'' means the Madera Irrigation District, Madera, California.
The term ``Project'' means the ``Madera Water Supply and Enhancement Project''.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior.
Study.-- Pursuant to the Reclamation Act of 1902 (32 United States Statutes at Large 388) and Acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, the Secretary, acting through the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation, and in consultation and cooperation with the District, is authorized to conduct a study to determine the feasibility of constructing the Project.
Report.-- (1) Transmission.--Upon completion of the study authorized by subsection (a), the Secretary shall transmit to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report containing the results of the study, together with recommendations regarding any recommendation to construct the project.
Use of available materials.--In developing the report under this section, the Secretary shall make use of reports and any other relevant information supplied by the District.
Deadline.--No later than December 30, 2006, the Secretary shall complete the report and transmit the report to Congress pursuant to subsection (b)(2).
Cost Share.-- (1) Federal share.--The Federal share of the costs of the feasibility study authorized by this section shall not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the study.
In-kind contribution for non-federal share.--The Secretary may accept as part of the non-Federal cost share the contribution of such in-kind services by the District as the Secretary determines will contribute to the conduct and completion of the study.
All planning, design, and construction of the Project authorized by this Act shall be undertaken in accordance with a cooperative agreement between the Secretary and the District for the Project.
Such cooperative agreement shall set forth in a manner acceptable to the Secretary and the District the responsibilities of the District for participating in the study and related environmental review, including, but not limited to: (1) preparation of an assessment of the need for the project; (2) preparation of feasibility and reconnaissance studies; (3) environmental review; (4) engineering and design; (5) construction; and (6) the administration of contracts pertaining to any of the foregoing.
AUTHORIZATION FOR THE MADERA WATER SUPPLY AND ENHANCEMENT PROJECT.
Authorization of Construction.--Upon submission of feasibility report described in section 3 and a statement by the Secretary that the project is feasible, the Secretary, acting pursuant to the Federal reclamation laws (Act of June 17, 1902; 32 United States Statutes at Large 388), and Acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, as far as those laws are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, is authorized to enter into a cooperative agreement through the Bureau with the District for the support of the design, and construction of the Project.
Cost Share.--The Federal share of the capital costs of the Project shall not exceed 25 percent of the total cost.
Capital costs incurred by the District prior to the date of the enactment of this Act shall be considered a portion of the non-Federal cost share.
In-Kind Services.--In-kind services performed by the District shall be considered a part of the local cost share to complete the Project authorized by subsection (a).
Credit for Non-Federal Work.--The District shall receive credit toward the non-Federal share of the cost of the Project for-- (1) reasonable costs incurred by the District as a result of participation in the planning, design, and construction of the Project; and (2) for the fair market value of lands used or acquired by the District for the Project.
Limitation.--The Secretary shall not provide funds for the operation or maintenance of the Project authorized by this section.
The operation and maintenance of the Project shall be the sole responsibility of the District.
Plans and Analyses Consistent With Federal Law.--Before obligating funds for design or construction under this section, the Secretary shall work cooperatively with the District to use, to the extent possible, plans, designs, and engineering and environmental analyses that have already been prepared by the District for the Project.
The Secretary shall ensure that such information as is used is consistent with applicable Federal laws and regulations.
Title; Responsibility; Liability.--Nothing in this section or the assistance provided under this section shall be construed to transfer title, responsibility or liability related to the Project to the United States.
Authorization of Appropriation.--There is authorized such sums as may be appropriated to carry out this section.
The authority of the Secretary to carry out any provisions of this Act shall terminate 10 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives July 10, 2006.
Attest: KAREN L. HAAS, Clerk.