This Act may be cited as the ``Smokeless Tobacco Consumption Reduction and Education Act of 1993''.
INCREASE IN TAXES ON SMOKELESS TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
In General.-- (1) Snuff.--Paragraph (1) of section 5701(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on smokeless tobacco) is amended by striking ``36 cents (30 cents on snuff removed during 1991 or 1992)'' and inserting ``$4.25''.
Chewing tobacco.--Paragraph (2) of section 5701(e) of such Code is amended by striking ``12 cents (10 cents on chewing tobacco removed during 1991 or 1992)'' and inserting ``$1.12''.
Adjustment for subsequent increases in cigarette tax.-- Subsection (e) of section 5701 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new sentences: ``If after the date of the enactment of this sentence there is an increase in the rate of the tax imposed under subsection (b)(1), effective on and after the date on which such increase takes effect, the rate of the tax imposed by paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be an amount per pound (as determined by the Secretary) which is the same percentage of the national average wholesale price per pound for snuff (as so determined) as the tax imposed by subsection (b)(1) is of the national average wholesale price for cigarettes (as so determined).
A similar adjustment shall be made to the rate of the tax imposed under paragraph (2) of this subsection.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Floor Stocks.-- (1) Imposition of tax.--On snuff and chewing tobacco manufactured in or imported into the United States which is removed before the date of the enactment of this Act, and held on such date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed the following taxes: (A) Snuff.--On snuff, $3.87 per pound and a proportionate tax at the like rate on all fractional parts of a pound.
Chewing tobacco.--On chewing tobacco, $1.00 per pound and a proportionate tax at the like rate on all fractional parts of a pound.
Liability for tax and method of payment.-- (A) Liability for tax.--A person holding snuff and chewing tobacco on the date of the enactment of this Act to which any tax imposed by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for such tax.
Method of payment.--The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be treated as a tax imposed under section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and shall be due and payable on the day 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, in the same manner as the tax imposed under such section is payable with respect to snuff and chewing tobacco, removed on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Snuff and chewing tobacco.--For purposes of this subsection, the terms ``snuff'' and ``chewing tobacco'' have the respective meanings given to such terms by section 5702 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Exception for retail stocks.--The taxes imposed by paragraph (1) shall not apply to snuff and chewing tobacco in retail stocks held on the date of the enactment of this Act at the place where intended to be sold at retail.
Foreign trade zones.--Notwithstanding the Act of June 18, 1934 (19 United States Code 81a et sequentes) or any other provision of law-- (A) snuff and chewing tobacco-- (i) on which taxes imposed by Federal law are determined, or customs duties are liquidated, by a customs officer pursuant to a request made under the first proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18, 1934 (19 United States Code 81c(a)) before the date of the enactment of this Act, and (ii) which are entered into the customs territory of the United States on or after such date of enactment, from a foreign trade zone, and (B) snuff and chewing tobacco which-- (i) are placed under the supervision of a customs officer pursuant to the provisions of the second proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18, 1934 (19 United States Code 81c(a)) before such date of enactment, and (ii) are entered into the customs territory of the United States on or after such date of enactment, from a foreign trade zone, shall be subject to the tax imposed by paragraph (1) and such snuff and chewing tobacco shall, for purposes of paragraph (1), be treated as being held on such date of enactment for sale.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Trust Fund Code) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
SMOKELESS TOBACCO EDUCATION AND PREVENTION TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Smokeless Tobacco Education and Prevention Trust Fund' (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Trust Fund'), consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--The Secretary shall transfer to the Trust Fund an amount equivalent to the 10 percent of the net increase in revenues received in the Treasury by reason of the amendments made to section 5701 by section 2(a), and the provisions contained in section 2(c), of the Smokeless Tobacco Consumption Reduction and Education Act of 1993, as estimated by the Secretary.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, for programs of public education regarding the risks of smokeless tobacco and other programs to reduce the consumption of smokeless tobacco.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Smokeless Tobacco Education and Prevention Trust Fund.''