INDEXING OF CAPITAL ASSETS.
In General.--Part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis rules of general application) is amended by inserting after section 1021 the following new section: ``SEC.
INDEXING OF CERTAIN ASSETS FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING GAIN OR LOSS.
In General.-- ``(1) Indexed basis substituted for adjusted basis.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, if an indexed asset which the taxpayer has held for 1 year or longer is sold or otherwise disposed of, for purposes of this title the indexed basis of the asset shall be substituted for its adjusted basis.
Exception for depreciation, etc.--The deductions for depreciation, depletion, and amortization shall be determined without regard to the application of paragraph (1) to the taxpayer or any other person.
Indexed Asset.--For purposes of this section, the term `indexed asset' means-- ``(1) stock in a corporation, ``(2) bonds, ``(3) tangible property which is property used in the trade or business (as defined in section 1231(b)), ``(4) land held in connection with a trade or business (other than property described in section 1231(b)(1)(B)), and ``(5) the principal residence (within the meaning of section 1034) of the taxpayer.
Indexed Basis.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The indexed basis of any asset is-- ``(A) the adjusted basis of the asset, increased by ``(B) the applicable inflation adjustment.
Applicable inflation adjustment.--The applicable inflation adjustment for any asset is an amount equal to-- ``(A) the adjusted basis of the asset, multiplied by ``(B) the percentage (if any) by which-- ``(i) the gross domestic product deflator for the calendar year in which the asset is disposed of, exceeds ``(ii) the gross domestic product deflator for the calendar year in which the asset was acquired by the taxpayer (or, if later, for 1986).
The percentage under subparagraph (B) shall be rounded to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 percent.
Gross domestic product deflator.--The gross domestic product deflator for any calendar year is the implicit price deflator for the gross domestic product for such year (as shown in the first revision thereof).
Not an Indexed Asset and Holding Period Restarted If Diminished Risk of Loss.--If the taxpayer (or a related person) enters into any transaction which substantially reduces the risk of loss from holding any asset-- ``(1) such asset shall not be treated as an indexed asset for the period of such reduced risk, and ``(2) for purposes of determining whether the 1-year holding requirement of subsection (a) has been met, the taxpayer shall be treated as first acquiring the asset on the day after the last day of such period.
Pass-Thru Entities.-- ``(1) Partnerships.--In the case of a partnership, the adjustment made under subsection (a) at the partnership level shall be passed through to the partners.
Subchapter s corporations.--In the case of an S corporation, the adjustment under subsection (a) at the corporate level shall be passed through to the shareholders.
Common trust funds.--In the case of a common trust fund, the adjustment made under subsection (a) at the trust level shall be passed through to the participants.
Regulated investment companies and real estate investment trusts.-- ``(A) In general.--Stock in a qualified investment entity shall be an indexed asset for any calendar month in the same ratio as the fair market value of the assets held by such entity at the close of such month which are indexed assets bears to the fair market value of all assets of such entity at the close of such month.
Ratio of 90 percent or more.--If the ratio for any calendar month determined under subparagraph (A) would (but for this subparagraph) be 90 percent or more, such ratio for such month shall be 100 percent.
Ratio of 10 percent or less.--If the ratio for any calendar month determined under subparagraph (A) would (but for this subparagraph) be 10 percent or less, such ratio for such month shall be zero.
Valuation of assets in case of real estate investment trusts.--Nothing in this paragraph shall require a real estate investment trust to value its assets more frequently than once each 36 months (except where such trust ceases to exist).
The ratio under subparagraph (A) for any calendar month for which there is no valuation shall be the trustee's good faith judgment as to such valuation.
Qualified investment entity.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified investment entity' means-- ``(i) a regulated investment company (within the meaning of section 851), and ``(ii) a real estate investment trust (within the meaning of section 856).
Dispositions Between Related Persons.-- ``(1) In general.--This section shall not apply to any sale or other disposition of property between related persons except to the extent that the basis of such property in the hands of the transferee is a substituted basis.
Related persons defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `related persons' means-- ``(A) persons bearing a relationship set forth in section 267(b), and ``(B) persons treated as single employer under subsection (b) or (c) of section 414.
Additions to Basis By Means of Improvements or Contributions to Capital.--If there is an addition to the adjusted basis of any tangible property or of any stock in a corporation during the taxable year by reason of an improvement to such property or a contribution to capital of such corporation, and the aggregate amount of such addition during the taxable year with respect to such property or stock is $10,000 or more, such addition shall be treated as a separate asset acquired at the close of such taxable year.
Section Cannot Increase Ordinary Loss.--To the extent that (but for this subsection) this section would create or increase a net ordinary loss to which section 1231(a)(2) applies or an ordinary loss to which any other provision of this title applies, such provision shall not apply.
The taxpayer shall be treated as having a long-term capital loss in an amount equal to the amount of the ordinary loss to which the preceding sentence applies.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Assets which are not indexed assets throughout holding period.--The applicable inflation ratio shall be appropriately reduced for periods during which the asset was not an indexed asset.
Treatment of certain distributions.--A distribution with respect to stock in a corporation which is not a dividend shall be treated as a disposition.
Acquisition date where prior application of subsection (a)(1) with respect to such asset of taxpayer.--If there has been a prior application of subsection (a)(1) to an asset while such asset was held by the taxpayer, the date of acquisition of such asset by the taxpayer shall be treated as not earlier than the date of the most recent such prior application.
Collapsible corporations.--The application of section 341(a) (relating to collapsible corporations) shall be determined without regard to this section.
Transfers To Increase Indexing Adjustment or Depreciation Allowance.--If any person transfers cash, debt, or any other property to another person and the principal purpose of such transfer is-- ``(1) to secure or increase an adjustment under subsection (a), or ``(2) to increase (by reason of an adjustment under subsection (a)) a deduction for depreciation, depletion, or amortization, the Secretary may disallow part or all of such adjustment or increase.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1021 the following new item: ``Sec.
Indexing of certain assets for purposes of determining gain or loss.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to dispositions of property after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXCLUSION OF GAIN FROM SALE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.
In General.--Section 121 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to one-time exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence by individual who has attained age 55) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
EXCLUSION OF GAIN FROM SALE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.
Exclusion.--Gross income shall not include gain from the sale or exchange of property which has been owned and used by the taxpayer as the taxpayer's principal residence.
Limitation.--The amount of gain excluded under subsection (a) with respect to any sale or exchange shall not exceed $250,000 ($500,000 in the case of a joint return).
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Property held jointly by husband and wife.--For purposes of this section, if-- ``(A) property is held by a husband and wife as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or community property, ``(B) such husband and wife make a joint return under section 6013 for the taxable year of the sale or exchange, and ``(C) one spouse satisfies the holding and use requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such property, then both husband and wife shall be treated as satisfying the holding and use requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such property.
Property of deceased spouse.--For purposes of this section, in the case of an unmarried individual whose spouse is deceased on the date of the sale or exchange of property, if the deceased spouse satisfied the holding and use requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such property then such individual shall be treated as satisfying the holding and use requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such property.
Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing corporation.--For purposes of this section, if the taxpayer holds stock as a tenant-stockholder (as defined in section 216) in a cooperative housing corporation (as defined in such section), then-- ``(A) the holding requirements of subsection (a) shall be applied to the holding of such stock, and ``(B) the use requirements of subsection (a) shall be applied to the house or apartment which the taxpayer was entitled to occupy as such stockholder.
Involuntary conversions.--For purposes of this section, the destruction, theft, seizure, requisition, or condemnation of property shall be treated as the sale of such property.
Property used in part as principal residence.--In the case of property only a portion of which has been owned and used by the taxpayer as his principal residence, this section shall apply with respect to so much of the gain from the sale or exchange of such property as is determined, under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, to be attributable to the portion of the property so owned and used by the taxpayer.
Determination of marital status.--In the case of any sale or exchange, for purposes of this section-- ``(A) the determination of whether an individual is married shall be made as of the date of the sale or exchange; and ``(B) an individual legally separated from his spouse under a decree of divorce or of separate maintenance shall not be considered as married.
Application of sections 1033 and 1034.--In applying sections 1033 (relating to involuntary conversions) and 1034 (relating to sale or exchange of residence), the amount realized from the sale or exchange of property shall be treated as being the amount determined without regard to this section, reduced by the amount of gain not included in gross income pursuant to an election under this section.
Property acquired after involuntary conversion.--If the basis of the property sold or exchanged is determined (in whole or in part) under subsection (b) of section 1033 (relating to basis of property acquired through involuntary conversion), then the holding and use by the taxpayer of the converted property shall be treated as holding and use by the taxpayer of the property sold or exchanged.
Determination of use during periods of out-of- residence care.--In the case of a taxpayer who-- ``(A) becomes physically or mentally incapable of self-care, and ``(B) owns property and has previously used such property as the taxpayer's principal residence, then the taxpayer shall be treated as using such property as the taxpayer's principal residence during any time in which the taxpayer owns the property and resides in any facility (including a nursing home) licensed by a State or political subdivision to care for an individual in the taxpayer's condition.
Election To Have Section Not Apply.--This section shall not apply to any sale or exchange with respect to which the taxpayer elects not to have this section apply.''
Clerical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (3) of section 1033(k) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(3) For exclusion from gross income of gain from involuntary conversion of principal residence, see section 121.''
Subparagraph (A) of section 1038(e)(1) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(A) section 121 (relating to exclusion of gain from sale or exchange of principal residence) applies, or''.
Subparagraph (B) of section 1250(d)(7) of such Code is amended by striking ``age and'' and by striking the parenthetical and inserting the following: ``(relating to exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence)''.
The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 121 and inserting the following new item: ``Sec.
Exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to sales and exchanges after the date of the enactment of this Act.