This Act may be cited as the ``Project Exile: The Safe Streets and Neighborhoods Act of 2000''.
FIREARMS SENTENCING INCENTIVE GRANTS.
Program Established.--Title II of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-322; 108 United States Statutes at Large 1815) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subtitle D as subtitle E; and (2) by inserting after subtitle C the following: ``Subtitle D--Firearms Sentencing Incentive Grants ``SEC.
``In this subtitle: ``(1) Firearm.--The term `firearm' has the meaning given the term in section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code.
Part 1 violent crime.--The term `part 1 violent crime' means murder and nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault, as reported to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for purposes of the Uniform Crime Reports.
Serious drug trafficking crime.--The term `serious drug trafficking crime' means an offense under State law for the manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance, for which State law authorizes to be imposed a sentence to a term of imprisonment of not less than 10 years.
State.--The term `State' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
Unit of local government.--The term `unit of local government' has the meaning given the term in section 901(a) of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3791(a)).
Violent crime.--The term `violent crime' means murder and nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault, or a crime in a reasonably comparable class of serious violent crimes, as approved by the Attorney General.
In General.--From amounts made available to carry out this subtitle, the Attorney General shall award Firearms Sentencing Incentive Grants to eligible States in accordance with this subtitle.
Allowable Uses.--Grants awarded under this subtitle may be used by a State only-- ``(1) to support-- ``(A) law enforcement agencies; ``(B) prosecutors; ``(C) courts; ``(D) probation officers; ``(E) correctional officers; ``(F) the juvenile justice system; ``(G) the expansion, improvement, and coordination of criminal history records; or ``(H) case management programs involving the sharing of information about serious offenders; ``(2) to carry out a public awareness and community support program described in section 20353(a)(2); or ``(3) to build or expand correctional facilities.
Subgrants.--A State may use grants awarded under this subtitle directly or by making subgrants to units of local government within that State.
FIREARMS SENTENCING INCENTIVE GRANTS.
Eligibility.--Except as provided in subsection (b), to be eligible to receive a grant award under this section, a State shall submit an application to the Attorney General, which shall comply with the following requirements: ``(1) Firearms sentencing laws.--The application shall demonstrate that the State has implemented firearms sentencing laws requiring 1 or both of the following: ``(A) Any person who, during and in relation to any violent crime or serious drug trafficking crime, uses or carries a firearm, shall, in addition to the punishment provided for that crime of violence or serious drug trafficking crime, be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than 5 years (without the possibility of parole during that term).
Any person who, having not less than 1 prior conviction for a violent crime, possesses a firearm, shall, for such possession, be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than 5 years (without the possibility of parole during that term).
Public awareness and community support program.--The application shall demonstrate that the State has implemented, or will implement not later than 6 months after receiving a grant under this subtitle, a public awareness and community support program that seeks to build support for, and warns potential violators of, the firearms sentencing laws implemented under paragraph (1).
Coordination with federal government; crime reduction in high-crime areas.--The application shall provide assurances that the State-- ``(A) will coordinate with Federal prosecutors and Federal law enforcement agencies whose jurisdictions include the State, so as to promote Federal involvement and cooperation in the enforcement of laws within that State; and ``(B) will allocate its resources in a manner calculated to reduce crime in the high-crime areas of the State.
Alternate Eligibility Requirement.-- ``(1) In general.--A State that is unable to demonstrate in its application that the State meets the requirement of subsection (a)(1) shall be eligible to receive a grant award under this subtitle notwithstanding that inability, if that State, in such application, provides assurances that the State has in effect an equivalent Federal prosecution agreement.
Equivalent federal prosecution agreement.--For purposes of paragraph (1), an equivalent Federal prosecution agreement is an agreement with appropriate Federal authorities that ensures that 1 or more of the following: ``(A) If a person engages in the conduct specified in subsection (a)(1)(A), but the conviction of that person under State law for that conduct is not certain to result in the imposition of an additional sentence as specified in that subsection, that person is prosecuted for that conduct under Federal law.
If a person engages in the conduct specified in subsection (a)(1)(B), but the conviction of that person under State law for that conduct is not certain to result in the imposition of a sentence as specified in that subsection, that person is prosecuted for that conduct under Federal law.
In General.--The amount available for grants under this subtitle for any fiscal year shall be allocated to each eligible State, in the ratio that the number of part 1 violent crimes reported by the State to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the 3 years preceding the year in which the determination is made, bears to the average annual number of part 1 violent crimes reported by all eligible States to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the 3 years preceding the year in which the determination is made.
Unavailable Data.--If data regarding part 1 violent crimes in any State is substantially inaccurate or is unavailable for the 3 years preceding the year in which the determination is made, the Attorney General shall utilize the best available comparable data regarding the number of violent crimes for the previous year for the State for the purposes of the allocation of funds under this subtitle.
Authorizations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subtitle-- ``(1) $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; ``(2) $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; ``(3) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; ``(4) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; and ``(5) $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2005.
Limitations on Funds.-- ``(1) Uses of funds.--Funds made available pursuant to this subtitle shall be used only to carry out the purposes described in section 20352(b).
Nonsupplanting requirement.--Funds made available pursuant to this section shall not be used to supplant State funds, but shall be used to increase the amount of funds that would, in the absence of Federal funds, be made available from State sources.
Administrative costs.--Not more than 3 percent of the funds made available pursuant to this section for a fiscal year shall be available to the Attorney General for purposes of administration, research and evaluation, technical assistance, and data collection.
Carryover of appropriations.--Funds appropriated pursuant to this section during any fiscal year shall remain available until expended.
Matching funds.--The Federal share of a grant awarded under this subtitle may not exceed 90 percent of the costs of a proposal as described in an application approved under this subtitle.
REPORT BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
``Beginning on October 1, 2001, and on each subsequent July 1 thereafter, the Attorney General shall submit to the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives a report on the implementation of this subtitle.
The report shall include information regarding the eligibility of States under section 20353 and the distribution and use of funds under this subtitle.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 2 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law 103- 322; 108 United States Statutes at Large 1796) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the item relating to subtitle D of title II as an item relating to subtitle E of that title; and (2) by inserting after the item relating to subtitle C of title II the following: ``Subtitle D--Firearms Sentencing Incentive Grants ``Sec.
Firearms sentencing incentive grants.
Report by the Attorney General.