ESTABLISHMENT OF JOINT COMMITTEE.
Establishment and Membership.--There is established a permanent Joint Committee for Review of Administrative Rules (hereinafter referred to as the ``Joint Committee'') to be composed of-- (1) 10 members of the Senate to be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; and (2) 10 members of the House of Representatives to be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Membership.--Vacancies in the membership of the Joint Committee shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the functions of the Joint Committee and shall be filled in the same manner as in the case of the original selection.
The Joint Committee shall select a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from among its members at the beginning of each Congress.
The Vice Chairman shall act in the place and stead of the Chairman in the absence of the Chairman.
The chairmanship shall alternate between the Senate and the House of Representatives with each Congress, and the Chairman shall be selected by the Members from that House entitled to the chairmanship.
The Vice Chairman shall be chosen from the House other than that of the Chairman by the Members from that House.
The Joint Committee shall review rules of Federal agencies as provided by chapter 8 of title 5 of the United States Code.
Any joint resolution that is referred to any committee pursuant to section 802 of title 5, United States Code, which is reported by, or discharged from, that committee shall be referred to the Joint Committee for its consideration.
The members of the Joint Committee who are members of the Senate shall from time to time report to the Senate, and the members of the Joint Committee who are members of the House of Representatives shall from time to time report to the House, by joint resolution their recommendations with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of their respective Houses which are referred to the Joint Committee.
AUTHORITY AND EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION OF STAFF.
Authority of Joint Committee.--The Joint Committee may-- (1) sit and act at such places and times as the Joint Committee determines is appropriate during the sessions, recesses, and adjourned periods of Congress; and (2) require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and documents, administer oaths, take testimony, and procure printing and binding.
Appointment and Compensation of Staff.--(1) The Joint Committee may appoint and fix the compensation of such experts, consultants, technicians, and staff employees as it deems necessary and advisable.
The Joint Committee may utilize such voluntary and uncompensated services as it deems necessary and may utilize the services, information, facilities, and personnel of the departments and establishments of the Government.
Witnesses.--Witnesses requested to appear before the Joint Committee shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in traveling to and from the places at which they are to appear.
CONGRESSIONAL REVIEW OF AGENCY RULEMAKING.
Congressional Review.--Section 801(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(C), by inserting ``and to the Joint Committee for Review of Administrative Rules'' before the period; and (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by inserting ``and to the Joint Committee for Review of Administrative Rules'' after ``Congress''.
Congressional Disapproval Procedure in the Senate.--(1) Section 804(c) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by-- (1) striking ``placed on the calendar'' and inserting ``referred to the Joint Committee for Review of Administrative Rules for a period of not to exceed 10 session days''; and (2) adding at the end the following new sentence: In the Senate, if the Joint Committee for Review of Administrative Rules has not reported such joint resolution (or an identical joint resolution) at the end of 10 session days after such joint resolution is referred to it, such joint committee may be discharged from further consideration of such joint resolution upon a petition supported in writing by 30 Members of the Senate, and such joint resolution shall be placed on the calendar.''.
Section 804(d) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``and the joint committee'' after ``committee'' the first place it occurs and by striking ``a committee'' and inserting ``the joint committee''.
In General.--This Act and the amendments made by it shall take effect on noon January 3, 2001, and shall apply to rules promulgated after such date.
Definition.--As used in subsection (a), the term ``rule'' has the meaning given such term by section 804(3) of title 5, United States Code.