15, as adopted by the House of Representatives on January 31, 2001, and Senate Concurrent Resolution 6, as adopted by the Senate on February 8, 2001, resolved that Congress ``expresses its support for continuing and substantially increasing the amount of disaster assistance being provided [to India] by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and other relief agencies''.
Senate Resolution 18, as adopted by the Senate on February 8, 2001, ``encourages a continued commitment by the United States and other countries to the long-term, sustainable development of El Salvador''.
House Concurrent Resolution 41, as adopted by the House of Representatives on March 21, 2001, ``expresses support for continuing and substantially increasing, in connection with these earthquakes, relief and reconstruction assistance provided by relief agencies .
the United States Agency for International Development''.
In the wake of Hurricane Mitch, the Mitch Consultative Group formulated what have become known as the ``Stockholm Principles'', namely that the reconstruction and transformation of the affected countries should be guided by the following goals and principles: (A) reduction of social and environmental vulnerability, (B) transparency and good governance, (C) decentralization and civil society participation, and (D) human rights and equality.
Development assistance, aimed ultimately toward poverty reduction, is the best mitigation against catastrophic disaster.
Nongovernmental organizations working on the ground, such as CARE, Catholic Relief Services, Habitat for Humanity International and others, strive to focus on long-term sustainable development, even in the midst of tragedy and immediate emergency relief efforts.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) the nature and scale of the earthquake disasters that recently struck El Salvador and India demonstrate that these are true disaster emergencies and that the United States should respond by providing emergency disaster assistance; (2)(A) emergency disaster assistance programs must complement and work with development assistance programs in order that the two types of programs reinforce one another; and (B) emergency disaster assistance programs should support and not undermine the long-term sustainable development efforts of nongovernmental organizations already working on the ground in countries that have suffered disasters; and (3) as such, regular United States bilateral development assistance funds that have been reallocated in order to meet the current emergency needs for relief and recovery following the earthquakes in India and El Salvador should be reimbursed with the funds authorized in this Act.
EMERGENCY DISASTER ASSISTANCE FOR INDIA AND EL SALVADOR.
Emergency Disaster Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance under chapter 9 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2292 et sequentes; relating to international disaster assistance) for recovery from the earthquakes of January and February 2001 in the Republic of India and the Republic of El Salvador.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Emergency disaster assistance.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President $468,500,000 for fiscal year 2001 to carry out subsection (a).
Of such amount-- (A) not less than $117,600,000 is authorized to be appropriated for recovery in India; (B) not less than $301,400,000 is authorized to be appropriated for recovery in El Salvador; (C) not less than $500,000 is authorized to be appropriated for technical assistance to develop emergency management systems in El Salvador and India; and (D) such sums as may be necessary are authorized to be appropriated for operating expenses of the United States Agency for International Development.
Reimbursement.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President $73,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 to reimburse the appropriate development assistance accounts for amounts obligated before the date of the enactment of this Act for recovery from the earthquakes of January and February 2001 in the Republic of India and the Republic of El Salvador.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under paragraphs (1) and (2) are authorized to remain available until expended.
DISASTER MITIGATION ASSISTANCE FOR INDIA, EL SALVADOR, AND CERTAIN OTHER COUNTRIES.
Disaster Mitigation Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance under chapter 9 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2292 et sequentes; relating to international disaster assistance) for disaster mitigation activities in the Republic of India, the Republic of El Salvador, and other countries that contain highly disaster-prone areas.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 to carry out subsection (a).
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under paragraph (1) are authorized to remain available until expended.
DESIGNATION AS EMERGENCY REQUIREMENT.
All funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under section 3(b) and section 4(b)(1) are designated as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 251(b)(2)(A) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.