The first section 33 of the Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1974 (15 United States Code 2229) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Definition of Firefighting Personnel.--In this section, the term `firefighting personnel' means individuals, including volunteers, who are firefighters, officers of fire departments, or emergency medical service personnel of fire departments.
Assistance Program.-- ``(1) Authority.--In accordance with this section, the Administrator may-- ``(A) make grants on a competitive basis directly to fire departments of a State, in consultation with the chief executive of the State, for the purpose of protecting the health and safety of the public, firefighting personnel, and property against fire and fire-related hazards; and ``(B) provide assistance for fire prevention programs in accordance with paragraph (4).
Office for administration of assistance.-- ``(A) Establishment.--Before providing assistance under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall establish an office in the Administration to administer the assistance under this section.
Included duties.--The duties of the office shall include the following: ``(i) Recipient selection criteria.--To establish specific criteria for the selection of recipients of the assistance under this section, including a requirement for peer review of the selection process.
Grant-writing assistance.--To provide grant-writing assistance to applicants.
Use of fire department grant funds.--The Administrator may make a grant under paragraph (1)(A) only if the applicant for the grant agrees to use the grant funds for one or more of the following purposes: ``(A) To hire additional firefighting personnel.
To train firefighting personnel in firefighting, emergency response (including response to a terrorism incident or use of a weapon of mass destruction), arson prevention and detection, or the handling of hazardous materials, or to train firefighting personnel to provide any of the training described in this subparagraph.
To fund the creation of rapid intervention teams to protect firefighting personnel at the scenes of fires and other emergencies.
To certify fire inspectors.
To establish wellness and fitness programs for firefighting personnel to ensure that the firefighting personnel can carry out their duties.
To fund emergency medical services provided by fire departments.
To acquire additional firefighting vehicles, including fire trucks.
To acquire additional firefighting equipment, including equipment for communications, monitoring, and response to a terrorism incident or use of a weapon of mass destruction.
To acquire personal protective equipment required for firefighting personnel by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and other personal protective equipment for firefighting personnel, including protective equipment to respond to a terrorism incident or the use of a weapon of mass destruction.
To modify fire stations, fire training facilities, and other facilities to protect the health and safety of firefighting personnel.
To enforce fire codes.
To fund fire prevention programs.
To educate the public about arson prevention and detection.
To provide incentives for the recruitment and retention of volunteer firefighting personnel for volunteer firefighting departments and other firefighting departments that utilize volunteers, including funding to enable training described in subparagraph (B).
Fire prevention programs.-- ``(A) In general.--For each fiscal year, the Administrator shall use not less than 5 percent of the funds made available under subsection (e)-- ``(i) to make grants to fire departments for the purpose described in paragraph (3)(L); and ``(ii) to make grants to, or enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with, national, State, local, or community organizations that are recognized for their experience and expertise with respect to fire prevention or fire safety programs and activities, for the purpose of carrying out fire prevention programs.
Priority.--In selecting organizations described in subparagraph (A)(ii) to receive assistance under this paragraph, the Administrator shall give priority to organizations that focus on prevention of injuries to children from fire.
Application.--The Administrator may provide assistance to a fire department or organization under this subsection only if the fire department or organization seeking the assistance submits to the Administrator an application that meets the following requirements: ``(A) Form.--The application shall be in such form as the Administrator may require.
Information.--The application shall include the following information: ``(i) Financial need.--Information that demonstrates the financial need of the applicant for the assistance for which applied.
In allocating funds under this section, the Administrator shall not discriminate against an applicant whose funding jurisdiction places a high budget priority on fire department needs.
Cost-benefit analysis.--An analysis of the costs and benefits, with respect to public safety, of the use of the assistance.
Reporting systems data.--An agreement to provide information to the national fire incident reporting system for the period covered by the assistance.
Other information.--Any other information that the Administrator may require.
Non-federal contribution.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the Administrator may provide assistance under this subsection only if the applicant for the assistance agrees to provide 30 percent of the cost of the purposes for which the assistance is sought under this subsection in non-Federal funds for any fiscal year.
Requirement for small community organizations.--In the case of an applicant whose personnel serve jurisdictions of 50,000 or fewer residents, the required non-Federal contribution under subparagraph (A) shall be 10 percent.
Maintenance of expenditures.--The Administrator may provide assistance under this subsection only if the applicant for the assistance agrees to maintain in the fiscal year for which the assistance will be received the applicant's aggregate expenditures for the uses described in paragraph (3) or (4) at or above the average level of such expenditures in the two fiscal years preceding the fiscal year for which the assistance will be received.
Report to the administrator.--The Administrator may provide assistance under this subsection only if the applicant for the assistance agrees to submit to the Administrator a report, including a description of how the assistance was used, with respect to each fiscal year for which the assistance was received.
Variety of fire department grant recipients.--The Administrator shall ensure that grants under paragraph (1)(A) for a fiscal year are made to a variety of fire departments, including, to the extent that there are eligible applicants-- ``(A) career, volunteer, and combination fire departments; ``(B) fire departments located in communities of varying sizes; and ``(C) fire departments located in urban, suburban, and rural communities.
Grant limitations.-- ``(A) Recipient limitation.--A grant recipient under this section may not receive more than $750,000 under this section for any fiscal year.
Limitation on expenditures for firefighting vehicles.--Not more than 25 percent of the funds appropriated to provide grants under this section for a fiscal year may be used to assist grant recipients to purchase vehicles, as authorized by paragraph (3)(G).
Reservation of grant funds for volunteer departments.--In making grants to firefighting departments, the Administrator shall ensure that those firefighting departments that have either all-volunteer forces of firefighting personnel or combined forces of volunteer and career firefighting personnel collectively receive at least a proportion of the total grant funding that equals the proportion of the United States population that those firefighting departments protect.
Audits.--A recipient of a grant under this section shall be subject to audits to ensure that the grant proceeds are expended for the intended purposes and that the grant recipient complies with the requirements of paragraphs (6) and (7) of subsection (b).
State Defined.--In this section, the term `State' includes the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator $900,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2004 for the purposes of this section.
Administrative expenses.--Of the funds appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Administrator may use not more than five percent of the funds to cover salaries and expenses and other administrative costs incurred by the Administrator to operate the office established under subsection (b)(2) and make grants and provide assistance under this section.''.
The second section 33 of the Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1974 (15 United States Code 2230) and section 34 of that Act (15 United States Code 2231) are redesignated as sections 34 and 35, respectively.