This Act may be cited as the ``Fragile X Research Breakthrough Act of 1999''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Fragile X is the most common inherited cause of mental retardation.
It affects 1 in every 2,000 boys and 1 in every 4,000 girls.
One in 260 women is a carrier.
Most children with Fragile X require a lifetime of special care at a cost of over $2,000,000 per child.
Relatively newly-discovered and relatively unknown, even in the medical profession, Fragile X is caused by the absence of a single protein that can be produced synthetically but that cannot yet be effectively assimilated.
Fragile X research, both basic and applied, is vastly underfunded in view of its prevalence, the potential for the development of a cure, the established benefits of currently available interventions, and the significance that Fragile X research has for related disorders.
Fragile X is a powerful research model for other forms of X-linked mental retardation, as well as neuropsychiatric disorders, including autism, schizophrenia, mood disorders, and pervasive developmental disorder.
Individuals with Fragile X are a homogeneous study population for advancing understanding of these disorders.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF CHILD HEALTH AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT; RESEARCH ON FRAGILE X. Subpart 7 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285g et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Expansion and Coordination of Research Activities.--The Director of the Institute, after consultation with the advisory council for the Institute, shall expand, intensify, and coordinate the activities of the Institute with respect to research on the disease known as Fragile X.
Research Centers.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Institute, after consultation with the advisory council for the Institute, shall make grants to, or enter into contracts with, public or nonprofit private entities for the development and operation of centers to conduct research for the purposes of improving the diagnosis and treatment of, and finding the cure for, Fragile X.
Number of centers.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Director of the Institute shall, to the extent that amounts are appropriated, provide for the establishment of at least 3 Fragile X research centers.
Activities.-- ``(A) In general.--Each center assisted under paragraph (1) shall, with respect to Fragile X-- ``(i) conduct basic and clinical research, which may include clinical trials of-- ``(I) new or improved diagnostic methods; and ``(II) drugs or other treatment approaches; and ``(ii) conduct research to find a cure.
Fees.--A center may use funds provided under paragraph (1) to provide fees to individuals serving as subjects in clinical trials conducted under subparagraph (A).
Coordination among centers.--The Director of the Institute shall, as appropriate, provide for the coordination of the activities of the centers assisted under this section, including providing for the exchange of information among the centers.
Certain administrative requirements.--Each center assisted under paragraph (1) shall use the facilities of a single institution, or be formed from a consortium of cooperating institutions, meeting such requirements as may be prescribed by the Director of the Institute.
Duration of support.--Support may be provided to a center under paragraph (1) for a period of not to exceed 5 years.
Such period may be extended for 1 or more additional periods, each of which may not exceed 5 years, if the operations of such center have been reviewed by an appropriate technical and scientific peer review group established by the Director and if such group has recommended to the Director that such period be extended.
Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.''.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF CHILD HEALTH AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT; LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM REGARDING RESEARCH ON FRAGILE X.
Part G of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 288 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 487E the following: ``SEC.
LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM REGARDING RESEARCH ON FRAGILE X.
In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, shall establish a program under which the Federal Government enters into contracts with qualified health professionals (including graduate students) who agree to conduct research regarding Fragile X in consideration of the Federal Government's agreement to repay, for each year of such service, not more than $35,000 of the principal and interest of the educational loans owed by such health professionals.
Applicability of Certain Provisions.--With respect to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established in subpart III of part D of title III, the provisions of such subpart (including section 338B(g)(3)) shall, except as inconsistent with subsection (a) of this section, apply to the program established in such subsection in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions apply to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established in such subpart.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Amounts appropriated for a fiscal year under the preceding sentence shall remain available until the expiration of the second fiscal year beginning after the fiscal year for which the amounts were appropriated.