This Act may be cited as the ``Voluntary Support for Reservists and National Guard Members Act''.
DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS TO SUPPORT RESERVISTS.
Designation.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS TO SUPPORT RESERVISTS ``Sec.
In General.--In the case of an individual, with respect to each taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the tax imposed by chapter 1, such taxpayer may designate that a specified portion (not less than $1) of any overpayment of tax for such taxable year be paid over to the Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year only at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Overpayments Treated as Refunded.--For purposes of this title, any portion of an overpayment of tax designated under subsection (a) shall be treated as-- ``(1) being refunded to the taxpayer as of the last date prescribed for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 (determined without regard to extensions) or, if later, the date the return is filed, and ``(2) a contribution made by such taxpayer on such date to the United States.''.
Transfers to reservist income differential trust fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, from time to time, transfer to the Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund the amounts designated under section 6097 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Clerical amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of overpayments to support reservists.''.
Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
RESERVIST INCOME DIFFERENTIAL TRUST FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to the Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6097 (relating to designation of overpayments to support reservists).
Expenditures.--Amounts in the Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund shall be available for making distributions to eligible members of reserve components in accordance with section 212 of title 37, United States Code.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund.''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Subsection (a).--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.
Subsection (b).--The amendments made by subsection (b) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
PAY DIFFERENTIAL FOR MOBILIZED RESERVES.
Authority.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 3 of title 37, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Reserves on active duty: pay differential for service in support of a contingency operation ``(a) Authority.--To the extent provided in appropriations Acts, the Secretary of a military department shall pay an eligible member of a reserve component of the armed forces a pay differential computed under subsection (c).
Eligible Member.--A member of a reserve component is eligible for a pay differential for each month during which the member is serving on active duty for a period of more than 30 days pursuant to a call or order to active duty under a provision of law referred to in section 101(a)(13)(B) of title 10.
Amount.--(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the amount of a pay differential paid under this section for a month to a member called or ordered to active duty as described in subsection (b) shall be equal to the excess of-- ``(A) the monthly rate of the salary, wage, or similar form of compensation that applied to the member in the member's position of employment (if any) for the last full month before the month in which the member either commenced the period of active duty to which called or ordered or commenced the performance of duties for the armed forces in another duty status in preparation for the performance of the active duty to which called or ordered, over ``(B) the monthly rate of basic pay payable to the member under section 204 of this title for such month of active-duty service.
The Secretary concerned may pay a member a pay differential under this section for a month in an amount less than the amount computed under paragraph (1) if the Secretary concerned determines that it is necessary to do so on the basis of the availability of funds for such purpose.
A member may not be paid more than a total of $25,000 under this section.
Funding.--(1) Pay differentials under this section shall be paid out of funds that are transferred from the Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund to military personnel accounts for the purposes of this section.
The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of the Treasury shall jointly prescribe regulations providing for transfers of funds in the Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund to the appropriate military personnel accounts to make payments under this section.
In this section, the term `Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund' means the Reservist Income Differential Trust Fund referred to in section 6097 of the Internal Revenue Code.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``212.
Reserves on active duty: pay differential for service in support of a contingency operation.''.
Effective Date.--Section 212 of title 37, United States Code, shall take effect on October 1, 2004, and shall apply with respect to months that begin on or after that date.