This Act may be cited as the ``Drinking Water and Public Health Enhancement Amendments of 1993''.
STATE REVOLVING FUNDS FOR SAFE DRINKING WATER Section 1443 of title XIV of the Public Health Service Act (the Safe Drinking Water Act) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as (d) and by adding the following new subsection after subsection (b): ``(c) State Revolving Funds.-- ``(1) General authority.-- ``(A) Grants to states to establish revolving funds.--The Administrator shall enter into agreements with States having primary enforcement responsibility for public water systems to make capitalization grants, including letters of credit, to the States under this subsection to further the health protection objectives of this Act.
The grants shall be allotted to the States in accordance with this section and deposited in drinking water treatment revolving funds established by the State.
Use of funds.--Amounts deposited in such revolving funds, including loan repayments and interest earned on such amounts, shall be used only for providing loans or other financial assistance of any kind or nature that the State deems appropriate to public water systems.
Such financial assistance may be used by a public water system only for expenditures (not including monitoring, operation, and maintenance expenditures) of a type or category which the Administrator has determined, through guidance, will facilitate compliance with national primary drinking water regulations applicable to such system under section 1411 or otherwise significantly further the health protection objectives of this title.
15 percent of the amount credited to any revolving fund established under this section in any fiscal year shall be available solely for providing loan assistance to public water systems which regularly serve less than 10,000 individuals.
Fund management.--Each State revolving fund under this subsection shall be established, maintained, and credited with repayments and interest.
The fund corpus shall be available in perpetuity for providing financial assistance under this section.
To the extent amounts in each such fund are not required for current obligation or expenditure such amounts shall be invested in interest bearing obligations of the State or of the United States.
The Administrator and the States shall take such steps as may be necessary to insure that amounts made available under this subsection are deposited in State revolving funds and earning interest as promptly as practicable after the commencement of the fiscal year in which such funds are made available.
Grants from revolving funds.--A State may not provide assistance in the form of grants from a State revolving fund established under this subsection in an aggregate amount which exceeds the sum of the interest collected on deposits in such State revolving fund plus amounts deposited in such fund by the State pursuant to paragraph (3).
Such grants may only be made to public water systems owned by a governmental or inter- governmental agency, a non-profit organization, an Indian tribe, or any combination thereof which the State finds to be experiencing financial hardship.
Investor-owned public water systems.--In the case of any public water system not owned by a governmental or inter-governmental agency, a non-profit organization, an Indian tribe, or any combination thereof, the State may provide assistance from a State revolving fund under this subsection only to those systems having the greatest public health needs and financial need.
The State may provide loan assistance to any such system from such a State revolving fund only after making a determination that the system has the ability to repay the loan according to its terms and conditions.
States are authorized to require such systems to identify a dedicated source for repayment of the loans and to impose such other requirements as may be necessary to assure loan repayment.
Specific requirements.--The Administrator shall enter into an agreement with a State under this subsection only after the State has established to the satisfaction of the Administrator that-- ``(A) the State will deposit all grants received from the Administrator under this subsection, together with all repayments and interest on such grants, in a drinking water treatment revolving fund established by the State in accordance with this subsection; and ``(B) no loan or other financial assistance will be provided to a public water system from such revolving fund to be used for any expenditure that could be avoided or significantly reduced by appropriate consolidation of that public water system with any other public water system, except that in such cases such assistance may be provided from the revolving fund for such consolidation.
The Administrator, in consultation with the States and public water systems, shall establish criteria to be applied in determining when the consolidation of public water systems is appropriate.
State contribution.--In the case of grants made after fiscal year 1994, each agreement under this subsection shall require that the State deposit in the fund from State moneys an amount equal to at least 20 percent of the total amount of the grant to be made to the State on or before the date on which the grant payment is made to the State.
Combined financial administration.--Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2), a State may combine the financial administration of a revolving fund established under this subsection with the financial administration of any other revolving fund established by the State if the Administrator determines that-- ``(A) the grants under this subsection, together with loan repayments and interest, will be separately accounted for and used solely for the purposes specified in paragraph (1); and ``(B) the authority to establish assistance priorities and carry out oversight and related activities (other than financial administration) with respect to such assistance remains with the State agency having primary responsibility for administration of the State program under this part.
Fund administration.--(A) Each State may use up to 4 percent of the grants in a revolving fund established under this subsection to cover the reasonable costs of administration of the assistance program under this subsection and of providing technical assistance to public water systems within the State.
For fiscal year 1994, each State may use up to 2 percent of the grants in any such revolving fund for public water system supervision if the State matches such expenditures with at least an equal amount of non-Federal funds (additional to the amount expended by the State for public water supervision in fiscal year 1993).
An additional 1 percent of the grants in such fund shall be used by each State to provide technical assistance to public water systems in such State.
The Administrator shall publish such guidance and promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section, including-- ``(i) provisions to ensure that each State commits and expends funds from revolving funds established under this subsection in accordance with this Act and applicable Federal and State laws, ``(ii) guidance to prevent waste, fraud, and abuse, and ``(iii) guidance to avoid the use of funds made available under this subsection to finance the expansion of any public water system in anticipation of future population growth.
Such guidance and regulations shall also insure that the States, and public water systems receiving assistance under this subsection, use accounting, audit, and fiscal procedures that conform to generally accepted accounting standards.
Each State administering a revolving fund and assistance program under this subsection shall publish and submit to the Administrator a report every 2 years on its activities under this subsection, including the findings of the most recent audit of the fund.
The Administrator shall periodically audit all revolving funds established under this subsection in accordance with procedures established by the Comptroller General.
Needs survey.--The Administrator shall conduct an assessment of financial needs of all public water systems in the United States and submit a report to the Congress containing the results of such assessment within 2 years after the date of the enactment of this subsection.
Indian tribes.--One and \1/2\ percent of the amounts appropriated to carry out this subsection may be used by the Administrator to make grants to Indian Tribes and Alaskan Native Villages which are not eligible to receive either capitalization grants from the Administrator under this subsection or assistance from State revolving funds established under this subsection.
Such grants shall be used for expenditures by such tribes and villages for public water system expenditures referred to in paragraph (1)(B).
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out the purposes of this subsection $599,000,000 for the fiscal year 1994 and $1,000,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997, and such sums as may be necessary thereafter.