This Act may be cited as the ``Underserved Adult and Adolescent Immunization Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) While the United States achieved record levels of immunization in the 1990s and childhood immunization coverage has dramatically increased, certain problems persist within the national immunization system.
The Nation still needs to address persistent disparities in childhood levels of immunization coverage in high-poverty areas.
In addition, immunization coverage rates for adults are well below those achieved for childhood immunizations.
Thus, there is a vital need to step up our activities to immunize underserved adults and adolescents.
Presently, many at-risk adults and adolescents are not getting the vaccines they need, such as influenza, pneumococcal, hepatitis B, chickenpox and mennigitis vaccine.
Moreover, adolescents and certain adult subpopulations (minorities, seniors, the uninsured, persons with chronic diseases) have significantly lower coverage.
This past season's shortage of influenza vaccine emphasized that the United States has no comprehensive flu vaccination plan.
Delays in vaccine production and a haphazard distribution system creates shortages, and drives up vaccine prices.
This past season, much of the available vaccine went to programs that immunize mostly lower-risk people (colleges, workplaces, shopping malls), leaving out the elderly and sick, for whom immunization could make the difference between life or death.
Vaccine-preventable diseases in adults cause staggering deaths and illnesses.
Each year, about 20,000 Americans die due to influenza or influenza-related pneumonia.
Over 90 percent of the deaths occur in persons aged 65 years and older.
Moreover, pneumonia and influenza together are the fifth leading cause of death among older adults.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that the overall cost to society from these vaccine-preventable diseases of adults exceeds $10 billion per year.
The problem is exacerbated by the fact that Federal resources for immunizations have decreased over the last five years.
This unpredictable funding has created uncertainty in State and local planning efforts.
Increasingly, State health departments are facing difficulties in monitoring the effectiveness of immunizations, since the majority of vaccines are delivered in private health care facilities.
Thus, long- range data collection, assessment of immunization rates and strategic planning efforts have suffered.
PROGRAM FOR INCREASING IMMUNIZATION RATES FOR ADULTS AND ADOLESCENTS; COLLECTION OF ADDITIONAL IMMUNIZATION DATA.
Activities of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.-- Section 317(j) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247b(j)) is amended by adding at the end the following paragraphs: ``(3)(A) For the purpose of carrying out activities toward increasing immunization rates for adults and adolescents through the immunization program under this subsection, and for the purpose of carrying out subsection (k)(2), there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2005.
Such authorization is in addition to amounts available under paragraphs (1) and (2) for such purposes.
In expending amounts appropriated under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall give priority to adults and adolescents who are medically underserved and are at risk for vaccine-preventable diseases, including as appropriate populations identified through projects under subsection (k)(2)(E).
The purposes for which amounts appropriated under subparagraph (A) are available include (with respect to immunizations for adults and adolescents) payment of the costs of storing vaccines, outreach activities to inform individuals of the availability of the immunizations, and other program expenses necessary for the establishment or operation of immunization programs carried out or supported by States or other public entities pursuant to this subsection.
The Secretary shall annually submit to the Congress a report that-- ``(A) evaluates the extent to which the immunization system in the United States has been effective in providing for adequate immunization rates for adults and adolescents, taking into account the applicable year 2010 health objectives established by the Secretary regarding the health status of the people of the United States; and ``(B) describes any issues identified by the Secretary that may affect such rates.
In carrying out this subsection and paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (k), the Secretary shall consider recommendations regarding immunizations that are made in reports issued by the Institute of Medicine.''.
Research, Demonstrations, and Education.--Section 317(k) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247b(k)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (4) as paragraphs (3) through (5), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following paragraph: ``(2) The Secretary, directly and through grants under paragraph (1), shall provide for a program of research, demonstration projects, and education in accordance with the following: ``(A) The Secretary shall coordinate with public and private entities (including nonprofit private entities), and develop and disseminate guidelines, toward the goal of ensuring that immunizations are routinely offered to adults and adolescents by public and private health care providers.
The Secretary shall cooperate with public and private entities to obtain information for the annual evaluations required in subsection (j)(4)(A).
The Secretary shall (relative to fiscal year 2001) increase the extent to which the Secretary collects data on the incidence, prevalence, and circumstances of diseases and adverse events that are experienced by adults and adolescents and may be associated with immunizations, including collecting data in cooperation with commercial laboratories.
The Secretary shall ensure that the entities with which the Secretary cooperates for purposes of subparagraphs (A) through (C) include managed care organizations, community based organizations that provide health services, and other health care providers.
The Secretary shall provide for projects to identify racial and ethnic minority groups and other health disparity populations for which immunization rates for adults and adolescents are below such rates for the general population, and to determine the factors underlying such disparities.