This Act may be cited as the ``Law Enforcement Official Protection and Officer John C. Knight Memorial Act of 1999''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) Chicago Police Officer John C. Knight, a man who emulated his father by dedicating his life to preserving public safety, left behind his wife and three children when he was killed in the line of duty on January 9, 1999 by a felon armed with handgun equipped with a laser sight device.
More than any other weapon, firearms pose the greatest threat to our Nation's law enforcement officers.
Between 1988 and 1997, firearms claimed the lives of 92 percent of the 688 officers killed in the line of duty and another 30,705 were assaulted with guns.
The risk to our Nation's law enforcement officers increases when violent offenders possess lethality-enhancing devices, such as laser sights, that are easily accessible and highly unregulated.
Ammunition known as ``armor piercing'' or ``armor piercing incendiary'', which can puncture police body armor, light armored vehicles, ballistic or armored glass and armored limousines, also poses a threat to the lives and the mission of our Nation's law enforcement officers.
Armor piercing and armor piercing incendiary ammunition, designed for use in military rifles, is readily available for virtually unrestricted sale on the civilian market.
The potential uses for such ammunition by violent offenders, terrorists or others against law enforcement personnel or critical components of the national infrastructure presents a serious threat to public safety and national security.
While handguns are the most commonly used weapons in the murders of both law enforcement officers and civilians, current law doesn't restrict the development of future generations of armor piercing ammunition for use in handguns.
TREATMENT OF CERTAIN MILITARY AMMUNITION AS ARMOR PIERCING AMMUNITION; USE OF PERFORMANCE STANDARD.
Section 921(a)(17) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B)-- (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i); (B) by striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting a semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(iii) a projectile which the Secretary has determined is substantially similar in design and manufacture to any ammunition which is or has been designated for use as armor piercing, armor piercing incendiary, or armor piercing tracing by any military or law enforcement authority of the United States; or ``(iv) a projectile which the Secretary finds is capable of penetrating the Executive Protection Exemplar.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(D)(i) Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the Secretary shall promulgate standards for the uniform testing of projectiles against the Executive Protection Exemplar.
The standards shall take into account, among other factors, the effective range of firearms from which the projectile may be fired and the nature of the propellants available for use.
In this paragraph, the term `Executive Protection Exemplar' means the minimum level of armor or other protective material, including ballistic glass but not including body armor, that the Secretary determines is essential to the effective protection of law enforcement personnel and their public safety mission.''.
COVERAGE OF LASER SIGHTS AND LASER-SIGHT EQUIPPED FIREARMS.
In General.--The first sentence of section 5845(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining firearm) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and (8)'' and inserting ``(8)'', and (2) by inserting before the period ``; (9) any laser sight suitable for use as a sight for any firearm (as defined in section 921(a)(3) of title 18, United States Code); and (10) any firearm (as defined in such section 921(a)(3)) on which any laser sight is permanently mounted.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
REGULATION OF THE MANUFACTURE, IMPORTATION, AND SALE OF PROJECTILES THAT MAY BE USED IN A HANDGUN AND ARE CAPABLE OF PENETRATING POLICE BODY ARMOR.
Expansion of Definition of Armor Piercing Ammunition.--Section 921(a)(17)(B) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (iii); (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (iv) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(v) a projectile that may be used in a handgun and that the Secretary determines, pursuant to section 926(d), to be capable of penetrating body armor.''.
Determination of the Capability of Projectiles To Penetrate Body Armor.--Section 926 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d)(1) Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall promulgate standards for the uniform testing of projectiles against the Body Armor Exemplar, based on standards developed in cooperation with the Attorney General of the United States.
Such standards shall take into account, among other factors, variations in performance that are related to the length of the barrel of the handgun from which the projectile is fired and the amount and kind of powder used to propel the projectile.
As used in paragraph (1), the term Body Armor Exemplar' means body armor that the Secretary, in cooperation with the Attorney General of the United States, determines meets minimum standards for protection of law enforcement officers.