This Act may be cited as the ``Bright Idea Act of 2007''.
TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR GENERAL SERVICE LAMPS.
In General.-- (1) Establishment of standards.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy shall initiate a project to establish technical standards for general service lamps.
Consultation with interested parties.--In carrying out the project, the Secretary shall consult with representatives of environmental organizations, labor organizations, general service lamp manufacturers, consumer organizations, and other interested parties.
Minimum initial standards; deadline.--The initial technical standards established shall be standards that enable those general service lamps to provide levels of illumination equivalent to the levels of illumination provided by general service lamps generally available in 2007, but with-- (A) a lumens per watt rating of not less than 30 by calendar year 2013; and (B) a lumens per watt rating of not less than 45 by calendar year 2018.
Manufacture and Distribution in Interstate Commerce.--If the Secretary of Energy, after consultation with the interested parties described in subsection (a)(2), determines that general service lamps meeting the standards established under subsection (a) are generally available for purchase throughout the United States at costs that are substantially equivalent (taking into account useful life, lifecycle costs, domestic manufacturing capabilities, energy consumption, and such other factors as the Secretary deems appropriate) to the cost of the general service lamps they would replace, then the Secretary shall take such action as may be necessary to require that at least 95 percent of general service lamps sold, offered for sale, or otherwise made available in the United States meet the standards established under subsection (a), except for those general service lamps described in subsection (c).
Exception.--The standards established by the Secretary under subsection (a) shall not apply to general service lamps used in applications in which compliance with those standards is not feasible, as determined by the Secretary.
Revised Standards.--After the initial standards are established under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult periodically with the interested parties described in subsection (a)(2) with respect to whether those standards should be changed.
The Secretary may change the standards, and the dates and percentage of lamps to which the changed standards apply under subsection (b), if after such consultation the Secretary determines that such changes are appropriate.
Report.--The Secretary shall submit reports periodically to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Technology, the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, and the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce with respect to the development and promulgation of standards for lamps and lamp-related technology, such as switches, dimmers, ballast, and non-general service lighting, that includes the Secretary's findings and recommendations with respect to such standards.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of Energy may carry out a lighting technology research and development program-- (1) to support the research, development, demonstration, and commercial application of lamps and related technologies sold, offered for sale, or otherwise made available in the United States; and (2) to assist manufacturers of general service lamps in the manufacturing of general service lamps that, at a minimum, achieve the lumens per watt ratings described in section 2(a).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2013.
Sunset.--The program under this section shall terminate on September 30, 2015.
In General.--The Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Commissioner of the Federal Trade Commission, shall carry out a comprehensive national program to educate consumers about the benefits of using light bulbs that have improved efficiency ratings.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2014.
REPORT ON MERCURY USE AND RELEASE.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy, in cooperation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall submit to Congress a report describing recommendations relating to the means by which the Federal Government may reduce or prevent the release of mercury during the manufacture, transportation, storage, or disposal of light bulbs.
REPORT ON LAMP LABELING.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commissioner of the Federal Trade Commission, in cooperation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Secretary of Energy, shall submit to Congress a report describing current lamp labeling practices by lamp manufacturers and recommendations for a national labeling standard.