This Act may be cited as the ``Fit to Serve Act''.
INFORMATION FOR MILITARY RECRUITS ON HEALTHY WEIGHT.
In General.--Commencing not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense may provide for the dissemination of information on healthy weight to potential military recruits.
Covered Information.--The information provided under subsection (a) may include the following: (1) Information on the healthy weight of various populations of potential military recruits, set forth by age, height, sex, and other applicable factors.
Information to assist potential recruits in calculating and tracking body mass index (BMI), and in determining whether they are obese or at risk for obesity.
Information on the risks of obesity.
Information on the importance of healthy weight for military service.
Information on how to achieve and maintain a healthy weight.
Means and Locations of Dissemination.-- (1) Electronic dissemination.--Information may be provided under subsection (a) electronically through the following: (A) Internet websites of each Armed Force devoted to recruiting.
Internet websites of particular units of the Armed Forces, if appropriate.
Internet websites of the military service academies and other appropriate Department of Defense schools.
Internet websites for the Senior Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) and the Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps (JROTC).
Dissemination in writing.--Information may be provided under subsection (a) in written form at appropriate locations to the following: (A) Potential recruits visiting military recruiting locations.
Members of the Armed Forces on active duty.
Cadets and midshipmen attending the military service academies, State-sponsored military academies, institutions of higher education that maintain a corps of cadets, and military preparatory schools.
Participants in the Senior Reserve Officers' Training Corps and the Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps.
JOINT USE AGREEMENTS ON USE OF MILITARY ATHLETIC FACILITIES BY NON-GOVERNMENT CIVILIANS.
Agreements Authorized.--Each Secretary of a military department may enter into joint use agreements with local governments in the vicinity of military installations under the jurisdiction of such Secretary in order to permit use of athletic facilities at such installations by non-Government civilians who reside within the jurisdiction of such local governments.
Protection of Security.-- (1) Exclusion of certain installations.--The Secretary of a military department may not enter into a joint use agreement under subsection (a) with respect to an installation if the Secretary determines that sensitive activities at the installation would make the use of athletic facilities of the installation by non-Government civilians, or the presence of such civilians at the installation in connection with such use, inadvisable.
Use by cleared personnel.--The Secretary of a military department may require in a joint use agreement under subsection (a) that-- (A) a security or other appropriate clearance shall be a condition to the use of the athletic facilities covered by the agreement by non-Government civilians permitted such use under the agreement; and (B) non-Government civilians using such facilities under the agreement shall comply with such security procedures and requirements as the commander of the installation concerned shall establish.
Model Agreement.--The Secretary of Defense may, for purposes of facilitating entry into joint use agreements under subsection (a)-- (1) provide for the development of a model joint use agreement for purposes of that subsection which shall, to the extent appropriate, be based on appropriate model agreements developed by the National Policy and Legal Analysis Network (NPLAN); and (2) authorize the Secretaries of the military departments to develop standardized guidelines on security clearances and other security requirements to be required in connection with the use of athletic facilities by non-Government civilians under such agreements.