EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME OF QUALIFIED LESSEE CONSTRUCTION ALLOWANCES NOT LIMITED TO SHORT-TERM LEASES.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 110(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to qualified lessee construction allowances for short-term leases) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) under a lease of retail space, and''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 110(c) of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (2) and by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).
The section heading for section 110 of such Code is amended by striking ``for short-term leases''.
The item relating to section 110 in the table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking ``for short-term leases''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to leases entered into after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME FOR CERTAIN CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE CAPITAL OF RETAILERS.
In General.--Section 118 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to contributions to the capital of a corporation) is amended by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections (e) and (f), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) Safe Harbor for Contributions to Retailers.-- ``(1) General rule.--For purposes of this section, the term `contribution to the capital of the taxpayer' includes any amount of money or other property received by the taxpayer if-- ``(A) the taxpayer has entered into an agreement to operate (or cause to be operated) a qualified retail business at a particular location for a period of at least 15 years, ``(B)(i) immediately after the receipt of such money or other property, the taxpayer owns the land to be used by the taxpayer in carrying on a qualified retail business at such location, or ``(ii) the taxpayer uses such amount to acquire ownership of at least such land, and ``(C) such amount meets the requirements of the expenditure rule of paragraph (2).
Expenditure rule.--An amount meets the requirements of this paragraph if-- ``(A) an amount equal to such amount is expended for the acquisition of land or for acquisition or construction of other property described in section 1231(b)-- ``(i) which was the purpose motivating the contribution, and ``(ii) which is used predominantly in a qualified retail business at the location referred to in paragraph (1)(A), ``(B) the expenditure referred to in subparagraph (A) occurs before the end of the second taxable year after the year in which such amount was received, and ``(C) accurate records are kept of the amounts contributed and expenditures made on the basis of the project for which the contribution was made and on the basis of the year of the contribution expenditure.
Definition of qualified retail business.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term `qualified retail business' means a trade or business of selling tangible personal property to the general public.
Services.--A trade or business shall not fail to be treated as a qualified retail business by reason of sales of services if such sales are incident to the sale of tangible personal property or if the services are de minimis in amount.
Special rules.-- ``(A) Leases of land.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(B)(i), the taxpayer shall be treated as owning the land referred to in such paragraph if the taxpayer is the lessee of such land under a lease having a term of at least 30 years and on which only nominal rent is required.
Controlled groups.--For purposes of this subsection, all taxpayers treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 shall be treated as 1 taxpayer.
Disallowance of deductions and credits; adjusted basis.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle, no deduction or credit shall be allowed for, or by reason of, the expenditure which constitutes a contribution to capital to which this subsection applies.
The adjusted basis of any property acquired with the contributions to which this subsection applies shall be reduced by the amount of the contributions to which this subsection applies.''
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (e) of section 118 of such Code (as redesignated by subsection (a)) is amended by adding at the end the following flush sentence: ``Rules similar to the rules of the preceding sentence shall apply to any amount treated as a contribution to the capital of the taxpayer under subsection (d).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts received after the date of the enactment of this Act.