This Act may be cited as the ``Theodore Roosevelt National Wildlife Refuge Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Yazoo-Mississippi Delta, located in Holmes, Humphreys, Issaquena, Leflore, Sharkey, Warren, Washington, and Yazoo Counties, Mississippi, popularly known as the Lower Delta, is of critical importance to the Louisiana Black Bear, over 350 species of birds (including migratory and resident waterfowl, shore birds, and neotropical migratory birds), aquatic life, and a wide array of other species associated with river basin ecosystems.
The bottomland hardwood forests of the Lower Delta have been significantly cleared.
Reforestation and restoration of native habitat will benefit a host of species.
The Lower Delta is part of a major continental migration corridor for migratory birds funneling through the midcontinent from as far north as the Arctic Circle and as far south as South America.
The Lower Delta offers extraordinary recreational, research, and educational opportunities for students, scientists, bird watchers, wildlife observers, hunters, anglers, trappers, hikers, and nature photographers.
The Lower Delta is an internationally significant environmental resource that has been neglected and requires active restoration and management to protect and enhance the value of the region as a habitat for fish and wildlife.
The Lower Delta's existing natural, historical, and cultural assets and environmental restoration potential may provide for a large component of the economic revitalization of this area.
The Lower Delta has the Nation's highest potential carbon sequestration storage capacity.
ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF REFUGE.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish as a national wildlife refuge the lands, waters, and interests therein acquired under section 5, at such time as the Secretary determines that sufficient property has been acquired under that section to constitute an area that can be effectively managed as a national wildlife refuge for the purposes set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
The national wildlife refuge so established shall be known as the ``Theodore Roosevelt National Wildlife Refuge''.
Purposes.--The purposes of the Refuge are the following: (1) To restore and preserve native Mississippi River ecosystems.
To provide habitat for migratory birds and the Louisiana Black Bear.
To maximize fisheries on the Mississippi River and its tributaries, natural lakes, and manmade reservoirs.
To provide habitat for and population management of native plants and resident animals (including restoration of extirpated species).
To provide technical assistance to private landowners in the protection, restoration, and enhancement of their lands for the benefit of fish and wildlife.
To provide the public with opportunities for hunting, angling, trapping, photographing wildlife, hiking, bird watching, and other outdoor recreational and educational activities.
To celebrate President Theodore Roosevelt and his 1902 bear hunt in Mississippi, which gave birth to the ``teddy bear''.
To increase natural, cultural, and historical resource education and business.
To achieve the purposes under this subsection without violating section 6.
Notice of Establishment.--The Secretary shall publish a notice of the establishment of the Refuge-- (1) in the Federal Register; and (2) in publications of local circulation in the vicinity of the Refuge.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer all lands, waters, and interests therein acquired under section 5 in accordance with-- (1) the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd et sequentes) and the Act of September 28, 1962 (76 United States Statutes at Large 653; 16 United States Code 460k et sequentes; popularly known as the Refuge Recreation Act); (2) the purposes of the Refuge set forth in section 3(b); and (3) the management plan issued under subsection (b).
Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a management plan for the Refuge.
Contents.--The management plan shall include provisions that provide for the following: (A) Planning and design of trails and access points.
Planning of wildlife and habitat restoration, including reforestation.
Permanent exhibits and facilities and regular educational programs throughout the Refuge.
Public participation.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall provide an opportunity for public participation in developing the management plan.
Local views.--The Secretary shall give special consideration to views by local public and private entities and individuals in developing the management plan.
Wildlife Interpretation and Education Center.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall construct, administer, and maintain, at an appropriate site within the Refuge, a multiagency wildlife interpretation and education center, which shall be known as the Holt Collier Wildlife Interpretation and Education Center.
Purposes.--The center shall be designed and operated-- (A) to provide continuing, natural, cultural and historical resource conservation and restoration educational programs to the public and business development education and assistance for natural resource-based tourism activities; (B) to promote environmental education; (C) to provide an opportunity for the study and enjoyment of wildlife in its natural habitat; and (D) to honor the legendary African American hunting guide Holt Collier.
ACQUISITION OF LANDS, WATERS, AND INTERESTS THEREIN.
In General.--The Secretary shall seek to acquire up to 25,000 acres of land, water, or interests therein (including permanent conservation easements or servitudes) within the boundaries designated under subsection (c).
All lands, waters, an interests acquired under this subsection shall be part of the Refuge.
Method of Acquisition.--The Secretary may acquire an interest in land or water for inclusion in the Refuge only by donation, exchange, or purchase from a willing seller.
Designation of Boundaries.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (A) consult with appropriate State and local officials, private conservation organizations, and other interested parties, regarding the designation of appropriate boundaries for the Refuge within the selection area; (B) designate boundaries of the Refuge that are within the selection area and adequate for fulfilling the purposes of the Refuge set forth in section 3(b); and (C) prepare a detailed map, entitled ``Theodore Roosevelt National Wildlife Refuge'', depicting the boundaries of the Refuge designated under subparagraph (B).
Selection area.--For purposes of this subsection, the selection area consists of Holmes, Humphreys, Issaquena, Leflore, Sharkey, Warren, Washington, and Yazoo Counties, Mississippi.
Availability of map; notice.--The Secretary shall-- (A) keep the map prepared under paragraph (1) on file and available for public inspection at offices of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service in the District of Columbia and Mississippi; and (B) publish in the Federal Register a notice of that availability.
Boundary Revisions.--The Secretary may make such minor revisions in the boundaries designated under subsection (c) as may be appropriate to achieve the purposes of the Refuge under section 3(b) or to facilitate the acquisition of property for the Refuge.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting or preventing, and the Secretary shall not for purposes of the Refuge prohibit or prevent-- (1) the continuation or development of commercial or recreational navigation on the Mississippi River or Yazoo River; (2) necessary construction, operation, or maintenance activities associated with the proposed Yazoo Backwater Pump Project; (3) the construction, improvement, or expansion of public port or recreational facilities on the Mississippi River or Yazoo River; or (4) the construction, improvement, or replacement of railroads or interstate highways within the selection area described in section 5(c)(2), or bridges that cross the Mississippi River, Sunflower River, or Yazoo River.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Refuge.--The term ``Refuge'' means the Theodore Roosevelt National Wildlife Refuge established under section 3.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.