This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Campaign Integrity Act''.
PROHIBITION ON USE OF LABOR ORGANIZATION DUES AND FEES FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
Section 316 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441b) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or any other law, it shall be unlawful for a labor organization to use dues or fees-- ``(A) to make contributions or expenditures with respect to any Federal election; or ``(B) to support or promote any political activity or organization.
As used in this subsection, the term `dues or fees' means, with respect to a labor organization, any amount of dues or fees required to be paid to such labor organization by reason of the employment of the individual who pays the dues or fees.''.
PROHIBITION OF PERSONAL LOANS BY CANDIDATES TO THEIR CAMPAIGNS.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) A candidate for Federal office may not make any loan to a campaign committee of the candidate or otherwise provide reimbursable financial support for the campaign of the candidate.''.
EQUALIZATION OF MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE CANDIDATE CONTRIBUTION LIMITATION WITH LIMITATION APPLICABLE TO OTHER PERSONS.
Persons Generally.--Section 315(a)(1)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(1)(A)) is amended by striking out ``$1,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$2,000''.
Multicandidate Political Committees.--Section 315(a)(2)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(2)(A)) is amended by striking out ``$5,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$2,000''.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTION LIMITATION ON CONTRIBUTIONS FROM PERSONS OTHER THAN IN-STATE INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTS.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), as amended by section 3, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j)(1) A candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not, with respect to an election, accept contributions from persons other than in-State individual residents totaling the same as, or in excess of, the total of contributions accepted from in-State individual residents.
As used in this subsection, the term `in-State individual resident' means an individual who resides in the State in which the congressional district involved is located.''.
SOFT MONEY OF POLITICAL PARTIES.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``soft money of political parties ``Sec.
A national committee of a political party, including the national congressional campaign committees of a political party, and any officers or agents of such party committees, shall not solicit or receive any contributions, donations, or transfers of funds, or spend any funds, not subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act.
This subsection shall apply to any entity that is established, financed, maintained, or controlled by a national committee of a political party, including the national congressional campaign committees of a political party, and any officers or agents of such party committees.
(1) Any amount expended or disbursed by a State, district, or local committee of a political party, during a calendar year in which a Federal election is held, for any activity which might affect the outcome of a Federal election, including but not limited to any voter registration and get-out-the-vote activity, any generic campaign activity, and any communication that identifies a Federal candidate (regardless of whether a State or local candidate is also mentioned or identified) shall be made from funds subject to the limitations, prohibitions and reporting requirements of this Act.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply to expenditures or disbursements made by a State, district or local committee of a political party for-- ``(A) a contribution to a candidate other than for Federal office, provided that such contribution is not designated or otherwise earmarked to pay for activities described in paragraph (1); ``(B) the costs of a State or district/local political convention; ``(C) the non-Federal share of a State, district or local party committee's administrative and overhead expenses (but not including the compensation in any month of any individual who spends more than 20 percent of his or her time on activity during such month which may affect the outcome of a Federal election).
For purposes of this provision, the non-Federal share of a party committee's administrative and overhead expenses shall be determined by applying the ratio of the non- Federal disbursements to the total Federal expenditures and non-Federal disbursements made by the committee during the previous presidential election year to the committee's administrative and overhead expenses in the election year in question; ``(D) the costs of grassroots campaign materials, including buttons, bumper stickers, and yard signs, which materials solely name or depict a State or local candidate; or ``(E) the cost of any campaign activity conducted solely on behalf of a clearly identified State or local candidate, provided that such activity is not a get-out-the-vote activity or any other activity covered by paragraph (1).
Any amount spent by a national, State, district or local committee or entity of a political party to raise funds that are used, in whole or in part, to pay the costs of any activity covered by paragraph (1) shall be made from funds subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act.
This paragraph shall apply to any entity that is established, financed, maintained, or controlled by a State, district or local committee of a political party or any agent or officer of such party committee in the same manner as it applies to that committee.
No national, State, district or local committee of a political party shall solicit any funds for or make any donations to any organization that is exempt from Federal taxation under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
(1) No candidate for Federal office, individual holding Federal office, or any agent of such candidate or officeholder, may solicit or receive (A) any funds in connection with any Federal election unless such funds are subject to the limitations, prohibitions and reporting requirements of this Act; (B) any funds that are to be expended in connection with any election for other than a Federal election unless such funds are not in excess of the amounts permitted with respect to contributions to Federal candidates and political committees under section 315(a) (1) and (2), and are not from sources prohibited from making contributions by this Act with respect to election for Federal office.
This paragraph shall not apply to the solicitation or receipt of funds by an individual who is a candidate for a non-Federal office if such activity is permitted under State law for such individual's non-Federal campaign committee.
(A) No candidate for Federal office or individual holding Federal office may directly or indirectly establish, maintain, finance or control any organization described in section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 if such organization raises funds from the public.
No candidate for Federal office or individual holding Federal office may raise funds for any organization described in section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 if the activities of the organization include voter registration or get-out-the-vote campaigns.
For purposes of this paragraph, an individual shall be treated as holding Federal office if such individual-- ``(i) holds a Federal office; or ``(ii) holds a position described in level I of the Executive Schedule under 5312 of title 5, United States Code.''.
Reporting Requirements.--Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Political Committees.--(1) A political committee other than a national committee of a political party, any congressional campaign committee of a political party, and any subordinate committee of either, to which section 325(b)(1) applies shall report all receipts and disbursements.
Any political committee other than the committees of a political party shall report any receipts or disbursements that are used in connection with a Federal election.
If a political committee has receipts or disbursements to which this subsection applies from any person aggregating in excess of $200 for any calendar year, the political committee shall separately itemize its reporting for such person in the same manner as required in subsection (b) (3)(A), (5), or (6).
Reports required to be filed under this subsection shall be filed for the same time periods required for political committees under subsection (a).''.
Reports by State Committees.--Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Filing of State Reports.--In lieu of any report required to be filed by this Act, the Commission may allow a State committee of a political party to file with the Commission a report required to be filed under State law if the Commission determines such reports contain substantially the same information.''.
Other Reporting Requirements.-- (1) Authorized committees.--Section 304(b)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(b)(4)) is amended-- (A) by striking out ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (H); (B) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (I); and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(J) in the case of an authorized committee, disbursements for the primary election, the general election, and any other election in which the candidate participates;''.
Names and addresses.--Section 304(b)(5)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(b)(5)(A)) is amended-- (A) by striking out ``within the calendar year''; and (B) by inserting ``, and the election to which the operating expenditure relates'' after ``operating expenditure''.
SOFT MONEY OF PERSONS OTHER THAN POLITICAL PARTIES.
Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434), as amended by section 7, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Election Activity of Persons Other Than Political Parties.-- (1)(A)(i) If any person to which section 325 does not apply makes (or obligates to make) disbursements for activities described in section 325(b)(1) in excess of $2,000, such person shall file a statement-- ``(I) within 48 hours after the disbursements (or obligations) are made; or ``(II) in the case of disbursements (or obligations) that are required to be made within 20 days of the election, within 24 hours after such disbursements (or obligations) are made.
An additional statement shall be filed each time additional disbursements aggregating $2,000 are made (or obligated to be made) by a person described in clause (i).
This paragraph shall not apply to-- ``(i) a candidate or a candidate's authorized committees; or ``(ii) an independent expenditure (as defined in section 301(17)).
Any statement under this section shall be filed with the Commission and shall contain such information as the Commission shall prescribe, including whether the disbursement is in support of, or in opposition to, 1 or more candidates or any political party.