This Act may be cited as the ``Unilateral Palestinian Statehood Disapproval Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) As part of the 1993 Oslo Accords, Palestinian Chairman Arafat committed to resolving all outstanding issues with Israel through negotiations.
On July 25, 2000, at the conclusion of the last round of the Camp David negotiations, Prime Minister Barak and Chairman Arafat issued a statement agreeing on the importance of ``avoiding unilateral action that prejudice the outcome of negotiations''.
A critical ingredient to the success of the peace process thus far has been the commitment by both sides to refrain from unilateral actions that undermine the peace process.
Upon his return to Gaza following the conclusion of the recent Camp David negotiations, Palestinian Chairman Arafat stated that the agreement to continue negotiations with Israel lasted only until September 13, ``the date for declaring our independent state with Jerusalem as its capital whether people like it or not''.
A unilateral declaration of a Palestinian state will most likely undermine the peace process.
In this Act: (1) Humanitarian assistance.--The term ``humanitarian assistance'' includes the provision of food, medicine, medical supplies, or medical equipment.
United states assistance.--The term ``United States assistance'' means-- (A) any assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (including programs under title IV of chapter 2, relating to the Overseas Private Investment Corporation), other than-- (i) assistance under part I of that Act; (ii) assistance under chapter 8 of part II of that Act; (iii) assistance for refugees; and (iv) humanitarian assistance not covered by clause (iii); (B) sales, or financing on any terms, under the Arms Export Control Act; (C) the provision of agricultural commodities, other than food, under the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954; and (D) financing under the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945.
NONRECOGNITION POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--It should be the policy of the United States not to recognize-- (1) a unilaterally declared Palestinian state; or (2) any document or other instrument of a unilaterally declared Palestinian state, including any passport or postage.
Diplomatic Efforts To Deny Recognition.--It is the sense of Congress that the President and the Secretary of State should use all diplomatic means to work with the allies of the United States in the European Union, Japan, and other countries to not extend recognition to a unilaterally declared Palestinian state.
Downgrade in Status of Palestinian Office in the United States.--It is the sense of Congress that, should there be a unilaterally declared Palestinian state, the President should instruct the Secretary of State to downgrade the status of the Palestinian office in the United States to an information office, the status it held prior to the Oslo Accords, including the commensurate reclassification and treatment of United States-Palestinian diplomatic contacts, travel, and communication.
PROHIBITION ON UNITED STATES ASSISTANCE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no funds may be made available for the provision of any United States assistance for a unilaterally declared Palestinian state, except for cooperation on security and antiterrorism matters.
UNITED STATES POLICY ON PALESTINIAN MEMBERSHIP IN THE UNITED NATIONS OR OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION.
It is the sense of Congress that the President should direct the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations to oppose and vote against-- (1) the recognition or membership of a unilaterally declared Palestinian state at the United Nations, or any affiliated agency or organization of the United Nations or any other international organization or commission; and (2) the provision of any economic, technical, or other assistance for a unilaterally declared Palestinian state from the United Nations or any affiliated agency or organization of the United Nations, except for humanitarian assistance and cooperation on security and antiterrorism matters.
UNITED STATES OPPOSITION TO PALESTINIAN MEMBERSHIP IN OR ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of the Treasury should instruct the United States Executive Director to each appropriate international financial institution to oppose, and vote against, the membership or recognition of a unilaterally declared Palestinian state in any of the international financial institutions and the extension by such institution of any loan or financial or technical assistance to a unilaterally declared Palestinian state.
UNITED STATES-ISRAEL SECURITY RELATIONS.
Review of United States-Israel Strategic Relations.--Congress urges the President to expedite and upgrade his ongoing review of strategic relations between the United States and Israel.
Report.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to Congress regarding Israel's security needs in the new security environment that would be created by a unilateral declaration of Palestinian statehood.
The President may waive the provisions of section 5, 6(2), or 7 of this Act if the President determines and so reports to Congress that to do so is in the national interest of the United States or advances the peace process.