This Act may be cited as the ``Agricultural Land Preservation Act of 1997''.
TREATMENT OF LAND SUBJECT TO A QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
Estate Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--Section 2031 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the definition of gross estate) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Estate Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.-- ``(1) In general.--If the executor makes the election described in paragraph (4), then, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, there shall be excluded from the gross estate the value of land subject to a qualified conservation easement, reduced by the amount of any deduction under section 2055(f) with respect to such land.
Treatment of certain indebtedness.-- ``(A) In general.--The exclusion provided in paragraph (1) shall not apply to the extent that the land is debt-financed property.
Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) Debt-financed property.--The term `debt-financed property' means any property with respect to which there is an acquisition indebtedness (as defined in clause (ii)) on the date of the decedent's death.
Acquisition indebtedness.--The term `acquisition indebtedness' means, with respect to debt-financed property, the unpaid amount of-- ``(I) the indebtedness incurred by the donor in acquiring such property, ``(II) the indebtedness incurred before the acquisition of such property if such indebtedness would not have been incurred but for such acquisition.
the indebtedness incurred after the acquisition of such property if such indebtedness would not have been incurred but for such acquisition and the incurrence of such indebtedness was reasonably foreseeable at the time of such acquisition, except that indebtedness incurred after the acquisition of such property is not acquisition indebtedness if incurred to carry on activities directly related to farming, ranching, forestry, horticulture, or viticulture, and ``(IV) the extension, renewal, or refinancing of an acquisition indebtedness.
Treatment of retained development right.-- ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the value of any development right retained by the donor in the conveyance of a qualified conservation easement.
Termination of retained development right.-- If every person in being who has an interest (whether or not in possession) in such land shall execute an agreement to extinguish permanently some or all of any development rights (as defined in subparagraph (D)) retained by the donor on or before the date for filing the return of the tax imposed by section 2001, then any tax imposed by section 2001 shall be reduced accordingly.
Such agreement shall be filed with the return of the tax imposed by section 2001.
The agreement shall be in such form as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Additional tax.--Failure to implement the agreement described in subparagraph (B) within 2 years of the decedent's death shall result in the imposition of an additional tax in the amount of tax which would have been due on the retained development rights subject to such agreement.
Such additional tax shall be due and payable on the last day of the 6th month following the end of the 2-year period.
Development right defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `development right' means the right to establish or use any structure and the land immediately surrounding it for sale (other than the sale of the structure as part of a sale of the entire tract of land subject to the qualified conservation easement), or other commercial purpose which is not subordinate to and directly supportive of the activity of farming, forestry, ranching, horticulture, or viticulture conducted on land subject to the qualified conservation easement in which such right is retained.
Election.--The election under this subsection shall be made on the return of the tax imposed by section 2001.
Such an election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
Calculation of estate tax due.--An executor making the election described in paragraph (4) shall, for purposes of calculating the amount of tax imposed by section 2001, include the value of any development right (as defined in paragraph (3)) retained by the donor in the conveyance of such qualified conservation easement.
The computation of tax on any retained development right prescribed in this paragraph shall be done in such manner and on such forms as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Land subject to a qualified conservation easement.--The term `land subject to a qualified conservation easement' means land-- ``(i) which is located in or within 50 miles of an area which, on the date of the decedent's death, is-- ``(I) a metropolitan area (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget), or ``(II) a National Park, National Seashore, or wilderness area designated as part of the National Wilderness Preservation System, ``(ii) which was owned by the decedent or a member of the decedent's family at all times during the 3-year period ending on the date of the decedent's death, and ``(iii) with respect to which a qualified conservation easement is or has been made by the decedent or a member of the decedent's family.
Qualified conservation easement.-- ``(i) In general.--The term `qualified conservation easement' means a qualified conservation contribution (as defined in section 170(h)(1)) of a qualified real property interest (as defined in section 170(h)(2)(C)), except that in applying section 170(h) for purposes of this subsection-- ``(I) the term `qualified real property interest' shall not include any structure or building constituting a certified historic structure (as defined in section 170(h)(4)(B)), and ``(II) the restriction on the use of such interest described in section 170(h)(2)(C) shall include a prohibition on commercial recreational activity, except that the leasing of fishing and hunting rights shall not be considered commercial recreational activity when such leasing is subordinate to the activities of farming, ranching, forestry, horticulture or viticulture.
Sales of qualified conservation easements to qualify.--In the case of an easement which would be a qualified conservation easement but for the fact that the easement was sold to the qualified organization-- ``(I) such easement shall be treated as a qualified easement for purposes of this subsection, and ``(II) references in this subsection to the donor shall be treated as references to the owner of the land to which the easement relates.
Member of family.--The term `member of the decedent's family' means any member of the family (as defined in section 2032A(e)(2)) of the decedent.''
Application of this section to interests in partnerships, corporations, and trusts.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations applying this section to an interest in a partnership, corporation, or trust which, with respect to the decedent, is an interest in a closely held business (within the meaning of paragraph (1) of section 6166(b)).''
Carryover Basis.--Section 1014(a) of such Code (relating to basis of property acquired from a decedent) is amended by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, or'' and by adding after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) to the extent of the applicability of the exclusion described in section 2031(c), the basis in the hands of the decedent.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to estates of decedents dying after December 31, 1996.
GIFT TAX ON LAND SUBJECT TO A QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
Gift Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--Section 2503 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to taxable gifts) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Gift Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--The transfer by gift of land subject to a qualified conservation easement shall not be treated as a transfer of property by gift for purposes of this chapter.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `land subject to a qualified conservation easement' has the meaning given to such term by section 2031(c); except that references to the decedent shall be treated as references to the donor and references to the date of the decedent's death shall be treated as references to the date of the transfer by the donor.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to gifts made after December 31, 1996.
TREATMENT UNDER ALTERNATE VALUATION OF FARM PROPERTY RULES OF QUALIFIED CONSERVATION CONTRIBUTIONS AND LAND SUBJECT TO QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENTS.
Exceptions From Recapture Rules for Land Subject To Qualified Conservation Easement and Qualified Conservation Contributions.-- Subsection (c) of section 2032A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to alternative valuation method) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(8) Exception for land subject to a qualified conservation easement.--If qualified real property is land subject to a qualified conservation easement (as defined in section 2031(c)), the preceding paragraphs of this subsection shall not apply.
Qualified conservation contribution is not a disposition.--A qualified conservation contribution (as defined in section 170(h)) by gift or otherwise shall not be deemed a disposition under subsection (c)(1)(A).''
Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement Is Not Disqualified.--Paragraph (1) of section 2032A(b) of such Code (relating to alternative valuation method) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) If property is otherwise qualified real property, the fact that it is land subject to a qualified conservation easement (as defined in section 2031(c)) shall not disqualify it under this section.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made, and easements granted, after December 31, 1986.
QUALIFIED CONSERVATION CONTRIBUTION WHERE SURFACE AND MINERAL RIGHTS ARE SEPARATED.
In General.--Section 170(h)(5)(B)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rule) is amended to read as follows: ``(ii) Special rule.--With respect to any contribution of property in which the ownership of the surface estate and mineral interests has been and remains separated, subparagraph (A) shall be treated as met if the probability of surface mining occurring on such property is so remote as to be negligible.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply with respect to contributions made after December 31, 1992, in taxable years ending after such date.