SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Farm Assistance Act of 2007''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION LOSSES Sec.
TITLE II--SMALL BUSINESS ECONOMIC LOSS GRANT PROGRAM Sec.
Small business economic loss grant program.
TITLE IV--ASSISTANCE FOR UNEMPLOYED AGRICULTURAL WORKERS Sec.
Food coupons and distribution.
Emergency grants to assist low-income migrant and seasonal farmworkers.
Temporary mortgage rental assistance.
Limit on amount of assistance.
TITLE VI--EMERGENCY DESIGNATION Sec.
In this Act: (1) Disaster county.--The term ``disaster county'' means-- (A) a county included in the geographic area covered by a natural disaster declaration; and (B) each county contiguous to a county described in subparagraph (A).
Livestock.--The term ``livestock'' includes-- (A) cattle (including dairy cattle); (B) bison; (C) sheep; (D) swine; (E) poultry; and (F) other livestock, as determined by the Secretary.
Natural disaster declaration.--The term ``natural disaster declaration'' means a natural disaster declared by the Secretary under section 321(a) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 United States Code 1961(a)) during-- (A) calendar year 2005 due to flooding in the State; (B) calendar year 2006 due to heat or flooding in the State; and (C) calendar year 2007 due to freezing or extreme low temperatures in the State.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Specialty crop.--The term ``specialty crop'' has the meaning given the term in section 3 of the Specialty Crops Competitiveness Act of 2004 (7 United States Code 1621 note; Public Law 108-465).
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of California.
TITLE I--AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION LOSSES SEC.
In General.--The Secretary shall use, of funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation-- (1) $100,000,000 to provide assistance to producers of specialty crops in disaster counties that suffered losses in calendar year 2005; (2) $400,000,000 to provide assistance to producers of specialty crops in disaster counties that suffered losses in calendar year 2006; (3) $420,000,000 to provide assistance to citrus producers in disaster counties that suffered losses in calendar year 2007; and (4) $438,000,000 to provide assistance to producers of other specialty crops in disaster counties that suffered losses in calendar year 2007.
Administration.--Except as provided in subsection (c), assistance required by subsection (a) shall be carried out by the Secretary in the State under the same terms and conditions as the special disaster relief programs carried out for producers that suffered from crop damage and tree losses, and carried out related cleanup, in certain areas of Florida due to Hurricanes Charley, Frances, and Jeanne during August and September 2004, as described in the notice of program implementation relating to Florida citrus, fruit, vegetable, and nursery crop disaster programs (69 Fed.
63134 (October 29, 2004)), with vegetable losses treated as citrus losses under this section for purposes of that program.
Uninsured Citrus Growers.-- (1) Limited assistance.--Subject to paragraph (2), citrus producers on a farm that did not obtain a policy or plan of insurance under the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et sequentes) for the crop incurring the losses shall only be eligible for assistance under this section if the producers agree to obtain a policy or plan of insurance under the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et sequentes) not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act providing additional coverage for the citrus crop of the producers for each of the next 3 crop years.
Amount of assistance.--Assistance under this section provided for citrus producers on a farm described in paragraph (1) shall not exceed 35 percent of the total amount of the documented losses of the producers.
Effect of violation.--In the event that citrus producers described in paragraph (1) fail to obtain a policy or plan of insurance in accordance with that paragraph, the producers shall reimburse the Secretary for the full amount of the assistance provided to the producers under this section.
The Secretary shall use $230,000,000 of funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to make payments to dairy producers for dairy production losses during calendar year 2006 in disaster counties.
In General.--The Secretary shall use $80,000,000 of funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to make livestock indemnity payments to producers on farms located in disaster counties that have incurred livestock losses during calendar year 2006 or 2007, or both, due to a disaster, as determined by the Secretary.
Payment Rates.--Indemnity payments to the producers on a farm under subsection (a) shall be made at a rate of not less than 30 percent of the market value of the applicable livestock on the day before the date of death of the livestock, as determined by the Secretary.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, assistance provided under this section to the producers on a farm (as defined by the Secretary) may not exceed $125,000 for each farm, ranch, processing plant, or dairy operation of the producers.
TITLE II--SMALL BUSINESS ECONOMIC LOSS GRANT PROGRAM SEC.
SMALL BUSINESS ECONOMIC LOSS GRANT PROGRAM.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall use such funds as are necessary of funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to make a grant to the State.
Requirement.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this subsection, the State shall agree to carry out an expedited disaster assistance program to provide grants to qualified small businesses in accordance with subsection (b).
Grants to Qualified Small Businesses.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out an expedited disaster assistance program described in subsection (a)(2), the State shall provide grants to eligible small businesses in the State that suffered material economic losses during the 2005, 2006, or 2007 crop year as a direct result of weather-related agricultural losses to the specialty crop or livestock production sectors of the State, as determined by the Secretary.
Eligibility.-- (A) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under paragraph (1), a small business shall-- (i) have less than $15,000,000 in average annual gross income from all business activities, at least 75 percent of which shall be directly related to production agriculture or agriculture support industries, as determined by the Secretary; (ii) verify the amount of economic loss attributable to weather-related agricultural losses using such documentation as the Secretary and the State may require; (iii) have suffered losses attributable to weather-related agricultural disasters that equal at least 15 percent of the total economic loss of the small business for each year a grant is requested; and (iv) demonstrate that the grant will materially improve the likelihood the business will-- (I) recover from the disaster; (II) continue to service and support production agriculture; and (III) replant agricultural production fields and groves.
Requirements.--A grant to a small business under this subsection shall-- (A) be limited to not more than 2 years of documented losses; (B) be in an amount of not more than 75 percent of the documented average economic loss attributable to weather-related agriculture disasters for each eligible year in the State; and (C) not exceed a total amount of $250,000 for each small business.
Insufficient funding.--If the grant funds received by the State under subsection (a) are insufficient to fund the grants of the State under this subsection, the State may apply a proportional reduction to all of the grants.
Definition of Tree.--In this section, the term ``tree'' includes-- (1) a tree (including a Christmas tree, ornamental tree, nursery tree, and potted tree); (2) a bush (including a shrub, nursery shrub, nursery bush, ornamental bush, ornamental shrub, potted bush, and potted shrub); and (3) a vine (including a nursery vine and ornamental vine).
Program.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Secretary shall use such sums as are necessary of the funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to provide assistance under the tree assistance program established under subtitle C of title X of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 8201 et sequentes) to-- (1) producers who suffered tree losses in disaster counties; and (2) fruit and tree nut producers in disaster counties.
Costs.--Funds made available under this section shall also be made available to cover costs associated with tree pruning, tree rehabilitation, and other appropriate tree-related activities as determined by the Secretary.
Scope of Assistance.--Assistance under this section shall compensate for losses resulting from disasters during calendar year 2005, 2006, or 2007, or any combination of those calendar years.
TITLE IV--ASSISTANCE FOR UNEMPLOYED AGRICULTURAL WORKERS SEC.
The Secretary of Homeland Security shall use such sums as are necessary to provide unemployment assistance in accordance with section 410 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5177) to agricultural workers in the State (including low-income migrant and seasonal farmworkers) who are unemployed due to disasters occurring in calendar year 2007, as determined by the Secretary.
FOOD COUPONS AND DISTRIBUTION.
The Secretary shall use such sums as are necessary of the funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to provide food coupons and surplus commodities in accordance with section 412 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5179) to agricultural workers in the State (including low-income migrant and seasonal farmworkers) who are unemployed due to disasters occurring in calendar year 2007, as determined by the Secretary.
EMERGENCY GRANTS TO ASSIST LOW-INCOME MIGRANT AND SEASONAL FARMWORKERS.
The Secretary shall use such sums as are necessary of the funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to provide emergency grants to assist low-income migrant and seasonal farmworkers in the State who are unemployed due to disasters occurring in calendar year 2007, as determined by the Secretary, in accordance with section 2281 of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 5177a).
TEMPORARY MORTGAGE RENTAL ASSISTANCE.
For the period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act and ending 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall use such sums as are necessary to provide temporary mortgage rental assistance to agricultural workers in the State (including low-income migrant and seasonal farmworkers) who are unemployed due to disasters occurring in calendar year 2007 under the same terms and conditions as the temporary mortgage rental assistance program under section 408(b) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5174(b)) (as in effect on the day before the effective date of the amendment made by section 206(a) of the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000 (42 United States Code 5174 note; Public Law 106-390)).
LIMIT ON AMOUNT OF ASSISTANCE.
The Secretary shall ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that no producers on a farm receive duplicative payments under this Act and any other Federal program for the same loss.
The Secretary shall use the funds, facilities, and authorities of the Commodity Credit Corporation to carry out this Act (other than sections 401 and 404), to remain available until expended.
In General.--The Secretary may promulgate such regulations as are necessary to implement this Act.
Procedure.--The promulgation of the regulations and administration of this Act shall be made without regard to-- (1) the notice and comment provisions of section 553 of title 5, United States Code; (2) the Statement of Policy of the Secretary of Agriculture effective July 24, 1971 (36 Fed.
13804), relating to notices of proposed rulemaking and public participation in rulemaking; and (3) chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Paperwork Reduction Act'').
Congressional Review of Agency Rulemaking.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall use the authority provided under section 808 of title 5, United States Code.
TITLE VI--EMERGENCY DESIGNATION SEC.
The amounts provided under this Act are designated as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 402 of H. Con.