Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Eliminate Colorectal Cancer Act of 1999''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States for men and women combined.
It is estimated that in 1999, 129,400 new cases of colorectal cancer will be diagnosed in men and women in the United States.
Colorectal cancer is expected to kill 56,600 individuals in the United States in 1999.
Research has shown that a high-fiber, low-fat diet can significantly reduce the risk of developing colorectal cancer.
The adoption of a healthy diet at a young age can significantly reduce the risk of developing colorectal cancer.
Appropriate screenings and regular tests can save large numbers of lives by leading to earlier identification of colorectal cancer.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Health Care Financing Administration, and the National Cancer Institute have initiated the Screen for Life Campaign targeted to individuals age 50 and older to spread the message of the importance of colorectal cancer screening tests.
Education helps to inform the public of symptoms for the early detection of colorectal cancer and methods of prevention.
COVERAGE FOR COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING.
Group Health Plans.-- (1) Public health service act amendments.--(A) Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
COVERAGE FOR COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING.
Coverage for Colorectal Cancer Screening.-- ``(1) In general.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage, shall provide coverage for colorectal cancer screening at regular intervals to-- ``(A) any participant or beneficiary over the age of 50; and ``(B) any participant or beneficiary under the age of 50 who is at a high risk for colorectal cancer, or who may have symptoms or circumstances that indicate a need for colorectal cancer screening.
Definition of high risk.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(B), the term `high risk for colorectal cancer' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(pp)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(pp)(2)).
Method of screening.--The group health plan or health insurance issuer shall cover the method and frequency of colorectal cancer screening deemed appropriate by a health care provider treating such participant or beneficiary, in consultation with the participant or beneficiary.
Such coverage shall include the procedures in section 1861(pp)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(pp)(1)) and section 4104(a)(2) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
Notice.--A group health plan under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 714(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements of this section as if such section applied to such plan.
Non-Preemption of More Protective State Law With Respect to Health Insurance Issuers.--This section shall not be construed to supersede any provision of State law which establishes, implements, or continues in effect any standard or requirement solely relating to health insurance issuers in connection with group health insurance coverage that provides greater protections to participants and beneficiaries than the protections provided under this section.''.
Section 2723(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-23(c)) is amended by striking ``section 2704'' and inserting ``sections 2704 and 2707''.
ERISA amendments.--(A) Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
COVERAGE FOR COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING.
Coverage for Colorectal Cancer Screening.-- ``(1) In general.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage, shall provide coverage for colorectal cancer screening at regular intervals to-- ``(A) any participant or beneficiary over the age of 50; and ``(B) any participant or beneficiary under the age of 50 who is at a high risk for colorectal cancer, or who may have symptoms or circumstances that indicate a need for colorectal cancer screening.
Definition of high risk.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(B), the term `high risk for colorectal cancer' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(pp)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(pp)(2)).
Method of screening.--The group health plan or health insurance issuer shall cover the method and frequency of colorectal cancer screening deemed appropriate by a health care provider treating such participant or beneficiary, in consultation with the participant or beneficiary.
Such coverage shall include the procedures in section 1861(pp)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(pp)(1)) and section 4104(a)(2) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
Notice Under Group Health Plan.--The imposition of the requirements of this section shall be treated as a material modification in the terms of the plan described in section 102(a), for purposes of assuring notice of such requirements under the plan; except that the summary description required to be provided under the third to last sentence of section 104(b)(1) with respect to such modification shall be provided by not later than 60 days after the first day of the first plan year in which such requirements apply.''.
Section 731(c) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191(c)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 714''.
Section 732(a) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191a(a)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 714''.
The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 713 the following new item: ``Sec.
Coverage for colorectal cancer screening.''.
Individual Health Insurance.--(1) Part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after section 2752 the following new section: ``SEC.
COVERAGE FOR COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING.
In General.--The provisions of section 2707(a) shall apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in the individual market in the same manner as it applies to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan in the small or large group market.
Notice.--A health insurance issuer under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 714(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements referred to in subsection (a) as if such section applied to such issuer and such issuer were a group health plan.''.
Effective Dates.--(1)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2001.
In the case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining agreements between employee representatives and 1 or more employers ratified before the date of enactment of this Act, the amendments made by subsection (a) shall not apply to plan years beginning before the later of-- (i) the date on which the last collective bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the date of enactment of this Act), or (ii) January 1, 2001.
For purposes of clause (i), any plan amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to any requirement added by subsection (a) shall not be treated as a termination of such collective bargaining agreement.
The amendments made by subsection (b) shall apply with respect to health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the individual market on or after January 1, 2001.
The amendment made by subsection (c) shall apply to contracts for contract periods beginning on or after January 1, 2001.
Coordinated Regulations.--The Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall ensure, through the execution of an interagency memorandum of understanding among such Secretaries, that-- (1) regulations, rulings, and interpretations issued by such Secretaries relating to the same matter over which both Secretaries have responsibility under the provisions of this section (and the amendments made thereby) are administered so as to have the same effect at all times; and (2) coordination of policies relating to enforcing the same requirements through such Secretaries in order to have a coordinated enforcement strategy that avoids duplication of enforcement efforts and assigns priorities in enforcement.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) all Americans should be educated about the risks, prevention, screening, and treatment of colorectal cancer; (2) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Department of Health and Human Services should be commended for launching a coordinated education campaign on colorectal cancer in March of 1999; and (3) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Department of Health and Human Services should track the impact of the coordinated education campaign on colorectal cancer and make information on its progress available to Members of Congress.