Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Access to Women's Health Care Act of 1999''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Women's health historically has received little attention.
A provider of obstetric and gynecological care improves a woman's access to health care by providing primary and preventive health care throughout the woman's lifetime.
Sixty percent of all office visits to providers of obstetric and gynecological care are for preventive care.
Providers of obstetrical and gynecological care are uniquely qualified on the basis of education and experience to provide basic women's health care services.
While more than 37 States have acted to promote residents' access to providers of obstetrical and gynecological care, patients in other States or in Federally-governed health plans are not protected from access restrictions or limitations.
PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE.
In General.--If a group health plan, or a health insurance issuer in connection with the provision of health insurance coverage, requires or provides for a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee to designate a participating primary care provider, and an individual who is female has not designated a provider who specializes in obstetrics and gynecology as a primary care provider, the plan or issuer-- (1) may not require authorization or a referral by the individual's primary care provider or otherwise for coverage of gynecological care (such as preventive women's health examinations) and pregnancy-related services provided by a participating health care professional who specializes in obstetrics and gynecology to the extent that such care is otherwise covered; and (2) may treat the ordering of other gynecological and obstetrical care, including referrals for related care, by such a participating provider as the authorization of the primary care provider with respect to such care under the plan or coverage.
Construction.--Nothing in subsection (a)(2) shall be construed to waive any requirements of coverage relating to medical necessity or appropriateness with respect to coverage of the gynecological and obstetrical care so ordered.
Providers.--A group health plan, or a health insurance issuer in connection with the provision of health insurance coverage, that provides benefits, in whole or in part, through participating health care providers shall have (in relation to the coverage) a sufficient number, distribution, and variety of qualified participating health care providers to ensure that all covered health care services, including specialty services, will be available and accessible in a timely manner to all participants, beneficiaries, and enrollees under the plan or coverage.
Prohibitions.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer in connection with the provision of health insurance coverage, may not-- (1) deny to an individual eligibility, or continued eligibility, to enroll or to renew coverage under the terms of the plan or coverage, for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of this section; (2) provide monetary payments or rebates to individuals to encourage such individuals to access less than the minimum protections available under this section; (3) penalize or otherwise reduce or limit the reimbursement of a provider because such provider provided care to an individual participant, beneficiary, or enrollee in accordance with this section; or (4) provide incentives (monetary or otherwise) to a provider to induce such provider to provide care to an individual participant, beneficiary, or enrollee in a manner inconsistent with this section.
Level and Type of Reimbursements.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a group health plan or a health insurance issuer in connection with the provision of health insurance coverage from negotiating the level and type of reimbursement with a provider for care provided in accordance with this section.
Continued Applicability of State Law With Respect to Health Insurance Issuers.--This section shall not be construed to supersede any provision of State law which establishes, implements, or continues in effect any standard or requirement solely relating to health insurance issuers in connection with group health insurance coverage except to the extent that such standard or requirement prevents the application of a requirement of this section.
PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
In General.--Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999 (Public Law 105-277), is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRIC AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE.
In General.--Each group health plan shall comply with the patient protection requirements under section 2 of the Access to Women's Health Care Act of 1999, and each health insurance issuer shall comply with patient protection requirements under such section with respect to group health insurance coverage it offers, and such requirements shall be deemed to be incorporated into this subsection.
Notice.--A group health plan shall comply with the notice requirement under section 711(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements referred to in subsection (a) and a health insurance issuer shall comply with such notice requirement as if such subsection applied to such issuer and such issuer were a group health plan.''
Individual Market.--Subpart 3 of part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999 (Public Law 105-277), is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRIC AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE.
In General.--Each health insurance issuer shall comply with patient protection requirements under section 2 of the Access to Women's Health Care Act of 1999, with respect to individual health insurance coverage it offers, and such requirements shall be deemed to be incorporated into this subsection.
Notice.--A health insurance issuer under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 711(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements referred to in subsection (a) as if such subsection applied to such issuer and such issuer were a group health plan.''.
PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE UNDER THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 1974.
In General.--Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999 (Public Law 105-277), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRIC AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), a group health plan (and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage in connection with such a plan) shall comply with the requirements of section 2 of the Access to Women's Health Care Act of 1999 (as in effect as of the date of enactment of such Act), and such requirements shall be deemed to be incorporated into this subsection.
Notice.--The imposition of the requirements of this section shall be treated as material modification in the terms of the plan described in section 102(a)(1), for purposes of assuring notice of such requirements under the plan, except that the summary description required to be provided under the last sentence of section 104(b)(1) with respect to such modification shall be provided by not later than 60 days after the first day of the first plan year in which such requirements shall apply.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999 (Public Law 105-277), is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 713 the following new item: ``Sec.
Patient access to obstetric and gynecological care.''.
APPLICATION OF PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRIC AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.
In General.--Subchapter B of chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to other requirements) is amended-- (1) in the table of sections, by inserting after the item relating to section 9812 the following new item: ``Sec.
Patient access to obstetric and gynecological care''; and (2) by inserting after section 9812 the following new section: ``SEC.
PATIENT ACCESS TO OBSTETRIC AND GYNECOLOGICAL CARE.
``A group health plan shall comply with the requirements of section 2 of the Access to Women's Health Care Act of 1999 (as in effect as of the date of enactment of such Act), and such requirements shall be deemed to be incorporated into this section.''