This Act may be cited as the ``Tobacco Accountability Act''.
Establishment.--There is established an independent board to be known as the Tobacco Accountability Board.
Membership.--The Board shall consist of 5 members with expertise relating to tobacco and public health.
The members, including the chair, shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The initial members of the Board shall be appointed by the Secretary within 30 days of the date of the enactment of this Act.
A member of the Board may be removed by the Secretary only for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
Terms.--The term of office of a member of the Board shall be 6 years, except that the members first appointed shall have terms of 2, 3, 4, and 5 years, respectively, as determined by the Secretary.
DISCLOSURE OF TOBACCO INDUSTRY DOCUMENTS.
Submission by Manufacturers.--Not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this Act and thereafter as required by the Board, each tobacco manufacturer shall submit to the Board a copy of all documents in the manufacturer's possession-- (1) relating to-- (A) any health effects, including addiction, caused by the use of tobacco products; (B) the manipulation or control of nicotine in tobacco products; or (C) the sale or marketing of tobacco products to children; or (2) produced, or ordered to be produced, by the tobacco manufacturer in the case entitled State of Minnesota v. Philip Morris, Inc, Civ.
C1-94-8565 (Ramsey County, Minn.) including attorney-client and other documents produced or ordered to be produced for in camera inspection.
Disclosure by the Board.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act and thereafter as required by the Board, the Board shall, subject to subsection (c), make available to the public the documents submitted under subsection (a).
Protection of Trade Secrets.--The Board, members of the Board, and staff of the Board shall not disclose information that is entitled to protection as a trade secret unless the Board determines that disclosure of such information is necessary to protect the public health.
This subsection shall not prevent the disclosure of relevant information to other Federal agencies or to committees of the Congress.
INVESTIGATION AND ANNUAL REPORTS.
The Board shall investigate all matters relating to the tobacco industry and public health and report annually on the results of the investigation to Congress.
Each annual report to Congress shall, at a minimum, disclose-- (1) any efforts by tobacco manufacturers to conceal research relating to the adverse health effects or addiction caused by the use of tobacco products; (2) any efforts by tobacco manufacturers to mislead the public or any Federal, State, or local elected body, agency, or court about the adverse health effects or addiction caused by the use of tobacco products; (3) any efforts by tobacco manufacturers to sell or market tobacco products to children; and (4) any efforts by tobacco manufacturers to circumvent, repeal, modify, impede the implementation of, or prevent the adoption of any Federal, State, or local law or regulation intended to reduce the adverse health effects or addiction caused by the use of tobacco products.
TOBACCO MANUFACTURER BOARD MEETINGS.
Each tobacco manufacturer shall permit a representative designated by the Board to attend and participate in all meetings of the board of directors of the tobacco manufacturer, including any executive session or committee meetings thereof.
Each tobacco manufacturer shall provide the representative designated by the Board a copy of all documents or other information provided by the tobacco manufacturer to any director of the manufacturer who is not an employee of the manufacturer.
The Board, any member of the Board, or staff designated by the Board may hold hearings, administer oaths, require the testimony or deposition of witnesses, the production of documents, or the answering of interrogatories, or, upon presentation of the proper credentials, enter and inspect facilities.
Responsibilities of Tobacco Manufacturers.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, tobacco manufacturers shall provide any testimony, deposition, documents, or other information, answer any interrogatories, and allow any entry or inspection required pursuant to this Act, except to the extent that a constitutional privilege protects the tobacco manufacturer from complying with such requirement.
Prohibited Act.--Section 301 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 331) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(x) The failure to comply with any requirement under the Tobacco Accountability Act.''.
Staff.--The Chair shall exercise the executive and administrative functions of the Board and shall have the authority to hire such staff as may be necessary for the operation of the Board.
Salaries.--The members of the Board shall receive such salary and benefits as the Secretary deems necessary, except that the salary of the Chair shall not be less than level III of the Executive Schedule (5 United States Code 5314).
For purposes of this Act: (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Tobacco Accountability Board.
Manufacture.--The term ``manufacture'' means the manufacturing, including repacking or relabeling, fabrication, assembly, processing, labeling, or importing of a tobacco product.
Tobacco manufacturer.--The term ``tobacco manufacturer'' means-- (A) any person who manufactures a tobacco product; or (B) the Tobacco Institute, the Council for Tobacco Research, the Smokeless Tobacco Council, the Center for Indoor Air Research, or any other trade association or entity that is primarily funded by persons who manufacture a tobacco product.