Amendments.--Part F of title XIV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8921 et sequentes) is amended to read as follows: ``PART F--ILLEGAL DRUG AND GUN POSSESSION ``SEC.
DRUG-FREE AND GUN-FREE REQUIREMENTS.
Short Title.--This section may be cited as the `Safe Schools Act of 1997'.
Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--Each State receiving Federal funds under this Act shall have in effect a State law requiring local educational agencies to expel from school for a period of not less than one year a student who is determined-- ``(A) to be in possession of an illegal drug, or illegal drug paraphernalia, on school property under the jurisdiction of, or on a vehicle operated by an employee or agent of, a local educational agency in that State; or ``(B) to have brought a weapon to a school under the jurisdiction of a local educational agency in that State, except that such State law shall allow the chief administering officer of such local educational agency to modify such expulsion requirement for a student on a case-by-case basis.
Construction.--Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent a State from allowing a local educational agency that has expelled a student from such a student's regular school setting from providing educational services to such student in an alternative setting.
Definition.--For the purpose of this section, the term `weapon' means a firearm as such term is defined in section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code.
Special Rule.--The provisions of this section shall be construed in a manner consistent with the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1400 et sequentes).
Report to State.--Each local educational agency requesting assistance from the State educational agency that is to be provided from funds made available to the State under this Act shall provide to the State, in the application requesting such assistance-- ``(1) an assurance that such local educational agency is in compliance with the State law required by subsection (b); and ``(2) a description of the circumstances surrounding any expulsions imposed under the State law required by subsection (b), including-- ``(A) the name of the school concerned; ``(B) the number of students expelled from such school; and ``(C) the type of illegal drugs, illegal drug paraphernalia, or weapons concerned.
Reporting.--Each State shall report the information described in subsection (d) to the Secretary on an annual basis.
Report to Congress.--Two years after the date of enactment of the Safe Schools Act of 1997, the Secretary shall report to Congress with respect to any State that is not in compliance with the requirements of this part.
POLICY REGARDING CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM REFERRAL.
In General.--No funds shall be made available under this Act to any local educational agency unless such agency has a policy requiring referral to the criminal justice or juvenile delinquency system of any student who is in possession of an illegal drug, or illegal drug paraphernalia, on school property under the jurisdiction of, or on a vehicle operated by an employee or agent of, such agency, or who brings a firearm or weapon to a school served by such agency.
Definitions.--For the purpose of this section, the terms `firearm' and `school' have the same meaning given to such terms by section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code.
DATA AND POLICY DISSEMINATION UNDER IDEA.
``The Secretary shall-- ``(1) widely disseminate the policy of the Department in effect on the date of enactment of the Safe Schools Act of 1997 with respect to disciplining children with disabilities; ``(2) collect data on the incidence of children with disabilities (as such term is defined in section 602(a)(1) of the Individuals With Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1401(a)(1))) possessing illegal drugs, or illegal drug paraphernalia, on school property under the jurisdiction of, or on a vehicle operated by an employee or agent of, a local educational agency, engaging in life threatening behavior at school, or bringing weapons to schools; and ``(3) submit a report to Congress not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Safe Schools Act of 1997 analyzing the strengths and problems with the current approaches regarding disciplining children with disabilities.
``In this part: ``(1) Illegal drug.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `illegal drug' means a controlled substance, as defined in section 102(6) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 802(6)), the possession of which is unlawful under such Act (21 United States Code 801 et sequentes) or the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act (21 United States Code 951 et sequentes).
Exclusion.--The term `illegal drug' does not mean a controlled substance used pursuant to a valid prescription or as authorized by law.
Illegal drug paraphernalia.--The term `illegal drug paraphernalia' means drug paraphernalia, as defined in section 422 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 863), except that the first sentence of section 422(d) of such Act shall be applied by inserting `or under the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act (21 United States Code 951 et sequentes)' before the period.''.
Effective Date.--This Act and the amendments made by this Act take effect 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.