This Act may be cited as the ``Wild Sky Wilderness Act of 2002''.
FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF POLICY.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Americans cherish the continued existence of diverse wilderness ecosystems and wildlife found on their Federal lands and share a strong sense of moral responsibility to protect their wilderness heritage as an enduring resource to cherish, protect, and bequeath undisturbed to future generations of Americans.
The values an area of wilderness offer to this and future generations of Americans are greatly enhanced to the degree that the area is diverse in topography, elevation, life zones and ecosystems, and to the extent that it offers a wide range of outdoor recreational and educational opportunities accessible in all seasons of the year.
Large blocks of wildlands embracing a wide range of ecosystems and topography, including low-elevation forests, have seldom remained undisturbed due to many decades of development.
Certain wildlands on the western slope of the Cascade Range in the Skykomish River valley of the State of Washington offer an outstanding representation of the original character of the forested landscape, ranging from high alpine meadows and extremely rugged peaks to low-elevation mature and old-growth forests, including groves with some of the largest and most spectacular trees in Washington, with diameters of eight feet and larger.
These diverse, thickly forested mountain slopes and valleys of mature and old-growth trees in the Skykomish River valley harbor nearly the full complement of the original wildlife and fish species found by settlers of the 19th century, including mountain goats, bald eagles, black bear, pine marten, black-tailed deer, as well as rare and endangered wildlife such as northern spotted owls and goshawks, Chinook and Coho salmon, and steelhead and bull trout.
An ecologically and topographical diverse wilderness area in the Skykomish River valley accessible in all seasons of the year will be enjoyable to users of various kinds, such as hikers, horse riders, hunters, anglers, and educational groups, but also to the many who cherish clean water and clean air, fish and wildlife (including endangered species such as wild salmon), and pristine mountain and riverside scenery.
Statement of Policy.--Congess hereby declares that it is the policy of the United States: (1) to better serve the diverse wilderness and environmental education needs of the people of the State of Washington and its burgeoning metropolitan regions by granting wilderness protection to certain lower elevation wildlands in the Skykomish River valley of the State of Washington; and (2) to protect additional lands adjacent to the Henry M. Jackson Wilderness designated by the Washington Wilderness Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-339), in further tribute to the ecologically enlightened vision of the distinguished Senator from the State of Washington and former Chairman of the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources (formerly the Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee).
ADDITIONS TO THE NATIONAL WILDERNESS PRESERVATION SYSTEM.
Additions.--The following Federal lands in the State of Washington are hereby designated as wilderness and, therefore, as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System: (1) Certain lands which comprise approximately 106,000 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Wild Sky Wilderness Proposal'', dated August 2002, which shall be known as the Wild Sky Wilderness.
Maps and Legal Descriptions.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall file a map and a legal description for the wilderness area designated under this Act with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Resources of the United States House of Representatives.
The map and description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary of Agriculture may correct clerical and typographical errors in the legal description and map.
The map and legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Chief of the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture.
In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, lands designated as wilderness by this Act shall be managed by the Secretary of Agriculture in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et seq.)
and this Act, except that, with respect to any wilderness areas designated by this Act, any reference in the Wilderness Act to the effective date of the Wilderness Act shall be deemed to be a reference to the date of enactment of this Act.
New Trails.-- (1) The Secretary of Agriculture shall consult with interested parties and shall establish a hiking trail plan designed to develop a system of hiking trails within or adjacent to or to provide access to the wilderness designated by this Act in a manner consistent with the Wilderness Act, Public Law 88-577 (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes).
Within two years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall complete a report on the implementation of the hiking trail plan required under this Act.
This report shall include the identification of priority hiking trails for development.
Repeater Site.--Within the Wild Sky Wilderness designated under this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture may use helicopter access to construct and maintain a joint Forest Service and Snohomish County repeater site, in compliance with a Forest Service approved communications site plan, for the purposes of improving communication for safety, health, and emergency services.
Float Plane Access.--As provided by section 4(d)(1) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(1)), the use of floatplanes on Lake Isabel, where such use has already become established, shall be permitted to continue subject to such reasonable restrictions as the Secretary of Agriculture determines desirable.
AUTHORIZATION FOR LAND ACQUISITION.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture may acquire lands and interests therein, by purchase, donation, or exchange, and shall give priority consideration to those lands identified as ``Priority Acquisition Lands'' on the map described in section 3(a)(1).
The boundaries of the Snoqualmie National Forest and the Wild Sky Wilderness shall be adjusted to encompass any lands acquired pursuant to this section.
Access.--Consistent with section 5(a) of the Wilderness Act (Public Law 88-577; 16 United States Code 1134(a)), the Secretary of Agriculture shall assure adequate access to private inholdings within the Wild Sky Wilderness.
Appraisal.--Valuation of private lands shall be determined without reference to any restrictions on access or use which arise out of designation as a wilderness area as a result of this Act.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall exchange lands and interests in lands, as generally depicted on a map entitled Chelan County Public Utility District Exchange and dated May 22, 2002, with the Chelan County Public Utility District in accordance with the following provisions: (1) If the Chelan County Public Utility District, within ninety days after the date of enactment of this Act, offers to the Secretary of Agriculture approximately 371.8 acres within the Snoqualmie National Forest in the State of Washington, the Secretary shall accept such lands.
Upon acceptance of title by the Secretary of Agriculture to such lands and interests therein, the Secretary of Agriculture shall convey to the Chelan County Public Utility District a permanent easement, including helicopter access, consistent with such levels as used as of date of enactment, to maintain an existing snowtel site on 1.82 acres on the Wenatchee National Forest in the State of Washington.
The exchange directed by this Act shall be consummated if Chelan County Public Utility District conveys title acceptable to the Secretary and provided there is no hazardous material on the site, which is objectionable to the Secretary.
In the event Chelan County Public Utility District determines there is no longer a need to maintain a snowtel site to monitor the snow pack for calculating expected runoff into the Lake Chelan hydroelectric project and the hydroelectric projects in the Columbia River Basin, the Secretary shall be notified in writing and the easement shall be extinguished and all rights conveyed by this exchange shall revert to the United States.