This Act may be cited as the ``National Student Dropout Prevention and Recovery Act of 2000''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Lowering the student dropout rate is one of the most significant challenges facing educators today.
Students must stay in school in order to receive the education they need to succeed in the new economy and contribute fully to American society.
The ability of local educational agencies to lower the student dropout rate has been inhibited by the lack of focus at the Federal level and the limited availability of appropriate dropout prevention-focused curriculum, instruction, professional development, and administrative support services.
According to the National Dropout Prevention Network, it is at the local and community level where school improvements and change occur that will eventually have an impact on the graduation rate of students.
The focus of these efforts should be concentrated on the most successful strategies that research has identified as having an impact on increasing the graduation rate.
These strategies encompass-- (A) systemic renewal; (B) community collaboration; (C) professional development; (D) family involvement; (E) early childhood education; (F) reading and writing programs; (G) individualized instruction; (H) instructional technologies; (I) mentoring and tutoring; (J) service learning; (K) learning styles and multiple intelligences; (L) violence prevention and conflict resolution; (M) career education and workforce readiness; (N) out-of-school experiences; and (O) alternative public schooling.
The National Dropout Prevention Network has found that the strategies described in paragraph (3) have been successful in all school levels from K-12 in rural, suburban, or urban centers.
When schools or school districts develop a program improvement plan that encompasses most or all of these strategies, positive outcomes will result.
It is necessary to develop a number of model dropout prevention programs to fully develop the effective strategies listed above into comprehensive dropout prevention programs.
These model programs should be used as examples by schools across the country that wish to implement similar programs.
Subsequently, a nationwide dropout prevention program, in order to be effective, should be based on these model programs.
Dropout prevention and recovery programs which are proven to be successful in lowering dropout rates need to be disseminated to school and community leaders willing to adapt and support these innovative programs in their schools and community.
SCHOOL DROPOUT PREVENTION GRANT PROGRAMS.
Part C of title V of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7261 et sequentes) is amended to read as follows: ``PART C--SCHOOL DROPOUT PREVENTION GRANT PROGRAMS ``Subpart 1--Model School Dropout Prevention Grant Program ``SEC.
In General.--The Director of the Office of Dropout Prevention and Program Completion shall award grants to public elementary schools, middle schools, and secondary schools that have established and are carrying out school dropout prevention programs to provide those schools with additional resources to develop such programs further, develop methods to assist other schools to implement similar programs, and provide for research on the effects of such programs on the student populations of the schools involved.
Duration.--A grant under subsection (a) shall be awarded for a period of not more than 5 years.
A school that desires to continue to receive funding for the purposes described in subsection (a) shall apply for a grant under the national school dropout prevention grant program under subpart 2.
``A school that receives a grant under section 5311 shall use amounts under the grant to establish and carry out, or further develop, school dropout prevention programs, intervention programs, and recovery programs, including as many of the following activities as possible: systemic renewal, community and family participation, professional development, early childhood education, reading and writing programs, alternative public schooling, individualized instruction, use of instructional technologies, mentoring and tutoring, service learning, instruction that recognizes that students learn in different ways (commonly referred to as `learning styles instruction'), violence prevention and conflict resolution, career education and workforce readiness, out-of-school experiences, and a comprehensive plan for dropout prevention.
APPLICATION; SELECTION OF SCHOOLS; FISCAL AGENT.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--Each school desiring a grant under section 5311 shall submit an application, after review by the local educational agency of the school, to the Director at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Director may require.
Contents.--A school desiring a grant under section 5311 shall submit an application, through the local educational agency of the school under paragraph (1), that contains a description of the current dropout prevention program of the school.
Selection of Schools.-- ``(1) Limitation.--The Director may award grants to not more than 20 schools under section 5311.
Such schools shall have demonstrated success in establishing and carrying out activities described in section 5312.
Allocation.--Grants awarded under section 5311 shall be allocated among schools that meet the following requirements: ``(A) 4 elementary schools that have established and are carrying out early childhood education programs.
4 secondary schools that have established and are carrying out academic intervention programs and mediation programs.
4 secondary schools that have established and are carrying out intervention programs and recovery programs.
4 schools (either elementary, middle, or secondary) that are located in rural school districts and that have demonstrated success in establishing and carrying out 12 or more of the activities described in section 5312.
4 schools (either elementary, middle, or secondary) that are located in urban school districts and that have demonstrated success in establishing and carrying out all of the activities described in section 5312.
Priority.--In awarding grants under section 5311, the Director shall give priority to schools that have demonstrated success in establishing and carrying out the highest number of activities described in section 5312.
Fiscal Agent.--The local educational agency of the school shall act as the fiscal agent for the school and shall accept and administer the grant awarded to the school under section 5311, except that all funds shall be expended at the school level.
``Subpart 2--National School Dropout Prevention Grant Program ``SEC.
In General.--Beginning in the third year of the Model School Dropout Prevention Grant Program under subpart 1, the Director of the Office of Dropout Prevention and Program Completion shall award grants to public elementary schools, middle schools, and secondary schools to enable the schools to implement, or further carry out, effective, sustainable, and coordinated school dropout prevention programs.
Duration.--A grant under subsection (a) shall be awarded for a period of not less than 2 years but not more than 5 years.
``A school that receives a grant under section 5321 shall use amounts under the grant to establish and carry out, or further develop, school dropout prevention programs, intervention programs, and recovery programs, including as many of the following activities as possible: systemic renewal, community and family participation, professional development, early childhood education, reading and writing programs, alternative public schooling, individualized instruction, use of instructional technologies, mentoring and tutoring, service learning, instruction that recognizes that students learn in different ways (commonly referred to as `learning styles instruction'), violence prevention and conflict resolution, career education and workforce readiness, out-of-school experiences, and a comprehensive plan for dropout prevention.
APPLICATION; SELECTION OF SCHOOLS; FISCAL AGENT.
Application.--Each school desiring a grant under section 5321 shall submit an application, after review by the local educational agency of the school, to the Director at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Director may require.
Selection of Schools.--The Director shall establish clear and specific selection criteria for awarding grants to schools under section 5321, including the number of grants to award and the type of schools to be awarded grants.
Such criteria shall be based on school dropout rates and other relevant factors, such as the quality of the existing or proposed dropout prevention program, the number of students who are dropouts, the number of students who are eligible to receive free or reduced price lunches under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act, the number of students who are below their grade level in basic skills, the number of students who are involved in family court or the juvenile justice system, and the number of students who are teen mothers.
Fiscal Agent.--The local educational agency of the school shall act as the fiscal agent for the school and shall accept and administer the grant awarded to the school under section 5321, except that all funds shall be expended at the school level.
``Subpart 3--Additional Requirements for Model and National Dropout Prevention Grant Program ``SEC.
``Each school that receives a grant under section 5311 or 5321, or the local educational agency of the school, shall provide information and technical assistance, including presentations, document-sharing, and joint staff development, to other schools within their school district and to other schools in their State that are desiring to receive grants under section 5311 or 5321, as the case may be.
SCHOOL DROPOUT RATE CALCULATION.
``For purposes of calculating a school dropout rate under subparts 1 and 2, a school shall use-- ``(1) the annual event school dropout rate for students leaving a school in a single year determined in accordance with the National Center for Education Statistics' Common Core of Data, if available; ``(2) the standard method used by the State agency; or ``(3) in other cases, a standard method for calculating the school dropout rate as determined by the Director.
Reporting.--In order to receive funding under subpart 1 or 2 for a fiscal year after the first fiscal year a school receives funding under subpart 1 or 2, as the case may be, the school shall provide, on an annual basis, to the Director a report regarding the status of the implementation of activities funded under subpart 1 or 2 and certification of progress from the eligible entity whose strategies the school is implementing.
Accountability.--On the basis of the reports submitted under subsection (a), the Director shall evaluate the effect of the activities assisted under subpart 1 or 2, as the case may be, on school dropout prevention compared to a control group, to the extent practicable.
``Subpart 4--National Clearinghouse on Effective School Dropout Prevention ``SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE.
``Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this part, the Director shall establish a national clearinghouse on effective school dropout prevention, intervention programs, and reentry programs.
The clearinghouse shall be established through a competitive grant or contract awarded to an organization with a demonstrated capacity to provide technical assistance and disseminate information in the area of school dropout prevention, intervention programs, and reentry programs.
The clearinghouse shall-- ``(1) collect and disseminate to educators, parents, and policymakers information on research, effective programs, best practices, and available Federal resources with respect to school dropout prevention, intervention programs, and reentry programs, including dissemination by an electronically accessible database, a worldwide Web site, and a national journal; ``(2) provide technical assistance regarding securing resources with respect to, and designing and implementing, effective and comprehensive school dropout prevention, intervention programs, and reentry programs; and ``(3) provide professional development opportunities through workshops, seminars, and institutes for educators and program providers responsible for planning, implementing, and evaluating comprehensive school dropout prevention, intervention programs, and recovery programs.
``Subpart 5--Definitions; Authorization of Appropriations ``SEC.
``In this part: ``(1) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of the Office of Dropout Prevention and Program Completion established under section 218 of the General Education Provisions Act.
Intervention programs.--The term `intervention programs' means programs or strategies that are designed to improve academic or personal problems of students that negatively affect the students' performance or ability to remain in school and graduate from school with a diploma.
Prevention programs.--The term `prevention programs' means programs that anticipate, forestall, or relate to cognitive, social, or personal problems of students before such problems impair a student's ability to perform in school.
Recovery programs.--The term `recovery programs' means programs or strategies designed to offer another schooling option to an individual who has dropped out of school.
School dropout.--The term `school dropout' has the meaning given the term in section 4(17) of the School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994.
Subpart 1.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out subpart 1 such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
Subpart 2.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out subpart 2 such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2003 and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
Subpart 4.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out subpart 4 such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.''.
OFFICE OF DROPOUT PREVENTION AND PROGRAM COMPLETION.
Establishment.--Title II of the Department of Education Organization Act (20 United States Code 3411 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``office of dropout prevention and program completion ``Sec.
Establishment.--There shall be in the Department of Education an Office of Dropout Prevention and Program Completion (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Office'), to be administered by the Director of the Office of Dropout Prevention and Program Completion.
The Director of the Office shall report directly to the Under Secretary of Education and shall perform such additional functions as the Under Secretary may prescribe.
Duties.--The Director of the Office of Dropout Prevention and Program Completion (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Director'), through the Office, shall-- ``(1) help coordinate Federal, State, and local efforts to lower school dropout rates and increase program completion by elementary, middle, and secondary school students; ``(2) recommend Federal policies, objectives, and priorities to lower school dropout rates and increase program completion; ``(3) oversee the implementation of subparts 1 and 2 of part C of title V of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965; ``(4) annually prepare and submit to Congress and the Secretary a national report describing efforts and recommended actions regarding school dropout prevention and program completion; ``(5) recommend action to the Secretary and the President, as appropriate, regarding school dropout prevention and program completion; and ``(6) consult with and assist State and local governments regarding school dropout prevention and program completion.
Scope of Duties.--The scope of the Director's duties under subsection (b) shall include examination of all Federal and non-Federal efforts related to-- ``(1) promoting program completion for children attending elementary, middle, or secondary school; ``(2) programs to obtain a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent (including general equivalency diploma (GED) programs); and ``(3) reentry programs for individuals aged 12 to 24 who are out of school.
Detailing.--In carrying out the Director's duties under this section, the Director may request the head of any Federal department or agency to detail personnel who are engaged in school dropout prevention activities to another Federal department or agency in order to implement the National School Dropout Prevention Strategy.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of the Department of Education Organization Act (20 United States Code 3401 note) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 217 the following new item: ``Sec.
Office of Dropout Prevention and Program Completion.