This Act may be cited as the ``Lorton Correctional Complex Closure Act''.
CLOSURE OF THE LORTON CORRECTIONAL COMPLEX.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not later than 6 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, all real property and improvements thereon comprising the Lorton Correctional Complex as of the date of the enactment of this Act (other than any such property retained by the District of Columbia under the Implementation Plan described in section 4) shall be transferred to the Administrator of General Services for disposal in accordance with the Implementation Plan described in section 4.
Prohibiting Placement of Future District of Columbia Prison Facilities in Virginia.--No prison, penitentiary, jail, correctional institution, or related facility of the District of Columbia may be established in the Commonwealth of Virginia after the date of the enactment of this Act without the approval of the Governor of Virginia.
INCARCERATION OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FELONS.
Transfer to Federal Custody.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any District of Columbia felon who is committed to the custody of the Attorney General for a term of imprisonment on or after the date of the enactment of this Act shall be incarcerated in a facility designated by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, in accordance with such rules as the Attorney General may establish to assure that the treatment of District of Columbia felons is similar to the treatment of other individuals under the control of the Director of the Bureau of Prisons.
Transition rule.--In the case of an individual convicted of a felony in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia who is under the custody and control of the Director of the District of Columbia Department of Corrections as of the date of the enactment of this Act, the individual shall be transferred to the control of the Director of the Bureau of Prisons not later than 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Conforming amendment.--Section 4042 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) provide suitable quarters and provide for the safekeeping, care and subsistence and for the protection, instruction and discipline of all District of Columbia felons (as defined in section 3(b) of the Lorton Correctional Complex Closure Act) who are sentenced to death or committed to the custody of the Attorney General for a term of imprisonment.''.
District of Columbia Felon Defined.--The term ``District of Columbia felon'' means an individual convicted in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia of an offense punishable by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year (without regard to the sentence actually imposed), but does not include any individual convicted in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia of a misdemeanor offense, as a juvenile offender, or any person detained pending trial in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia.
Description of Plan.--In accordance with the process described in subsection (b), not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of General Services shall submit to Congress an Implementation Plan for the closure of the Lorton Correctional Complex which shall identify actions with respect to each of the following: (1) The future use of the land on which the Complex is located, including (if appropriate) plans for a regional park at the site.
The need to address the impact of such future uses on local and regional transportation resources.
If appropriate, the transfer of real property and improvements thereon to Federal agencies (including the Bureau of Prisons) for Federal use, the Government of the District of Columbia, or any other governmental entity.
If appropriate, the disposal of real property or improvements thereon.
Changes in law or regulation necessary to effect the purposes of this Act and the closure of the Lorton Correctional Complex.
Such other actions as considered appropriate by the Administrator to effectively implement this Act.
Process for Submission of Final Implementation Plan.-- (1) Development and submission of initial proposal by commission.--Not later than 13 months after the date of the enactment of the Act, the Commission shall develop and submit to the Administrator a proposal for the Implementation Plan.
Review of commission proposal.--Not later than 4 months after receiving the proposal for the Implementation Plan from the Commission under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall submit a proposal for the Plan to the Commission for comment and review.
Comments of commission.--During the 1-month period beginning on the date the Administrator submits the proposed final Implementation Plan to the Commission under paragraph (2), the Commission and each of its members may submit comments on the Plan to the Administrator.
Any comments made by the Commission or any individual commissioner shall be transmitted by the Administrator with the final Implementation Plan under paragraph (4).
Submission of final plan.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to Congress the final Implementation Plan for the closure of the Lorton Correctional Complex.
Automatic Implementation of Plan.--The Implementation Plan submitted by the Administrator under subsection (b)(4) shall take effect at the end of the 60-day period beginning on the day such plan is transmitted to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate.
COMMISSION ON CLOSURE OF LORTON CORRECTIONAL COMPLEX.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Commission on Closure of the Lorton Correctional Complex.
Membership.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members appointed not later than 1 month after the date of the enactment of this Act as follows: (A) The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors shall appoint 5 members, one of which shall be specially qualified by training and experience in matters relating to regional transportation problems and issues.
The Prince William County Board of Supervisors shall appoint 3 members.
The Mayor of the District of Columbia, with the advice and consent of the District of Columbia City Council, shall appoint 2 members.
The Administrator shall serve as an ex officio member.
Continuation of membership.-- (A) General rule.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), if a member was appointed to the Commission because the member was an officer or employee of any government or if a member is appointed to the Commission and later becomes an officer or employee of a government, the member may continue service on the Commission for not longer than the 30- day period beginning on the date the member ceases to be such an officer or employee or becomes such an officer or employee, as the case may be.
Exception.--Service as a member of the Commission shall not be discontinued pursuant to subparagraph (A) in the case of a member who has served on the Commission for not less than 3 months.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term, except that a member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--No member of the Commission may receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of service on the Commission.
Quorum.--6 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; vice chairperson.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by a majority of the members of the Commission.
Director and Staff; Experts and Consultants.-- (1) Director.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, have a Director who shall be appointed by the Commission and paid at the rate of basic pay payable for Level III of the Executive Schedule.
Appointment and pay of staff.--The Commission may appoint such personnel as it considers appropriate without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointment to the competitive service.
Such personnel shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of federal agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties.
Powers.-- (1) Hearings and sessions.-- (A) In general.--The Commission may hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate to carry out its duties under this Act.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Maximization of local involvement.--The Commission shall hold its hearings in a place and manner which maximizes local community involvement, input, and participation.
Powers of members and agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States any information necessary to enable it to carry out its duties under this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission to the extent otherwise permitted by law.
Gifts and donations.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative support services.--The Administrator shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final comments pursuant to section 4(b)(3).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Commission for carrying out its duties under this Act an amount not to exceed $200,000.
In this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of General Services or the Administrator's designated representative.
Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Commission on Closure of the Lorton Correctional Complex established under section 5(a).
Lorton correctional complex.--The term ``Lorton Correctional Complex'' means any District of Columbia correctional, reformatory, or related facility which is located in the Commonwealth of Virginia and which is operated under the authority, control, supervision or management of the District of Columbia Department of Corrections, the Mayor of the District of Columbia, or any other agency or official of the District of Columbia.
Implementation plan.--The term ``Implementation Plan'' means the Implementation Plan described in section 4.