This Act may be cited as the ``General Equivalency Diploma Reform and Improvement Act of 2001''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Since the mid-1970s, the Federal Government and many State and local agencies have encouraged Americans to seek a General Equivalency Diploma (GED) rather than a traditional high school degree.
As the economy now demands higher skilled workers, the General Equivalency Diploma is no longer an adequate alternative to a traditional high school degree.
Economists Stephen Cameron and James Heckman have studied individuals with exam-certified high school equivalents and have made each of the following conclusions: (A) Individuals with exam-certified high school equivalents are statistically indistinguishable in the labor market from high school dropouts.
Individuals with exam-certified equivalents and high school dropouts have comparably poor wages, earnings, hours of work, employment experiences, and job tenure.
Measured by their ability and in their labor market status, individuals who have a General Equivalency Diploma are closer to high school dropouts than individuals with traditional high school degrees.
Even after controlling for ability, men with General Equivalency Diplomas have inferior labor market status than individuals with traditional high school degrees.
Individuals with General Equivalency Diplomas have lower employment rates and less work experience than individuals with traditional high school degrees.
Both anecdotal and empirical evidence suggests that employers and the military discount the General Equivalency Diploma.
There is no cheap substitute for classroom instruction and education programs that focus on obtaining a General Equivalency Diploma as an end in itself are misguided.
Although the rates of teenage pregnancy and early childbearing in the United States have decreased somewhat recently, approximately 3,941,553 adolescent girls between the ages of 10 and 17 gave birth in 1999, and the number of births for 2000 has yet to be determined.
While, as a Nation, we should continue to make efforts to prevent unintended pregnancies, we must also provide pregnant teenagers and young mothers with educational opportunities to help them become productive citizens and good, caring parents.
No Americans, including pregnant teenagers, young mothers, and young fathers, should be provided with a second- rate, inferior education.
STUDY AND REVIEW OF POLICIES.
In General.--The Secretary of Education shall-- (1) conduct a study to review the value of a General Equivalency Diploma (GED) relative to a traditional high school degree; and (2) review the policies and procedures of the Department of Education to determine means by which the Department can reform such policies and procedures to allow the Department-- (A) to cooperate with other Federal agencies to improve the educational opportunities offered to all Americans, including pregnant teenagers and young mothers; (B) to work with States and local educational agencies to promote high quality education for all Americans, including pregnant teenagers and young mothers; (C) to encourage individuals, including pregnant teenagers and young mothers, who already have dropped out of school to return to school to receive additional training; (D) to encourage individuals currently working to obtain a General Equivalency Diploma to enter community or four-year colleges in order to improve their skills and enhance the value of their education credentials; and (E) to encourage the restructuring the General Equivalency Diploma to make it more relevant to current high educational standards.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report containing-- (1) the results of the study conducted under this section; (2) the results of the review conducted under this section; and (3) any recommendations for reform.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $2,000,000 for fiscal years 2002 and 2003.