This Act may be cited as the ``State Criminal Alien Assistance Program II and Local Medical Emergency Reimbursement Act''.
TITLE I--STATE CRIMINAL ALIEN ASSISTANCE PROGRAM II SEC.
This Act may be cited as the ``State Criminal Alien Assistance Program II Act of 2001''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Federal policies and strategies aimed at curbing illegal immigration and criminal alien activity implemented along our Nation's southwest border influence the number of crossings, especially their location.
States and local governments were reimbursed approximately 60 percent of the costs of the incarceration of criminal aliens in fiscal year 1996 when only 90 jurisdictions applied for such reimbursement.
In subsequent years, the number of local jurisdictions receiving reimbursement has increased.
For fiscal year 2000, approximately 360 local jurisdictions applied, and reimbursement amounted to only 40 percent of the costs incurred by those jurisdictions.
Certain counties, often with a small taxpayer base, located on or near the border across from sometimes highly populated areas of Mexico, suffer a substantially disproportionate share of the impact of criminal illegal aliens on its law enforcement and criminal justice systems.
A University of Arizona/United States Reports-Mexico Border Counties Coalition study released in November 2000 reported that the 4 counties located on Arizona's border of Mexico, Pima, Yuma, Santa Cruz, and Cochise Counties, are burdened with this problem-- (A) for example, in 1999, Arizona's four border counties' combined population was 1.1 million, or 17.5 percent of the total population along the United States Reports-Mexico border, but accounted for 11 percent of alien crossings and nearly 40 percent of illegal alien apprehensions along the border; Santa Cruz County had 43 percent of alien crossings and 16.3 percent of illegal apprehensions in the State of Arizona and Cochise County had 21 percent of alien crossings and 56 percent of illegal apprehensions in the State of Arizona.
for fiscal year 1999, it is estimated that, of its total criminal justice budget of $6,000,000, Santa Cruz County spent $1,978,863 (33 percent) to process criminal illegal aliens, of which over half was not reimbursed by Federal monies; and of Cochise County's total law enforcement and criminal justice budget of $14.2 million, Cochise County spent an estimated $4.6 million (32 percent) to apprehend and process criminal illegal aliens, of which over half was not reimbursed by Federal monies; and (C) Santa Cruz County and Cochise County have not obtained relief from this burden, despite repeated appeals to Federal and State officials.
In the State of Texas, the border counties of Cameron, Dimmit, El Paso, Hidalgo, Kinney, Val Verde, and Webb bore the unreimbursed costs of apprehension, prosecution, indigent defense, and other related services for criminal aliens who served more than 142,000 days in county jails.
Throughout Texas nonborder counties bore similar unreimbursed costs for apprehension, prosecution, indigent defense, and other related services for criminal aliens who served more than 1,000,000 days in county jails.
The State of Texas has incurred substantial additional unreimbursed costs for State law enforcement efforts made necessary by the presence of criminal illegal aliens.
The Federal Government should reimburse States and units of local government for the related costs incurred by the State for the imprisonment of any illegal alien.
Purpose.--The purpose of this title is-- (1) to assist States and local communities by providing financial assistance for expenditures for illegal juvenile aliens, and for related costs to States and units of local government that suffer a substantially disproportionate share of the impact of criminal illegal aliens on their law enforcement and criminal justice systems; and (2) to ensure equitable treatment for those States and local governments that are affected by Federal policies and strategies aimed at curbing illegal immigration and criminal alien activity implemented on the Southwest border of the United States.
REIMBURSEMENT OF STATES FOR INDIRECT COSTS RELATING TO THE INCARCERATION OF ILLEGAL ALIENS.
Section 501 of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (8 United States Code 1365) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``for'' and all that follows through ``State'' and inserting ``for-- ``(1) the costs incurred by the State for the imprisonment of any illegal alien or Cuban national who is convicted of a felony by such State; and ``(2) the indirect costs related to the imprisonment described in paragraph (1).
''; (2) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following: ``(c) Indirect Costs Defined.--In subsection (a), the term `indirect costs' includes-- ``(1) court costs, county attorney costs, detention costs, and criminal proceedings expenditures that do not involve going to trial; ``(2) indigent defense; and ``(3) unsupervised probation costs.
''; and (3) by amending subsection (d) to read as follows: ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $200,000,000 to carry out subsection (a)(2) for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2005.''.
REIMBURSEMENT OF STATES FOR COSTS OF INCARCERATING JUVENILE ALIENS.
In General.--Section 501 of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (8 United States Code 1365), as amended by section 103 of this Act, is further amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1), by inserting ``or illegal juvenile alien who has been adjudicated delinquent or committed to a juvenile correctional facility by such State or locality'' before the semicolon; (2) in subsection (b), by inserting ``(including any juvenile alien who has been adjudicated delinquent or has been committed to a correctional facility)'' before ``who is in the United States unlawfully''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Juvenile Alien Defined.--In this section, the term `juvenile alien' means an alien (as defined in section 101(a)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act) who has been adjudicated delinquent or committed to a correctional facility by a State or locality as a juvenile offender.''.
Annual Report.--Section 332 of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 United States Code 1366) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (3); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (4) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(5) the number of illegal juvenile aliens (as defined in section 501(f) of the Immigration Reform and Control Act) that are committed to State or local juvenile correctional facilities, including the type of offense committed by each juvenile.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 241(i)(3)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1231(i)(3)(B)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (ii); (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(iv) is a juvenile alien with respect to whom section 501 of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 applies.''.
REIMBURSEMENT OF STATES BORDERING MEXICO OR CANADA.
Section 501 of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (8 United States Code 1365), as amended by sections 103 and 104 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Manner of Allotment of Reimbursements.--Reimbursements under this section shall be allotted in a manner that takes into account special consideration for any State that-- ``(1) shares a border with Mexico or Canada; or ``(2) includes within the State an area in which a large number of undocumented aliens reside relative to the general population of the area.''.
TITLE II--REIMBURSEMENT OF STATES AND LOCALITIES FOR EMERGENCY HEALTH SERVICES TO UNDOCUMENTED ALIENS SEC.
AUTHORIZATION OF ADDITIONAL FEDERAL REIMBURSEMENT OF EMERGENCY HEALTH SERVICES FURNISHED TO UNDOCUMENTED ALIENS (a) Total Amount Available for Allotment.--To the extent of available appropriations under subsection (e), there are available for allotments under this section for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005, $200,000,000 for payments to certain States under this section.
State Allotment Amount.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall compute an allotment for each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2002 and ending with fiscal year 2005 for each of the 17 States with the highest number of undocumented aliens.
The amount of such allotment for each such State for a fiscal year shall bear the same ratio to the total amount available for allotments under subsection (a) for the fiscal year as the ratio of the number of undocumented aliens in the State in the fiscal year bears to the total of such numbers for all such States for such fiscal year.
The amount of allotment to a State provided under this paragraph for a fiscal year that is not paid out under subsection (c) shall be available for payment during the subsequent fiscal year.
Determination.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the number of undocumented aliens in a State under this section shall be determined based on estimates of the resident illegal alien population residing in each State prepared by the Statistics Division of the Immigration and Naturalization Service as of October 1992 (or as of such later date if such date is at least 1 year before the beginning of the fiscal year involved).
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--From the allotments made under subsection (b) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall pay to each State amounts described in a State plan, submitted to the Secretary, under which the amounts so allotted will be paid to local governments, hospitals, and related providers of emergency health services to undocumented aliens in a manner that-- (A) takes into account-- (i) each eligible local government's, hospital's or related provider's payments under the State plan approved under title XIX of the Social Security Act for emergency medical services described in section 1903(v)(2)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396b(v)(2)(A)) for such fiscal year; or (ii) an appropriate alternative proxy for measuring the volume of emergency health services provided to undocumented aliens by eligible local governments, hospitals, and related providers for such fiscal year; and (B) provides special consideration for local governments, hospitals, and related providers located in-- (i) a county that shares a border with Mexico or Canada; or (ii) an area in which a large number of undocumented aliens reside relative to the general population of the area.
Special rules.--For purposes of this subsection: (A) A provider shall be considered to be ``related'' to a hospital to the extent that the provider furnishes emergency health services to an individual for whom the hospital also furnishes emergency health services.
Amounts paid under this subsection shall not duplicate payments made under title XIX of the Social Security Act for the provision of emergency medical services described in section 1903(v)(2)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396b(v)(2)(A)).
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Hospital.--The term ``hospital'' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(e)).
Provider.--The term ``provider'' includes a physician, another health care professional, and an entity that furnishes emergency ambulance services.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term ``State'' means the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005.