This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Fair Federal Compensation Act of 2002''.
TITLE I--DEDICATED INFRASTRUCTURE ACCOUNT SEC.
There is established in the general fund of the District of Columbia an account to be known as the Dedicated Infrastructure Account (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Account''), which shall consist of the following amounts: (1) Amounts deposited pursuant to section 102.
Such other amounts as may be deposited pursuant to District of Columbia law.
Interest earned on amounts in the account.
DEPOSIT OF REVENUE OBTAINED UNDER NONRESIDENT WAGE TAX.
All amounts obtained by the District of Columbia which are attributable directly to the imposition and withholding of the nonresident wage tax under title II shall be deposited into the Account.
USE OF AMOUNTS IN ACCOUNT.
In General.--Amounts in the Account may be used only for the following purposes: (1) Building and facility maintenance, construction, and capital improvement projects for District of Columbia public schools and public charter schools.
Transportation activities, including the payment of the local share of participation in public transportation activities and road construction and improvement projects.
Information technology improvements for the District government.
Debt service payments on bonds, notes, and other obligations of the District government.
Availability of Funds.--Funds appropriated or otherwise made available from the Account shall remain available until expended.
TITLE II--IMPOSITION AND WITHHOLDING OF NONRESIDENT WAGE TAX SEC.
IMPOSITION AND WITHHOLDING OF NONRESIDENT WAGE TAX.
Imposition of Tax.--Every nonresident individual employed in the District of Columbia is subject to a tax equal to 2 percent of wages from employment in the District of Columbia and 2 percent of net earnings from self-employment in the District of Columbia, so long as there is a corresponding Federal credit.
Exception.--Individuals excluded from the definition of ``resident'' under the second sentence of section 47-1801.4(17), District of Columbia Code, partners in partnerships and sole proprietors subject to tax under sections 47-1808.1 through 47-1808.6, District of Columbia Code, and members of the military service on active duty are not subject to the tax imposed in this section.
Assessment and Collection of Non-Resident Wage Tax.--Every employer making payment of wages and every nonresident partner and sole proprietor of unincorporated businesses located in the District shall deduct and withhold the nonresident wage tax imposed by this section and make returns of tax in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia.
Definitions.-- (1) Employer.--The term ``employer'' has the meaning given such term in section 3401(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Employment in the district of columbia and self- employment in the district of columbia.--The terms ``employment in the District of Columbia'' and ``self-employment in the District of Columbia'' shall mean employment or self-employment involving labor or personal services performed in the District of Columbia during the taxable year except that such terms shall not include labor or personal services performed by a nonresident in the District of Columbia for a period not exceeding 45 days during the taxable year.
Net earnings from self-employment.--The term ``net earnings from self-employment'' shall mean such net earnings as defined in section 1402 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Nonresident.--The term ``nonresident'' has the meaning given such term in section 47-1801.4(18), District of Columbia Code.
Wages.--The term ``wages'' has the meaning given such term in section 3401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
FEDERAL CREDIT CORRESPONDING TO IMPOSITION OF NONRESIDENT WAGE TAX.
Section 31 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to determination of tax liability) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Tax Withheld at Source on Nonresidents of the District of Columbia.-- ``(1) In general.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle an amount equal to the amount withheld at source under section 201 of the District of Columbia Fair Federal Compensation Act of 2002 (relating to the withholding of tax on nonresidents of the District of Columbia employed within the District).
No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any tax for which credit is allowed under this subsection.
Administration.--The Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, administer the credit allowed under paragraph (1) in a way which provides the benefit of the credit without any requirement to claim the credit on the taxpayer's return.''.
This title and the amendments made by this title shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.