This Act may be cited as the ``Start-Up Success Accounts Act of 2001''.
In General.--Subpart C of part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to taxable year for which deductions taken) is amended by inserting after section 468B the following new section: ``SEC.
Deduction Allowed.--In the case of a taxpayer which is an eligible small business, there shall be allowed as a deduction for any taxable year the amount paid in cash by such taxpayer to a Start-up Success Account (hereafter in this section also referred to as an `SUSA Account').
Limitation.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount which a taxpayer may pay into the SUSA Account for any taxable year shall not exceed whichever of the following is the least: ``(A) 20 percent of so much of the taxable income of the taxpayer (determined without regard to this section) which is attributable to any trade or business.
$100,000, reduced by the aggregate amount paid by the taxpayer (and all related persons) into SUSA accounts for all prior taxable years.
Deduction allowed only during startup period.--No deduction shall be allowed under this section with respect to any eligible small business for any taxable year after the 5th taxable year that such business (or any predecessor) is engaged in a trade or business.
Dollar limitation on controlled groups.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1)-- ``(i) all component members of a controlled group shall be treated as one taxpayer, and ``(ii) the Secretary shall apportion the dollar limitations contained in paragraph (1) among the component members of such controlled group in such manner as he shall by regulations prescribe.
Controlled group defined.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `controlled group' has the meaning given such term by section 1563(a); except that, for such purposes, `more than 50 percent' shall be substituted for `at least 80 percent' each place it appears in section 1563(a)(1).
Partnerships and s corporations.--In the case of a partnership, the limitation under paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to the partnership and each partner.
A similar rule shall apply in the case of an S corporation and its shareholders.
Related persons.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(C), a person (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as the `related person') is related to any person if the related person bears a relationship to such person specified in section 267(b) or 707(b)(1), or the related person and such person are engaged in trades or businesses under common control (within the meaning of subsections (a) and (b) of section 52.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, in applying section 267(b) or 707(b)(1), `10 percent' shall be substituted for `50 percent'.
Eligible Small Business.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible small business' means, with respect to any taxable year, any person actively engaged in a trade or business if for all prior taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999, the taxpayer (or any predecessor) met the $2,000,000 gross receipts test of paragraph (2).
In the case of a taxpayer to which section 469 applies, such term shall not include any trade or business which is a passive activity (within the meaning of section 469(c)) of the taxpayer.
$2,000,000 gross receipts tests.--A person meets the $2,000,000 gross receipts tests of this paragraph for any prior taxable year if such person would meet the test of section 448(c) were such section applied by substituting `$2,000,000' for `$5,000,000'.
Start-up Success Account.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The terms `Start-up Success Account' and `SUSA Account' means a trust created or organized in the United States for the exclusive benefit of an eligible small business, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted for any taxable year in excess of the amount allowed as a deduction under subsection (a) for such year.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which such person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
The assets of the trust consist entirely of cash or of obligations which have adequate stated interest (as defined in section 1274(c)(2)) and which pay such interest not less often than annually.
All income of the trust is distributed currently to the grantor.
The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
Account taxed as grantor trust.--The grantor of an SUSA Account shall be treated for purposes of this title as the owner of such Account and shall be subject to tax thereon in accordance with subpart E of part I of subchapter J of this chapter (relating to grantors and others treated as substantial owners).
Inclusion of Amounts Distributed.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), there shall be includible in the gross income of the taxpayer for any taxable year-- ``(A) any amount distributed from an SUSA Account of the taxpayer during such taxable year (to the extent not previously included in gross income), and ``(B) any deemed distribution under-- ``(i) subsection (f)(1) (relating to deposits not distributed within 5 years), ``(ii) subsection (f)(2) (relating to cessation in trade or business), and ``(iii) subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (f)(3) (relating to prohibited transactions and pledging account as security).
Exceptions.--Gross income shall not include the distribution of any contribution paid during a taxable year to an SUSA Account to the extent that such contribution exceeds the limitation applicable under subsection (b) if requirements similar to the requirements of section 408(d)(4) are met.
Exclusion from self-employment tax.--Amounts included in gross income under this subsection shall not be included in determining net earnings from self-employment under section 1402.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Tax on deposits in account which are not distributed within 5 years.-- ``(A) In general.--If, at the close of any taxable year, there is a nonqualified balance in any SUSA Account-- ``(i) there shall be deemed distributed from such Account during such taxable year an amount equal to such balance, and ``(ii) the taxpayer's tax imposed by this chapter for such taxable year shall be increased by 10 percent of such deemed distribution.
The preceding sentence shall not apply if an amount equal to such nonqualified balance is distributed from such Account to the taxpayer before the due date (including extensions) for filing the return of tax imposed by this chapter for such year (or, if earlier, the date the taxpayer files such return for such year).
Nonqualified balance.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `nonqualified balance' means any balance in the Account on the last day of the taxable year which is attributable to amounts deposited in such Account before the 4th preceding taxable year.
Ordering rule.--For purposes of this paragraph, distributions from an SUSA Account shall be treated as made from deposits in the order in which such deposits were made, beginning with the earliest deposits.
Cessation in trade or business.--At the close of the first disqualification period after a period for which the taxpayer was engaged in the trade or business referred to in subsection (a), there shall be deemed distributed from the SUSA Account (if any) of the taxpayer an amount equal to the balance in such Account at the close of such disqualification period.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `disqualification period' means any period of 2 consecutive taxable years for which the taxpayer is not engaged in the trade or business referred to in subsection (a).
Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the following rules shall apply for purposes of this section: ``(A) Section 408(e)(2) (relating to loss of exemption of account where individual engages in prohibited transaction).
Section 408(e)(4) (relating to effect of pledging account as security).
Section 408(g) (relating to community property laws).
Section 408(h) (relating to custodial accounts).
Time when payments deemed made.--For purposes of this section, a taxpayer shall be deemed to have made a payment to an SUSA Account on the last day of a taxable year if such payment is made on account of such taxable year and is made within 3\1/2\ months after the close of such taxable year.
Reports.--The trustee of an SUSA Account shall make such reports regarding such Account to the Secretary and to the person for whose benefit the Account is maintained with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require under regulations.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such persons at such time and in such manner as may be required by those regulations.''.
Tax on Excess Contributions.-- (1) Subsection (a) of section 4973 of such Code (relating to tax on certain excess contributions) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (3), by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5), and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) an SUSA Account (within the meaning of section 468C(d)), or''.
Section 4973 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Excess Contributions to SUSA Accounts.--For purposes of this section, in the case of SUSA Accounts (within the meaning of section 468C(d)), the term `excess contributions' means the amount by which the amount contributed for the taxable year to the Account exceeds the amount which may be contributed to the Account under section 468C(b) for such taxable year.
For purposes of this subsection, any contribution which is distributed out of the SUSA Account in a distribution to which section 468C(e)(2)(B) applies shall be treated as an amount not contributed.''.
Tax on Prohibited Transactions.-- (1) Subsection (c) of section 4975 of such Code (relating to prohibited transactions) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Special rule for susa accounts.--A person for whose benefit an SUSA Account (within the meaning of section 468C(d)) is established shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such Account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if, with respect to such transaction, the account ceases to be an SUSA Account by reason of the application of section 468C(f)(3)(A) to such Account.''.
Paragraph (1) of section 4975(e) of such Code is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (E) and (F) as subparagraphs (F) and (G), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) an SUSA Account described in section 468C(d),''.
Failure To Provide Reports on SUSA Accounts.--Paragraph (2) of section 6693(a) of such Code (relating to failure to provide reports on certain tax-favored accounts or annuities) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as subparagraphs (D) and (E), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph: ``(C) section 468C(g) (relating to SUSA Accounts),''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart C of part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 468B the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.