This Act may be cited as the ``National Clean Water Trust Fund Act of 2000''.
NATIONAL CLEAN WATER TRUST FUND.
Section 309 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1319) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) National Clean Water Trust Fund.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury a National Clean Water Trust Fund (referred to in this subsection as the `Fund') consisting of amounts transferred to the Fund under paragraph (2) and amounts credited to the Fund under paragraph (3).
Transfer of amounts.--For fiscal year 2001, and each fiscal year thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Fund an amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the total amount deposited in the general fund of the Treasury in the preceding fiscal year from fines, penalties, and other funds obtained through judgments from courts of the United States for enforcement actions conducted under this section and section 505(a)(1), excluding any amounts ordered to be used to carry out mitigation projects under this section or section 505(a).
Investment of amounts.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest in interest-bearing obligations of the United States such portion of the Fund as is not, in the Secretary's judgment, required to meet current withdrawals.
Administration.--The obligations shall be acquired and sold and interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, the obligations shall be credited to the Fund in accordance with section 9602 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Use of amounts for remedial projects.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), amounts in the Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriations Acts, to the Administrator to carry out projects to restore and recover waters of the United States from damage resulting from violations of this Act that are subject to enforcement actions under this section or from the discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States, including-- ``(i) soil and water conservation projects; ``(ii) wetland restoration projects; and ``(iii) such other similar projects as the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
Condition for use of funds.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available under subparagraph (A) only for a project conducted in the watershed, or in a watershed adjacent to the watershed, in which a violation of this Act described in subparagraph (A) results in the institution of an enforcement action.
Selection of projects.-- ``(A) Priority.--In selecting projects to carry out under this subsection, the Administrator shall give priority to a project described in paragraph (4) that is located in the watershed, or in a watershed adjacent to the watershed, in which there occurred a violation under this Act for which an enforcement action was brought that resulted in the payment of any amount into the general fund of the Treasury.
Consultation with states.--In selecting a project to carry out under this section, the Administrator shall consult with the State in which the Administrator is considering carrying out the project.
Allocation of amounts.--In determining an amount to allocate to carry out a project to restore and recover waters of the United States from damage described in paragraph (4), the Administrator shall, in the case of a priority project described in subparagraph (A), take into account the total amount deposited in the general fund of the Treasury as a result of enforcement actions conducted with respect to the violation under this section or section 505(a)(1).
Implementation.--The Administrator may carry out a project under this subsection directly or by making grants to, or entering into contracts with, another Federal agency, a State agency, a political subdivision of a State, or any other public or private entity.
Report to congress.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subsection, and every 2 years thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to Congress a report on implementation of this subsection.''.
USE OF CIVIL PENALTIES FOR MITIGATION PROJECTS.
In General.--Section 309(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1319(d)) is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``The court may order that a civil penalty be used for carrying out mitigation, restoration, or other projects that are consistent with the purposes of this Act and that enhance public health or the environment.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 505(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1365(a)) is amended in the last sentence by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, including ordering the use of a civil penalty for carrying out mitigation, restoration, or other projects in accordance with section 309(d)''.