SCRAP TIRE TRUST FUND.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Scrap Tire Trust Fund'' (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Trust Fund'').
Accounts in trust fund.--The Trust Fund shall consist of-- (A) a Scrap Tire Reduction Account; and (B) a Scrap Tire Recycling Account.
Each such Account shall consist of such amounts as may be appropriated to it as provided in this section.
Scrap Tire Reduction Account.-- (1) Appropriation to account.--There are hereby appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to the Scrap Tire Reduction Account amounts equivalent to the following amounts: (A) 87 percent of amounts received during 1993 through 1997 from the fees imposed by subsection (d).
77 percent of amounts received during 1998 through 2001 from such fees.
67 percent of amounts received during 2002 through 2004 from such fees.
Expenditures from account.--Amounts in the Scrap Tire Reduction Account shall be available, as provided by appropriation Acts-- (A) for making expenditures to provide financial assistance to States for purposes of conducting surveys of current scrap tire piles, developing State tire management plans, and carrying out the portion of such State tire plans relating to reduction and elimination of existing scrap tire piles, including recycling, recovering, and reusing scrap tires; and (B) for payment of expenses for administration of such financial assistance (but not in excess of 5 percent of the Account may be used for such purpose).
Scrap Tire Recycling Account.-- (1) Appropriation to account.--There are hereby appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to the Scrap Tire Recycling Account amounts equivalent to the following amounts: (A) 13 percent of amounts received during 1993 through 1997 from the fees imposed by subsection (d).
23 percent of amounts received during 1998 through 2001 from such fees.
33 percent of amounts received during 2002 through 2004 from such fees.
Expenditures from account.--Amounts in the Scrap Tire Recycling Account shall be available, as provided by appropriation Acts-- (A) for making expenditures to provide financial assistance to States to carry out the portion of State tire management plans relating to the current and future disposal of scrap tires, including recycling, recovering, and reusing new scrap tires; and (B) for payment of expenses for administration of such financial assistance (but not in excess of 5 percent of the Account may be used for such purpose).
Imposition and Rate of Fee.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator shall impose and collect a fee of $.85 on each new tire sold by the manufacturer or importer, regardless of intended use, during the period beginning on January 1, 1993, and ending on December 31, 2004.
The fee shall be due and payable by the manufacturer or importer sixty days after sale of the tire.
The Administrator shall deposit amounts received from such fees into the General Fund of the Treasury.
Tires on imported articles.--For purposes of paragraph (1), if an article imported in the United States is equipped with tires-- (A) the importer of the article shall be treated as the importer of the tires with which such article is equipped; and (B) the sale of the article by the importer thereof shall be treated as the sale of the tires with which such article is equipped.
This paragraph shall not apply with respect to the sale of an automobile bus chassis or an automobile bus body.
Transfers to Trust Fund.--The amounts appropriated by subsections (b)(1) and (c)(1) shall be transferred at least monthly from the General Fund of the Treasury to the Trust Fund on the basis of estimates made by the Secretary of the Treasury of the amounts referred to in such subsections.
Adjustments shall be made in the amount subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess of or less than the amounts required to be transferred.
Investment.--(1) The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the Trust Fund as is not, in his judgment, required to meet current withdrawals.
Such investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States and may be acquired-- (A) on original issue at the issue price; or (B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Any obligation acquired by the Trust Fund may be sold by the Secretary at the market price.
The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Trust Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Trust Fund.