This Act may be cited as the ``Civil Aviation Research and Development Authorization Act of 1999''.
Section 48102(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4)(J); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(6) for fiscal year 2000, $208,416,100 including-- ``(A) $17,269,000 for system development and infrastructure projects and activities; ``(B) $33,042,500 for capacity and air traffic management technology projects and activities; ``(C) $11,265,400 for communications, navigation, and surveillance projects and activities; ``(D) $15,765,000 for weather projects and activities; ``(E) $6,358,200 for airport technology projects and activities; ``(F) $39,639,000 for aircraft safety technology projects and activities; ``(G) $53,218,000 for system security technology projects and activities; ``(H) $26,207,000 for human factors and aviation medicine projects and activities; ``(I) $3,481,000 for environment and energy projects and activities; and ``(J) $2,171,000 for innovative/cooperative research projects and activities, of which $750,000 shall be for carrying out subsection (h) of this section; and ``(7) for fiscal year 2001, $222,950,000.''.
BUDGET DESIGNATION FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES.
Section 48102 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after subsection (f) the following new subsection: ``(g) Designation of Activities.--(1) The amounts appropriated under subsection (a) are for the support of all research and development activities carried out by the Federal Aviation Administration that fall within the categories of basic research, applied research, and development, including the design and development of prototypes, in accordance with the classifications of the Office of Management and Budget Circular A-11 (Budget Formulation/Submission Process).
The Department of Transportation's annual budget request for the Federal Aviation Administration shall identify all of the activities carried out by the Administration within the categories of basic research, applied research, and development, as classified by the Office of Management and Budget Circular A-11.
Each activity in the categories of basic research, applied research, and development shall be identified regardless of the budget category in which it appears in the budget request.''.
NATIONAL AVIATION RESEARCH PLAN.
Section 44501(c) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(B)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (iii); (B) by striking the period at the end of clause (iv) and inserting in lieu thereof ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(v) highlight the research and development technology transfer activities that promote technology sharing among government, industry, and academia through the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980.
''; and (2) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``The report shall be prepared in accordance with requirements of section 1116 of title 31, United States Code.''
after ``effect for the prior fiscal year.''.
INTEGRATED SAFETY RESEARCH PLAN.
Requirement.--Not later than March 1, 2000, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall jointly prepare and transmit to the Congress an integrated civil aviation safety research and development plan.
Contents.--The plan required by subsection (a) shall include-- (1) an identification of the respective research and development requirements, roles, and responsibilities of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Federal Aviation Administration; (2) formal mechanisms for the timely sharing of information between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Federal Aviation Administration, including a requirement that the FAA-NASA Coordinating Committee established in 1980 meet at least twice a year; and (3) procedures for increased communication and coordination between the Federal Aviation Administration research advisory committee established under section 44508 of title 49, United States Code, and the NASA Aeronautics and Space Transportation Technology Advisory Committee, including a proposal for greater cross-membership between those two advisory committees.
INTERNET AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION.
The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall make available through the Internet home page of the Federal Aviation Administration the abstracts relating to all research grants and awards made with funds authorized by the amendments made by this Act.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require or permit the release of any information prohibited by law or regulation from being released to the public.
RESEARCH ON NONSTRUCTURAL AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS.
Section 44504(b)(1) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``, including nonstructural aircraft systems,'' after ``life of aircraft''.
In general.--The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall exclude from consideration for grant agreements made by that Administration with funds appropriated pursuant to the amendments made by this Act any person who received funds, other than those described in subsection (b), appropriated for a fiscal year after fiscal year 1999, under a grant agreement from any Federal funding source for a project that was not subjected to a competitive, merit- based award process, except as specifically authorized by this Act.
Any exclusion from consideration pursuant to this subsection shall be effective for a period of 5 years after the person receives such Federal funds.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to the receipt of Federal funds by a person due to the membership of that person in a class specified by law for which assistance is awarded to members of the class according to a formula provided by law.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``grant agreement'' means a legal instrument whose principal purpose is to transfer a thing of value to the recipient to carry out a public purpose of support or stimulation authorized by a law of the United States, and does not include the acquisition (by purchase, lease, or barter) of property or services for the direct benefit or use of the United States Government.
Such term does not include a cooperative agreement (as such term is used in section 6305 of title 31, United States Code) or a cooperative research and development agreement (as such term is defined in section 12(d)(1) of the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 United States Code 3710a(d)(1))).
COMPLIANCE WITH BUY AMERICAN ACT.
No funds authorized pursuant to this Act may be expended by an entity unless the entity agrees that in expending the assistance the entity will comply with sections 2 through 4 of the Act of March 3, 1933 (41 United States Code 10a-10c, popularly known as the ``Buy American Act'').
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS; REQUIREMENT REGARDING NOTICE.
Purchase of American-Made Equipment and Products.--In the case of any equipment or products that may be authorized to be purchased with financial assistance provided under this Act, it is the sense of the Congress that entities receiving such assistance should, in expending the assistance, purchase only American-made equipment and products.
Notice to Recipients of Assistance.--In providing financial assistance under this Act, the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall provide to each recipient of the assistance a notice describing the statement made in subsection (a) by the Congress.
If it has been finally determined by a court or Federal agency that any person intentionally affixed a label bearing a ``Made in America'' inscription, or any inscription with the same meaning, to any product sold in or shipped to the United States that is not made in the United States, such person shall be ineligible to receive any contract or subcontract made with funds provided pursuant to this Act, pursuant to the debarment, suspension, and ineligibility procedures described in section 9.400 through 9.409 of title 48, Code of Federal Regulations.
LASER VISUAL GUIDANCE RESEARCH.
The Federal Aviation Administration is encouraged to conduct research on the laser visual guidance landing system.
Passed the House of Representatives September 15, 1999.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.