This Act may be cited as the ``Young Witness Assistance Act of 2001''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Witness and victim intimidation at the juvenile and young adult level is a serious, growing concern for State and local prosecutors and law enforcement agencies.
Each year, thousands of young people witness violent crimes such as assaults, robbery, homicide, domestic violence, and sexual abuse.
In many cases, the lack of juvenile and young adult witness participation has seriously impeded efforts to bring violent perpetrators to justice.
Prosecutors and police officers have become increasingly frustrated by their inability to prosecute cases successfully when young witnesses refuse to testify because they fear retaliation by the defendant, or the defendant's family or friends.
Factors that contribute to the reluctance of young witnesses to step forward include-- (A) the fear and trauma associated with witnessing a violent crime; (B) a personal connection with the perpetrator or their associates; (C) geographic proximity to the perpetrator; and (D) membership in a culturally vulnerable group.
The cooperation and participation of young victims and witnesses in the criminal justice process, from crime reporting through prosecution, are essential to the successful operation of the criminal justice system.
Though most States have witness assistance programs, very few, if any, have adequate resources to address the unique needs associated with juvenile and young adult witnesses.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to encourage and promote the creation and development of policies and programs by State and local prosecutors and law enforcement authorities that provide assistance to juvenile and young adult witnesses who cooperate with efforts to bring violent criminals to justice.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance.
Juvenile.--The term ``juvenile'' means an individual who is 17 years of age or younger.
Young adult.--The term ``young adult'' means an individual who is between the ages of 18 and 21.
State.--The term ``State'' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
The Director may make grants to State and local prosecutors and law enforcement agencies in support of juvenile and young adult witness assistance programs, including State and local prosecutors and law enforcement agencies that have existing juvenile and adult witness assistance programs.
To be eligible to receive a grant under this Act, State and local prosecutors and law enforcement officials shall-- (1) submit an application to the Director in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require; and (2) give assurances that each applicant has developed, or is in the process of developing, a witness assistance program that specifically targets the unique needs of juvenile and young adult witnesses and their families.
Grants made available under this Act may be used-- (1) to assess the needs of juvenile and young adult witnesses; (2) to develop appropriate program goals and objectives; and (3) to develop and administer a variety of witness assistance services, which includes-- (A) counseling services to young witnesses dealing with trauma associated in witnessing a violent crime; (B) pre- and post-trial assistance for the youth and their family; (C) providing education services if the child is removed from or changes their school for safety concerns; (D) protective services for young witnesses and their families when a serious threat of harm from the perpetrators or their associates is made; and (E) community outreach and school-based initiatives that stimulate and maintain public awareness and support.
Report.--State and local prosecutors and law enforcement agencies that receive funds under this Act shall submit to the Director a report not later than May 1st of each year in which grants are made available under this Act.
Reports shall describe progress achieved in carrying out the purpose of this Act.
Report to Congress.--The Director shall submit to Congress a report by July 1st of each year which contains a detailed statement regarding grant awards, activities of grant recipients, a compilation of statistical information submitted by applicants, and an evaluation of programs established under this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $3,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004.