This Act may be cited as the ``Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Improvement Act of 1995''.
RECOVERY BY SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION OF COSTS OF INVESTIGATION OF CERTAIN PIPELINE ACCIDENTS.
Section 60117 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k)(1)(A) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Secretary of Transportation may recover from any person who engages in the transportation of gas or hazardous liquid, or who owns or operates pipeline facilities, the costs incurred by the Secretary-- ``(i) in investigating an accident with respect to such transportation or facilities; and ``(ii) in overseeing the response of the person to the accident.
For the purposes of this paragraph, the costs incurred by the Secretary in an investigation of an accident may include the cost of hiring additional personnel (including personnel to support monitoring activities by the Office of Pipeline Safety), the cost of tests or studies, and travel and administrative costs associated with the investigation.
The Secretary may not recover costs under this subsection with respect to an accident unless the accident-- ``(A) results in death or personal injury; or ``(B) results in property damage (including the cost of any lost natural gas or hazardous liquid) and environmental damage (including the cost of any environmental remediation) in an amount in excess of $250,000.
The amount that the Secretary may recover under this subsection with respect to an accident may not exceed $500,000.
(A) Amounts recovered by the Secretary under this subsection shall be available to the Secretary for purposes of the payment of the costs of investigating and overseeing responses to accidents under this subsection.
Such funds shall be available to the Secretary for such purposes without fiscal year limitation.
Such amounts shall be used to supplement and not to supplant other funds made available to the Secretary for such purposes.''.
GRANTS TO STATES AND ONE-CALL NOTIFICATION SYSTEMS TO PROMOTE USE OF SUCH SYSTEMS.
Grants to States.--Subsection (b) of section 60114 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Secretary may make a grant to a State for development and establishment of a one-call notification system only if the State ensures that the cost of establishing and operating the system are shared equitably by persons owning or operating underground facilities.''.
Grants to Systems.--Such subsection is further amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``Grants.--''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2)(A) The Secretary may also make grants to one-call notification systems for activities relating to the promotion of the utilization of such systems.
The Secretary shall ensure that the Federal share of the cost of the activities referred to in subparagraph (A) under any grant made under this paragraph does not exceed 50 percent of the cost of such activities.''.
Sanctions.--Subsection (a)(9) of such section is amended by inserting ``, or that would provide for effective civil or criminal penalty sanctions or equitable relief appropriate to the nature of the offense'' after ``60123 of this title''.
PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO PIPELINE FACILITIES.
Section 60117(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after ``and training activities'' the following: ``and promotional activities relating to prevention of damage to pipeline facilities''.
ELECTRONIC DATA ON PIPELINE FACILITIES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT AND SAFETY PLANNING.
Authority To Develop.--The Secretary of Transportation may develop an electronic data base containing uniform information on the nature, extent, and geographic location of pipeline facilities.
The purpose of the data base shall be to provide information on such facilities to the Secretary, owners of pipeline facilities, as persons engaged in transporting gas or hazardous liquids through pipeline facilities, and for secured use by State agencies concerned with land use planning, environmental regulation, and pipeline regulatory oversight, in order to facilitate risk assessment and safety planning with respect to such facilities.
Contract and Grant Authority.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may develop the data base described under subsection (a) by entering into contracts or cooperative agreements with any entity that the Secretary determines appropriate for that purpose and by making grants to States or institutions of higher education for that purpose.
The Secretary shall ensure that the Federal share of the cost of any activities carried out under a grant or cooperative agreement made under this subsection does not exceed 50 percent of the cost of such activities.
Use of Geographic Information System Technology.--In developing the data base described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, develop a data base that-- (1) utilizes Geographic Information System technology or any similar technology providing data of an equivalent quality and usefulness; and (2) permits ready incorporation of data and information from a variety of sources.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``pipeline facility'' has the meaning given such term in section 60101 of title 49, United States Code.
Natural Gas.--(1) Section 60125(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding after paragraph (3) the following new paragraphs: ``(4) $20,000,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1996.
$30,000,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1997.
$35,000,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998.''.
Section 60125(c)(1) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraphs: ``(D) $16,500,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1996.
$19,000,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1997.
$21,500,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998.''.
Hazardous Liquid.--Section 60125(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding after paragraph (3) the following new paragraphs: ``(4) $7,000,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1996.
$10,000,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1997.
$11,000,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998.''.
SITING OF INTERSTATE PIPELINE FACILITIES.
Siting Guidelines.--Within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall review its practices and guidelines for siting interstate gas pipeline facilities in urban areas to determine whether changes are needed in the areas of-- (1) selecting routes for pipelines; and (2) determining the appropriate width of rights-of-way.
Educational Information for Local Jurisdictions.--(1)(A) Within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, shall make educational information available, regarding interstate gas pipeline facilities permits and rights-of-way and issues with respect to development in the vicinity of such interstate gas pipeline facilities, for distribution to appropriate agencies of local governments with jurisdiction over the lands through which interstate gas pipeline facilities pass.
For purposes of this section, the term ``interstate gas pipeline facility'' has the meaning given such term in section 60101 of title 49, United States Code.
(A) Within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall make educational information available, regarding interstate hazardous liquid pipeline facilities rights-of-way and issues with respect to development in the vicinity of such interstate pipeline facilities, for distribution to appropriate agencies of local governments with jurisdiction over the lands through which interstate hazardous liquid pipeline facilities pass.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``interstate hazardous liquid pipeline facility'' has the meaning given such term in section 60101 of title 49, United States Code.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation for carrying out this subsection, $2,000,000, to remain available until expended.
DUMPING WITHIN PIPELINE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
Amendment.--Chapter 601 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Dumping within pipeline rights-of-way ``(a) Prohibition.--No person shall excavate within the right-of- way of an interstate gas pipeline facility or interstate hazardous liquid pipeline facility, or any other limited area in the vicinity of any such interstate pipeline facility established by the Secretary of Transportation, and dispose solid waste therein.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `solid waste' has the meaning given such term in section 1004(27) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6903(27)).''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Sections 60122 and 60123 of title 49, United States Code, are amended by striking ``or 60118(a)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``, 60118(a), or 60126''.
The table of sections of chapter 601 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``60126.
Dumping within pipeline rights-of-way.''.
PERIODIC INSPECTION BY INSTRUMENTED INTERNAL INSPECTION DEVICES.
Section 60102(f)(2) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``October 24, 1995'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1 year after the date of the enactment of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Improvement Act of 1995''; and (2) in the first sentence, by inserting ``, and shall prescribe a schedule or schedules for such inspections'' after ``60109 of this title''.
PROMOTING PUBLIC AWARENESS FOR NEIGHBORS OF PIPELINES.
Section 60116 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) Gas Leaks.--'' before ``Under regulations the Secretary''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(b) Promoting Public Awareness for Neighbors of Pipelines.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this subsection, and annually thereafter, the owner or operator of each interstate gas pipeline facility or interstate hazardous liquid pipeline facility shall notify all residents within 1000 yards, or such other distance as the Secretary of Transportation determines appropriate, of such interstate pipeline facility of-- ``(1) the general location of the interstate pipeline facility; ``(2) a request for reporting of any instances of excavation or dumping on or near the interstate pipeline facility; ``(3) a phone number to use to make such reports; and ``(4) appropriate procedures for such residents to follow in response to accidents concerning interstate pipeline facilities.
Public Education.--The Secretary of Transportation shall develop, in conjunction with appropriate representatives of the natural gas pipeline industry and the hazardous liquid pipeline industry, public service announcements to be broadcast or published to educate the public about pipeline safety.''.
REMOTELY OR AUTOMATICALLY CONTROLLED VALVES.
Section 60102 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(l) Remotely or Automatically Controlled Valves.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary of Transportation shall prescribe regulations requiring the installation and use, wherever technically and economically feasible, of remotely or automatically controlled valves that are reliable and capable of shutting off the flow of gas in the event of an accident, including accidents in which there is a loss of the primary power source.
In developing proposed regulations, the Secretary shall consult with, and give special consideration to recommendations of, appropriate groups from the gas pipeline industry, such as the Gas Research Institute.''.
Section 60102(f) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Before transporting natural gas or hazardous liquid through a pipeline which, because of its design, construction, or replacement, is required by regulations issued under paragraph (1) to accommodate the passage of instrumented internal inspection devices, the owner or operator of such pipeline shall, using such a device, obtain baseline information with respect to the safety of the pipeline.