This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Progress Assessment Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Timely and reliable data on the situation of women in the United States and around the world is critical to the effective implementation of the Platform for Action agreed upon at the International Conference on Population and Development and in evaluating the cost effectiveness of United States domestic and foreign assistance programs.
Statistics on women exist in every country, including the United States, but are not generally published or analyzed in a form accessible to those, including laypersons, concerned with gender issues.
Many of the statistical indicators currently used fail to provide a complete picture of women's health and their roles within the family, the economy, and political and social spheres.
Many topics relevant to gender issues in society have not been adequately measured, such as access to resources, time-use, extent of family responsibilities, and the quality and effectiveness of programs and policies designed to meet women's needs.
Efforts to develop appropriate approaches to data collection and to refine old approaches to data collection are required.
Comparable measurements and standard methodologies for collection and analysis of gender statistics must be integrated into the ongoing programs of the United States Census Bureau's national and international statistical services, and the statistical services funded by United States Agency for International Development, so that they can provide an unbiased basis for the design, implementation and monitoring of programs, policies, and legislation.
SURVEY OF STATUS OF WOMEN.
Periodic Surveys Required.--Title 13, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 11--COLLECTION AND PUBLICATION OF INFORMATION ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN ``Sec.
Federal Forum on Women's Statistics.
Collection and publication ``(a) The Secretary shall collect, compile, and publish statistics concerning the status of women and girls of all ages in the United States, and compile and publish statistics concerning the status of women and girls of all ages in foreign countries and in refugee camps, including statistics in the following priority areas-- ``(1) participation in the labor force, and educational and political institutions; ``(2) the structure of, care of, and support for families; ``(3) fertility regulation behavior and health; and ``(4) such additional categories as the Secretary may determine.
To assist the Secretary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter in foreign countries and refugee camps, the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development, acting through its regional bureaus as well as its offices of population and women in development, and the Secretary of State acting through the Bureau for Refugee Programs, shall collect the information described in this chapter in the form and manner which shall be agreed to between the Secretary, the Secretary of State, and the Administrator.
The Secretary, the Secretary of State, and the Administrator shall seek to develop and establish internationally comparable measures and standard methodologies for collection of information on women and their roles under this chapter in both a large scale quantitative manner and in-depth descriptive manner based on smaller samples, surveys, or case studies.
The United States Agency for International Development, the State Department, and the Bureau of the Census shall incorporate these measures and methodologies into their current and future, data collection effort.
The Bureau of the Census shall promote these measures and methodologies in their international programs.
Reports ``(a) The Secretary shall publish the statistics collected under section 501, together with information obtained from other departments, agencies, or establishments of the Federal Government-- ``(1) for the United States, in 1997 and every second year thereafter; and ``(2) for foreign countries, in 1999 and every fifth year thereafter.
Each report under subsection (a) (after the first such report) shall include historical comparisons and interpretive comparisons on the changes in the status of women since the preceding report.
Each report under this section shall be submitted to the Congress.
Federal Forum on Women's Statistics ``(a) To assist in carrying out the provisions in this chapter, the Secretary shall establish a Federal Forum on Women's Statistics.
The Forum may include representatives from appropriate departments, agencies, and establishments of the Federal Government that collect, compile, analyze, or publish data on the status of women and girls, and those entities that receive Federal grants or contracts to collect, compile, analyze, or publish data on the status of women and girls.
The Forum shall meet semiannually to exchange information on current collection and survey initiatives and to avoid duplication of efforts, to identify gaps in data, and to carry out other activities as the Secretary shall designate.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters at the beginning of title 13, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``11.
Collection and publication of information on the 501''.