This Act may be cited as the ``Common Sense Hazardous Waste Facilities Siting and Permitting Act of 1996''.
AMENDMENT OF SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL ACT.
In General.--Subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6921 and following) is amended by adding the following new section at the end thereof: ``SEC.
SITING OF NEW OR EXPANDED HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Application.--The term `application' means an application filed with a State or local permitting authority for approval to site a new or expanded hazardous waste facility.
Densely populated area.--The term `densely populated area' means an incorporated place or census designated place ``(defined by the Census Bureau) with a population density of at least 1,500 people per square mile as determined by the decennial census.
Environmental redlining.--The term `environmental redlining' means the selection of sites for new or expanded hazardous waste facilities based predominantly on the income of the majority of residents of real property surrounding the new or expanded hazardous waste facility site.
Host community.--The term `host community' means the incorporated place or census designated place of a State in which a new or expanded hazardous waste facility is proposed to be located.
New or expanded hazardous waste facility.--The term `new or expanded hazardous waste facility' means a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility-- ``(A) the construction of which commences after the enactment of this section, or ``(B) the expansion of the physical capacity of which commences after January 1, 2000.
For the purposes of this paragraph, the term `commence', when used with respect to a facility, refers to the issuance of all applicable permits for such facility under other provisions of Federal, State, and local law.
Official.--The term `official' means the elected executive official(s) of the host community if it is incorporated, or the county executive official or officials if it is a census designated place.
Person.--The term `person' means an individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, or any other lawful business entity that plans to operate a new or expanded hazardous waste facility.
Prime farm land.--The term `prime farm land' means real property on which crop yields exceed the State's annual average (as determined by the United States Department of Agriculture) of units per acre by at least 15 percent for 5 consecutive or nonconsecutive years of the past 10 years.
Permitting authority.--The term `permitting authority' means the State or local authority having jurisdiction under State or local law over the siting and permitting of new or expanded hazardous waste facilities.
Public place.--The term `public place' means any structure the general public may access at least 40 hours per week.
Units.--The term `units' means the pertinent crop measure used by the United States Department of Agriculture for reporting services for historical data.
Siting Criteria.--In addition to the standards applicable under section 3004, and under State and local law, each State or local permitting authority shall develop, not longer than 1 year after enactment of this Act, hazardous waste facility siting criteria, which, at a minimum, are consistent with each of the following: ``(1) Demographic criteria.--New or expanded hazardous waste facilities shall not be located within a 10-mile radius of densely populated areas or within 2,600 feet of any school, church, day care center, or other building or site at which persons under the age of 18 are frequently present.
Topographic-atmospheric-geologic criteria.--New or expanded hazardous waste facilities shall not be located on or within any of the following areas: ``(A) On shallow aquifers or recharge areas for shallow aquifers that are or may reasonably be expected to be used for drinking water or cropland irrigation.
Within at least 200 feet of streams, rivers, ponds, lakes, reservoirs, or other bodies of water that are in existence for at least 21 consecutive days.
On prime farm land.
Redlining.--The siting of new or expanded hazardous waste facilities shall not be based on environmental redlining.
Siting Procedures.--In addition to any procedures otherwise applicable under this Act or other applicable law, each State or local permitting authority shall develop hazardous waste facility siting procedures, which, at a minimum, are consistent with the following: ``(1) Application process.--Each application shall contain written assurances that the following procedures have been, or will be, carried out: ``(A)(i) The person shall publish an announcement of the intent to file an application to site a new or expanded hazardous waste facility, specifying the exact location of the proposed site, in 2 newspapers of general circulation 30 to 90 days before the filing of the application.
One of the 2 newspapers of general circulation shall be the newspaper with the largest circulation of the incorporated place or census designated place wherein the new or expanded hazardous waste facility is proposed to be sited.
The announcement of intent to file an application to site a new or expanded hazardous waste facility shall be published in a type size not smaller than the majority of the text type used on the front page of the newspaper.
The person shall submit to the permitting authority and to the official of the host community, a prospectus that detailed the criteria for the selection of the site and the nature of the waste management activities conducted at the planned facility.
A copy of the prospectus shall be made available at a public place in the host community by the official of the host community.
The person shall submit to the permitting authority and to the official of the host community a detailed analysis and reporting of each of the following: ``(i) The area in which the new or expanded hazardous waste facility is to be located.
The process by which the area was selected.
A description of the technologies to be used at the facility.
A comprehensive treatment analysis of the hazardous waste to be managed at the facility.
The annual capacity of the new or expanded hazardous waste facility.
The expected origin of the waste accepted at the new or expanded hazardous waste facility.
The quantity of waste the person intends to receive.
The prospects for future expansion of the hazardous waste facility.
Whether the person, its parent company, officers, corporate principals, or any entity owned, controlled, or operated by the entity has any pending or unresolved environmental violations of this Act.
The official of the host community shall establish a host community advisory committee of individuals with representation from opponents and supporters of the location of the new or expanded hazardous waste facility within 60 days of the filing of the application.
The host community advisory committee shall conduct 1 public meeting on the planned hazardous waste facility within 90 days of the establishment of the host advisory committee.
Upon the completion of the procedures described in subparagraphs (A) through (E), the person filing the application has requested the official of the host community for consent to site the facility in the host community.
Recommendation of the host community advisory committee.--The host community advisory committee shall submit a nonbinding written recommendation to the official of the host community within 30 days of the written request of the person filing the application, which reflects the opinion of the majority of the members of the host community advisory committee.
Consent of the official of the host community.--(A) The official of the host community shall file his consent or a statement withholding consent with the permitting authority within 10 days of the submission of the host community advisory committee's recommendations.
The official of the host community shall include in his consent or statement withholding consent, the criteria upon which his consent, or lack thereof, is based.
Appeals process.--The number of appeals of the permitting authority's final ruling on the application to site new or expanded hazardous waste facilities shall not exceed one (1).''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding the following new item after the item relating to section 3023: ``Sec.
Siting of new or expanded hazardous waste facilities.