PROCEDURES FOR ADJUDICATION OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT BY COURTS- MARTIAL.
New UCMJ Article.--(1)(A) Chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (the Uniform Code of Military Justice), is amended by inserting after section 852 (article 52) the following new section (article): ``Sec.
Procedures for adjudging capital punishment ``(a) No person may be sentenced by a court-martial to suffer death except as provided in this section (article).
No person may be sentenced by a court-martial to suffer death unless convicted by the concurrence of all the members of the court- martial present at the time the vote is taken of an offense in this chapter expressly made punishable by death.
If the trial counsel at a court-martial of an offense under this chapter expressly made punishable by death intends to prove at the trial any aggravating factor set out in subsection (e), the trial counsel shall provide the accused before arraignment with written notice of each such aggravating factor the trial counsel intends to prove.
However, failure to provide such notice of an aggravating factor set out in subsection (e) before arraignment shall not bar later notice and proof of that aggravating factor unless the accused demonstrates-- ``(1) that the failure resulted in specific prejudice to the accused; and ``(2) that a continuance or recess is not an adequate remedy for such failure.
(1) A person may not be sentenced to death by a court-martial unless-- ``(A) the members of the court-martial unanimously find at least one of the aggravating factors set out in subsection (e); ``(B) notice of that aggravating factor was provided in accordance with subsection (c); and ``(C) each member of the court-martial concurs in finding that any extenuating or mitigating circumstances are substantially outweighed by aggravating circumstances, including the aggravating factors set out in subsection (e).
Findings by the members of a court-martial under paragraph (1) may be based on-- ``(A) evidence introduced on the issue of guilt or innocence; ``(B) evidence introduced during the sentencing proceeding; or ``(C) all such evidence.
The accused shall be given broad latitude to present matters in extenuation and mitigation.
(1) A sentence of death may be adjudged by a court-martial only if the members of the court-martial unanimously find, beyond a reasonable doubt, one or more of the following aggravating factors: ``(A) That the offense was committed before or in the presence of the enemy (except that this subparagraph does not apply in the case of an offense under section 918 or 920 of this title (article 118 or 120)).
That, in committing the offense, the accused intended-- ``(i) to cause a grave risk of substantial damage to the national security; or ``(ii) to cause a grave risk of substantial damage to a mission, system, or function of the United States, but only if substantial damage to the national security of the United States would have resulted had the intended damage been effected.
That the offense caused substantial damage to the national security of the United States, whether or not the accused intended such damage (except that this subparagraph does not apply in the case of an offense under section 918 or 920 of this title (article 118 or 120)).
That the accused knowingly created a grave risk of death to one or more persons in addition to the victim of the offense (except that this factor does not apply in the case of an offense under section 920 of this title (article 120)).
That the accused committed the offense with the intent to avoid hazardous duty.
That, only in the case of an offense under section 918 or 920 of this title (article 118 or 120), the offense was committed in time of war and in territory in which-- ``(i) the United States or an ally of the United States was then an occupying power; or ``(ii) the armed forces of the United States were then engaged in active hostilities.
That, only in the case of an offense under section 918(l) of this title (article 118(l)), any of the following is applicable: ``(i) The accused was serving a sentence of confinement for 30 years or more or for life at the time of the offense.
The offense was committed while the accused-- ``(I) was engaged in the commission or attempted commission of robbery, rape, aggravated arson, sodomy, burglary, kidnapping, mutiny, sedition, or piracy of an aircraft or vessel; or ``(II) was engaged in flight or attempted flight after the commission or attempted commission of any such offense.
The offense was committed for the purpose of receiving money or a thing of value.
The accused procured another by means of compulsion, coercion, or a promise of an advantage, a service, or a thing of value to commit the offense.
The offense was committed with the intent to avoid or to prevent lawful apprehension or effect an escape from custody or confinement.
The victim of the offense was-- ``(I) the President, the President-elect, the Vice President (or, if there was no Vice President, the officer next in the order of succession to the office of President), the Vice President-elect, or an individual who is acting as President under the Constitution and laws of the United States; ``(II) a Member of Congress (including a Delegate to, or Resident Commissioner in, the Congress) or Member-of-Congress elect; ``(III) a justice or judge of the United States; ``(IV) a chief of state or head of government (or the political equivalent) of a foreign nation; or ``(V) a foreign official (as such term is defined in section 1116(b)(3)(A) of title 18), if the official was in the United States or on military property of the United States on official business at the time of the offense.
The accused at the time of the offense knew that the victim was any of the following in the execution of such person's office: ``(I) A commissioned, warrant, noncommissioned, or petty officer of the armed forces.
A member of a law enforcement or security activity or agency, including correctional custody personnel.
The offense was committed with intent to obstruct justice.
The offense was preceded by the intentional infliction of substantial physical harm or prolonged, substantial mental or physical pain and suffering to the victim.
The accused has been found guilty in the same case of another offense under section 918 of this title (article 118).
That, only in the case of an offense under section 918(4) of this title (article 118(4)), the accused was the actual perpetrator of the killing.
That, only in the case of an offense under section 920 of this title (article 120)-- ``(i) the victim was under the age of 12; or ``(ii) the accused maimed or attempted to kill the victim.
That, only in the case of an offense under the law of war, a sentence of death is authorized under the law of war for the offense.
That, only in the case of an offense under section 904 or 906a the accused has previously been convicted of this title (article 104 or 106a), of another offense involving espionage or treason for which either a sentence of death or a sentence of life imprisonment was authorized by statute.
That the offense involved such other factors as may be prescribed by the President by regulation, to the extent that such factors concern the national security or otherwise involve a function of the armed forces related to the conduct of hostilities.
In this subsection, `national security' means the national defense and foreign relations of the United States and specifically includes-- ``(A) a military or defense advantage over any foreign nation or group of nations; ``(B) a favorable foreign relations position; or ``(C) a defense posture capable of successfully resisting hostile or destructive action from within or without.
The military judge, in the presence of the accused and counsel, shall instruct the members of the court-martial on-- ``(1) such aggravating factors set forth in subsection (e) as may be in issue in the case; ``(2) the requirements and procedures under this section; and ``(3) the requirement to consider all evidence in extenuation and mitigation before they may adjudge a sentence of death.
(1) In closed session, before voting on a sentence-- ``(A) the members of the court-martial shall vote by secret written ballot separately on each aggravating factor set out in subsection (e) on which they have been instructed; and ``(B) if one or more of the aggravating factors set forth in subsection (e) is found to exist, the members shall then vote by secret written ballot on whether the aggravating circumstances (including any aggravating factors set out in subsection (e)) substantially outweigh any extenuating or mitigating circumstances or, in the absence of any extenuating or mitigating circumstances, whether the aggravating circumstances are themselves sufficient to justify a sentence of death.
A sentence of death may not be adjudged unless each member of the court-martial concurs-- ``(A) that, with respect to at least one aggravating factor, the existence of such factor has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt; and ``(B) that the aggravating circumstances (including any aggravating factors set out in subsection (e)) substantially outweigh any extenuating or mitigating circumstances or, in the absence of any extenuating or mitigating circumstances, that the aggravating circumstances are themselves sufficient to justify a sentence of death.
The members of the court-martial shall vote on a sentence under section 852 of this title (article 52).
If a sentence of death is adjudged, the president of the court-martial shall announce which aggravating factors under subsection (e) were unanimously found by the members.
Subsections (c) through (h) do not apply with respect to the sentence for an offense under section 106 of this title (article 106).''.
The table of sections at the beginning of subchapter VII of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 852 (article 52) the following new item: ``852a.
Procedures for adjudging capital punishment.''.
Section 852(b)(1) of such title (article 52(b)(1)) is amended by inserting ``as provided in section 852a of this title (article 52a)'' after ``taken''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the 90th day after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to charges first preferred on or after that date.