This Act may be cited as the ``Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians are descendants and political successors to the signatories of the 1836 Treaty of Washington and the 1855 Treaty of Detroit.
The Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians, the Sault Ste.
Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians, and the Bay Mills Band of Chippewa Indians, whose members are also descendants of the signatories to the 1836 Treaty of Washington and the 1855 Treaty of Detroit, have been recognized by the Federal Government as distinct Indian tribes.
The Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians consists of over 600 eligible members who continue to reside close to their ancestral homeland as recognized in the Cheboygan Reservation in the 1836 Treaty of Washington and 1855 Treaty of Detroit, which area is now known as Cheboygan County, Michigan.
The Band continues its political and social existence with a viable tribal government.
The Band, along with other Michigan Odawa/Ottawa groups, including the tribes described in paragraph (2), formed the Northern Michigan Ottawa Association in 1948.
The Association subsequently pursued a successful land claim with the Indian Claims Commission.
Between 1948 and 1975, the Band carried out many of their governmental functions through the Northern Michigan Ottawa Association, while retaining individual Band control over local decisions.
In 1975, the Northern Michigan Ottawa Association petitioned under the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 461 et seq.
; commonly referred to as the ``Indian Reorganization Act''), to form a government on behalf of the Band.
Again, in spite of the Band's eligibility, the Bureau of Indian Affairs failed to act.
The United States Government, the government of the State of Michigan, and local governments have had continuous dealings with the recognized political leaders of the Band from 1836 to the present.
For purposes of this Act the following definitions apply: (1) Band.--The term ``Band'' means the Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians.
Member.--The term ``member'' means those individuals enrolled in the Band pursuant to section 7.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Federal Recognition.--Federal recognition of the Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians is hereby reaffirmed.
All laws and regulations of the United States of general application to Indians or nations, tribes, or bands of Indians, including the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 461 et sequentes, commonly referred to as the ``Indian Reorganization Act''), which are inconsistent with any specific provision of this Act shall not be applicable to the Band and its members.
Federal Services and Benefits.-- (1) In general.--The Band and its members shall be eligible for all services and benefits provided by the Federal Government to Indians because of their status as federally recognized Indians, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, such services and benefits shall be provided after the date of the enactment of this Act to the Band and its members without regard to the existence of a reservation or the location of the residence of any member on or near any Indian reservation.
Service areas.--For purposes of the delivery of Federal services to the enrolled members of the Band, the area of the State of Michigan within 70 miles of the boundaries of the reservation for the Burt Lake Band as set out in article I, paragraph ``seventh'' of the Treaty of 1855 (11 United States Statutes at Large 621), shall be deemed to be within or near a reservation, notwithstanding the establishment of a reservation for the tribe after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Services may be provided to members outside the named service area unless prohibited by law or regulation.
In General.--All rights and privileges of the Band and its members, which may have been abrogated or diminished before the date of the enactment of this Act are hereby reaffirmed.
Existing Rights of Tribe.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to diminish any right or privilege of the Band or of its members that existed before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in any other provision of this Act, nothing in this Act shall be construed as altering or affecting any legal or equitable claim the Band may have to enforce any right or privilege reserved by or granted to the Band which was wrongfully denied to or taken from the Band before the enactment of this Act.
The Band's tribal lands shall consist of all real property, now or hereafter held by, or in trust for, the Band.
The Secretary shall acquire real property for the Band.
Any such property shall be taken by the Secretary in the name of the United States in trust for the benefit of the Band and shall become part of the Band's reservation.
Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Band shall submit to the Secretary a membership roll consisting of all individuals currently enrolled for membership in the Band.
The qualifications for inclusion on the membership roll of the Band shall be determined by the membership clauses in the Band's governing document, in consultation with the Secretary.
Upon completion of the roll, the Secretary shall immediately publish notice of such in the Federal Register.
The Band shall ensure that such roll is maintained and kept current.
CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNING BODY.
Constitution.-- (1) Adoption.--Not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall conduct by secret ballot elections for the purpose of adopting a new constitution for the Band.
The elections shall be held according to the procedures applicable to elections under section 16 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 476; commonly referred to as the ``Indian Reorganization Act'').
Interim governing documents.--Until such time as a new constitution is adopted under paragraph (1), the governing documents in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be the interim governing documents for the Band.
Officials.-- (1) Elections.--Not later than 6 months after the Band adopts their constitution and bylaws pursuant to subsection (a), the Band shall conduct elections by secret ballot for the purpose of electing officials for the Band as provided in the Band's governing constitution.
The elections shall be conducted according to the procedures described in the Band's constitution and bylaws.
Interim governments.--Until such time as the Band elects new officials pursuant to paragraph (1), the Band's governing bodies shall be those bodies in place on the date of the enactment of this Act, or any new governing bodies selected under the election procedures specified in the respective interim governing documents of the Band.