The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Ensuring secure access to energy is in the highest national security interests of the United States.
Without secure access to oil supplies, the United States economy, which depends heavily on oil for transportation, could be severely affected.
Two-thirds of the oil used in the United States is consumed by the transportation sector.
Passenger vehicles alone account for 40 percent of United States oil use.
In the year 2000, the United States imported 58 percent of its oil needs, 45 percent of which came from Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) nations.
Over the next 20 years, according to the Energy Information Administration, the United States's demand for oil is projected to increase by 33 percent.
In 1973 OPEC placed an embargo on sales of oil to the United States, creating severe oil shortages and driving up oil prices in the United States.
OPEC's action was a major factor in the recession which followed shortly thereafter.
Under the ``Carter Doctrine'', announced by President Carter in 1980, ``An attempt by any outside forces to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military force.''.
Following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990, the United States sent more than 500,000 troops to the Persian Gulf to expel the Iraqi troops, liberate Kuwait, protect Saudi Arabia, and ensure access to Persian Gulf oil.
As of March 19, 2003, the United States is on the verge of fighting yet another war against Iraq to further ensure access to vital oil supplies.
Many major oil producing nations do not share United States values of democracy, freedom of expression, thought, and religion, and equality for women.
During the Afghanistan conflict and the war on terrorism, many oil producing nations did not openly support the United States campaign to end the terror, and many of the terrorists of September 11 came from major OPEC nations.
It is in the highest national security interests of the United States to substantially reduce our dependence on oil as soon as possible, to secure our access to oil supplies, and to reduce our dependence on nations which do not share our interests and values.
Because most oil is consumed by the transportation sector, reduction of our dependence on oil can only come from major increases in fuel efficiency in cars, sport utility vehicles, light trucks, and other vehicles.
To protect United States national security interests after September 11, the United States Government has invested heavily in securing many industrial sectors, including airlines and the national health system.
FUEL EFFICIENCY VEHICLE CREDIT.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
FUEL EFFICIENCY VEHICLE CREDIT.
Allowance of Credit.-- ``(1) Fuel economy not less than 40 miles per gallon.--At the election of the taxpayer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 25 percent of the cost of any qualified fuel-effi cient vehicle placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Fuel economy not less than 50 miles per gallon.--In the case of a qualified fuel-efficient vehicle in which the fuel economy (within the meaning of subsection (c)(1)) is not less than 50 miles per gallon-- ``(A) paragraph (1) shall be applied by substituting `35 percent' for `25 percent', and ``(B) subsection (b) shall be applied by substituting `$6,000' for $5,000'.
Limitation.--The amount of the credit allowed by subsection (a) shall not exceed $5,000.
Qualified Fuel-Efficient Vehicle.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified fuel-efficient vehicle' means a motor vehicle (as defined in section 30(c)(2))-- ``(1) in which the fuel economy (determined in accordance with section 4064) of such vehicle is rated at not less than 40 miles per gallon, ``(2) which is-- ``(A) an automobile (as defined in section 4064(b)), or ``(B) a truck or van with an unloaded gross vehicle weight rating not greater than 7,500 pounds, and ``(3) which has received a certificate that such vehicle meets or exceeds the Bin 5 Tier II emission level established in regulations prescribed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under section 202(i) of the Clean Air Act for that make and model year vehicle.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Basis reduction.--The basis of any property for which a credit is allowable under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit.
Recapture.--The Secretary shall, by regulations, provide for recapturing the benefit of any credit allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any property which ceases to be property eligible for such credit.
Property used outside united states, etc.
not qualified.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to any property referred to in section 50(b) or with respect to the portion of the cost of any property taken into account under section 30, 179, or 179A.
Carryforward of Unused Credits.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds-- ``(1) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and this part (other than this section), over ``(2) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year, such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subpart B is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 30A the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
FUEL EFFICIENT VEHICLE ASSEMBLY CREDIT.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business-related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
FUEL-EFFICIENT VEHICLE ASSEMBLY CREDIT.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the fuel-efficient vehicle assembly credit determined under this section for the taxable year is an amount equal to the product of $2,000 and the number of qualified fuel-efficient vehicles manufactured or produced in the United States by the taxpayer during the taxable year for their 1st retail sale.
Qualified Fuel-Efficient Vehicle.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `qualified fuel-efficient vehicle' has the meaning given to such term by section 30B(c).
1st Retail Sale.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `1st retail sale' has the meaning given to such term by section 4002.''.
Credit To Be Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code (relating to general business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (14), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(16) the fuel-efficient vehicle assembly credit determined under section 45G(a).''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 45F the following new item: ``Sec.
Fuel-efficient vehicle assembly credit.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
General Authority.--The Secretary of Energy may provide loan guarantees to manufacturers of motor vehicles or of motor vehicle engines for the purposes described in subsection (b).
Eligible Purposes.--Loans guaranteed under this section shall be used for the costs of conversion from the manufacture of motor vehicles or engines achieving less than 40 miles per gallon of gasoline to the manufacture of motor vehicles or engines achieving more than 40 miles per gallon of gasoline.
Such loans may not be used for advertising or promotional costs.
Aggregate Amount of Loan Guarantees.--The aggregate amount of loans that may be guaranteed under this section at any one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
Limitation on Loan Guarantee Size.--The Secretary shall not guarantee a loan under this section for an amount greater than $100,000,000.
Rates of Interest.--The Secretary shall not make a loan guarantee under this section if the interest rate for the loan exceeds that which the Secretary determines to be reasonable, taking into consideration the prevailing interest rates and customary fees incurred under similar obligations in the private capital market.
Ability To Repay.--The Secretary shall not make a loan guarantee under this section unless the Secretary has made a finding in writing that the recipient of the loan is likely to be able to repay the loan according to its terms.
Applications.--The Secretary shall prescribe the form and contents required of applications for assistance under this section, to enable the Secretary to determine the eligibility of the applicant's proposal, and shall establish terms and conditions for loan guarantees made under this section.
Full Faith and Credit.--All guarantees entered into by the Secretary under this section shall constitute general obligations of the United States backed by the full faith and credit of the United States.
Modifications.--The Secretary may approve the modification of any term or condition of a loan guarantee or loan guarantee commitment, including the rate of interest, time of payment of interest or principal, or security requirements, if the Secretary finds in writing that-- (1) the modification is equitable and is in the overall best interests of the United States; and (2) consent has been obtained from the applicant and the holder of the obligation.
Default.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations setting forth procedures in the event of default on a loan guaranteed under this section.
The Secretary shall ensure that each loan guarantee made under this section contains terms and conditions that provide that-- (1) if a payment of principal or interest under the loan is in default for more than 30 days, the Secretary shall pay to the holder of the obligation, or the holder's agent, the amount of unpaid guaranteed interest; (2) if the default has continued for more than 90 days, the Secretary shall pay to the holder of the obligation, or the holder's agent, 90 percent of the unpaid guaranteed principal; (3) after final resolution of the default, through liquidation or otherwise, the Secretary shall pay to the holder of the obligation, or the holder's agent, any remaining amounts guaranteed but which were not recovered through the default's resolution; (4) the Secretary shall not be required to make any payment under paragraphs (1) through (3) if the Secretary finds, before the expiration of the periods described in such paragraphs, that the default has been remedied; and (5) the holder of the obligation shall not receive payment or be entitled to retain payment in a total amount which, together with all other recoveries (including any recovery based upon a security interest in equipment or facilities) exceeds the actual loss of such holder.
Rights of the Secretary.-- (1) Subrogation.--If the Secretary makes payment to a holder, or a holder's agent, under subsection (j) in connection with a loan guarantee made under this section, the Secretary shall be subrogated to all of the rights of the holder with respect to the obligor under the loan.
Disposition of property.--The Secretary may complete, recondition, reconstruct, renovate, repair, maintain, operate, charter, rent, sell, or otherwise dispose of any property or other interests obtained pursuant to this section.
The Secretary shall not be subject to any Federal or State regulatory requirements when carrying out this paragraph.
Action Against Obligor.--The Secretary may bring a civil action in an appropriate Federal court in the name of the holder of the obligation in the event of a default on a loan guaranteed under this section.
The holder of a guarantee shall make available to the Secretary all records and evidence necessary to prosecute the civil action.
The Secretary may accept property in full or partial satisfaction of any sums owed as a result of a default.
If the Secretary receives, through the sale or other disposition of such property, an amount greater than the aggregate of-- (1) the amount paid to the holder of a guarantee under subsection (j); and (2) any other cost to the United States of remedying the default, the Secretary shall pay such excess to the obligor.
Breach of Conditions.--The Attorney General shall commence a civil action in an appropriate Federal court to enjoin any activity which the Secretary finds is in violation of this section, regulations issued hereunder, or any conditions which were duly agreed to, and to secure any other appropriate relief.
Attachment.--No attachment or execution may be issued against the Secretary, or any property in the control of the Secretary, prior to the entry of final judgment to such effect in any State, Federal, or other court.
Investigation Charge.--The Secretary may charge and collect from each applicant a reasonable charge for appraisal of the value of the equipment or facilities for which the loan guarantee is sought, and for making necessary determinations and findings.
Such charge shall not aggregate more than one-half of 1 percent of the principal amount of the obligation.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Energy for carrying out this section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``loan guarantee'' means any guarantee, insurance, or other pledge with respect to the payment of all or a part of the principal or interest on any debt obligation of a non-Federal borrower to a non-Federal lender, but does not include the insurance of deposits, shares, or other withdrawable accounts in financial institutions.
The term ``loan guarantee commitment'' means a binding agreement by the Secretary of Energy to make a loan guarantee when specified conditions are fulfilled by the borrower, the lender, or any other party to the guarantee agreement.
The term ``modification'' means any Government action that alters the estimated cost of an outstanding loan guarantee (or loan guarantee commitment) from the current estimate of cash flows.
This includes the sale of loan assets, with or without recourse, and the purchase of guaranteed loans.
This also includes any action resulting from new legislation, or from the exercise of administrative discretion under existing law, that directly or indirectly alters the estimated cost of outstanding loan guarantees (or loan guarantee commitments) such as a change in collection procedures.
PERMANENT EXTENSION OF RESEARCH CREDIT.
In General.--Section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit for increasing research activities) is amended by striking subsection (h).
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (1) of section 45C(b) of such Code is amended by striking subparagraph (D).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASE IN RATES OF ALTERNATIVE INCREMENTAL CREDIT.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 41(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to election of alternative incremental credit) is amended-- (1) by striking ``2.65 percent'' and inserting ``3 percent'', (2) by striking ``3.2 percent'' and inserting ``4 percent'', and (3) by striking ``3.75 percent'' and inserting ``5 percent''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXCLUSION OF QUALIFIED FUEL-EFFICIENT VEHICLES FROM CALCULATION OF AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY OF A MANUFACTURER.
Section 32904(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) In calculating the average fuel economy of a manufacturer under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall not consider any automobile manufactured by the manufacturer for which a credit is allowed under section 38(a)(16) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.