SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES TO TITLE 38, UNITED STATES CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Women Vietnam Veterans' Children's Birth Defects Benefits Act.''
References to Title 38, United States Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 38, United States Code.
BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN OF WOMEN VIETNAM VETERANS WHO SUFFER FROM BIRTH DEFECTS.
Chapter 18 is amended-- (1) by inserting before section 1801 the following: ``SUBCHAPTER I--BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN OF VIETNAM VETERANS WHO ARE BORN WITH SPINA BIFIDA''; (2) by inserting after section 1805 the following new subchapters: ``SUBCHAPTER II--BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN OF WOMEN VIETNAM VETERANS WHO SUFFER FROM BIRTH DEFECTS ``Sec.
Definitions ``For the purposes of this subchapter-- ``(1) The term `child' means a natural child of a woman Vietnam veteran, regardless of the child's age or marital status, who was conceived after the date on which the woman Vietnam veteran first entered the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era.
The term `woman Vietnam veteran' means a woman who performed active military, naval, or air service in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era, without regard to the characterization of the individual's service.
Covered birth defects ``(a) This subchapter applies with respect to any birth defect, other than spina bifida, which results in a permanent physical or mental disability, except for a birth defect determined by the Secretary to result from a familial disorder, birth-related injury, or fetal or neonatal infirmity with well-established causes.
A birth defect to which this subchapter applies pursuant to the preceding sentence is referred to in this subchapter as a `covered birth defect'.
Where affirmative evidence establishes that a particular birth defect suffered by an individual resulted from a cause other than the service of the individual's mother in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era, the provision of health care or other benefits under this subchapter is not authorized.
Health care ``(a) In accordance with regulations the Secretary shall prescribe, the Secretary shall provide a child of a woman Vietnam veteran who is suffering from a covered birth defect with such health care as the Secretary determines is needed by the child for the birth defect or any disability that is associated with such condition.
The Secretary may provide health care under this section directly or by contract or other arrangement with any health care provider.
For the purposes of this section-- ``(1) The term `health care'-- ``(A) means home care, hospital care, nursing home care, outpatient care, preventive care, habilitative and rehabilitative care, case management, and respite care; and ``(B) includes-- ``(i) the training of appropriate members of a child's family or household in the care of the child; and ``(ii) the provision of such pharmaceuticals, supplies, equipment, devices, appliances, assistive technology, direct transportation costs to and from approved sources of health care, and other materials as the Secretary determines necessary.
The term `health care provider' includes health care plans, insurers, organizations, institutions, and any other entity or individual furnishing health care services that the Secretary determines are authorized under this section.
The term `home care' means outpatient care, habilitative and rehabilitative care, preventive health services, and health-related services furnished to an individual in the individual's home or other place of residence.
The term `hospital care' means care and treatment for a disability furnished to an individual who has been admitted to a hospital as a patient.
The term `nursing home care' means care and treatment for a disability furnished to an individual who has been admitted to a nursing home as a resident.
The term `outpatient care' means care and treatment of a disability, and preventive health services, furnished to an individual other than hospital care or nursing home care.
The term `preventive care' means care and treatment furnished to prevent disability or illness, including periodic examinations, immunizations, patient health education, and such other services as the Secretary determines necessary to provide effective and economical preventive health care.
The term `habilitative and rehabilitative care' means such professional, counseling, and guidance services and treatment programs (other than vocational training under section 1804 or 1814 of this title) as are necessary to develop, maintain, or restore, to the maximum extent practicable, the functioning of a disabled person.
The term `respite care' means care furnished on an intermittent basis for a limited period to an individual who resides primarily in a private residence when such care will help the individual to continue residing in such private residence.
Vocational training and rehabilitation ``(a) Pursuant to such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may provide vocational training under this section to a child of a woman Vietnam veteran who is suffering from a covered birth defect if the Secretary determines that the achievement of a vocational goal by such child is reasonably feasible.
A program of vocational training for a child under this section shall be provided to the same extent and in the same manner as a program provided under section 1804 of this title to a child of a Vietnam veteran who is suffering from spina bifida and shall be subject to the same terms, conditions, and limitations set forth in that section.
Monetary allowance ``(a) The Secretary shall pay a monthly allowance under this subchapter to any child of a woman Vietnam veteran who suffers from a disability resulting from a covered birth defect which results in permanent impairment of a physical or mental function in such child.
(1) The amount of the allowance paid under this section shall be based on the degree of disability suffered by a child, as determined in accordance with such schedule for rating disabilities resulting from covered birth defects as the Secretary may prescribe.
The Secretary shall, in prescribing the rating schedule for the purposes of this section, establish four levels of disability upon which the amount of the allowance provided by this section shall be based.
The levels of disability established shall take into account functional limitations, including limitations on cognition, communication, motor abilities, activities of daily living, and employability.
The amounts of the monthly allowance shall be as follows: ``(A) For the lowest level of disability prescribed, $100.
For the first intermediate level of disability prescribed, the greater of $214 or the rate payable for the lowest level of disability under section 1805(b)(3) of this title.
For the second intermediate level of disability prescribed, the greater of $743 or the rate payable for the intermediate level of disability under section 1805(b)(3).
For the highest level of disability prescribed, the greater of $1,272 or the rate payable for the highest level of disability under section 1805(b)(3) of this title.
Such amounts are subject to adjustment under section 5312 of this title.
``SUBCHAPTER III--GENERAL''; (3) by redesignating section 1806 as section 1821; and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Effect of monetary allowance under this chapter on other benefits ``(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, receipt by an individual of an allowance under this chapter shall not impair, infringe, or otherwise affect the right of the individual to receive any other benefit to which the individual may otherwise be entitled under any law administered by the Secretary, nor shall receipt of such an allowance impair, infringe, or otherwise affect the right of any other individual to receive any benefit to which that individual is entitled under any law administered by the Secretary that is based on that individual's relationship to an individual who receives an allowance under this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the allowance paid to an individual under this chapter shall not be considered to be income or resources in determining eligibility for or the amount of benefits under any Federal or federally assisted program.
Nonduplication of benefits ``(a) An individual who is entitled to a monthly allowance under both subchapter I and subchapter II of this chapter may not receive such benefit under each subchapter concurrently, but shall elect (in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe) under which subchapter to receive such benefit.
An individual may not be provided more than one program of vocational training under this chapter.''.
CLERICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Chapter Heading.--(1) The heading of chapter 18 is amended to read as follows: ``CHAPTER 18--BENEFITS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN OF VIETNAM VETERANS''.
The item relating to chapter 18 in the tables of chapters before part I and at the beginning of part II is amended to read as follows: ``18.
Benefits for Certain Children of Vietnam Veterans..... 1801''.
Amendments to Chapter 18.--Chapter 18 is amended-- (1) by striking ``chapter'' in sections 1801 and 1802 and inserting ``subchapter''; (2) by striking ``section 1804'' in section 1803(c)(8) and inserting ``either section 1804 or 1814''; and (3) in section 1805-- (A) by striking ``chapter'' and inserting ``subchapter''; and (B) by striking subsections (c) and (d).
Other Amendments.--Section 5312 is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``section 1805'' and inserting ``sections 1805 and 1815''; and (2) in subsection (c)(1), by striking ``and 1805'' and inserting ``1805, and 1815''.
Table of Sections.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 18 is amended-- (1) by inserting at the beginning the following: ``SUBCHAPTER I--BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN OF VIETNAM VETERANS WHO ARE BORN WITH SPINA BIFIDA''; (2) by striking the item relating to section 1806; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER II--BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN OF WOMEN VIETNAM VETERANS WHO SUFFER FROM BIRTH DEFECTS ``1811.
Vocational training and rehabilitation.
Applicability of certain administrative provisions.
Effect of monetary allowance under this chapter on other benefits.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the later of October 1, 2000, or the first day of the first month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.