This Act may be cited as the ``Electronic Commerce Technology Promotion Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Electronic commerce has been widely embraced by industry, both in the United States and abroad.
The volume of commerce conducted over the Internet, though almost nonexistent just a few years ago, is expected to top $1 trillion by 2003, according to market research reports.
Continued growth of this market is vital to the economy of the United States as well as the global economy.
United States industries are at the forefront of this global revolution, continually evolving and innovating to respond to rapidly changing market needs and conditions.
Agility and flexibility are essential elements in their abilities to compete and adapt.
These are also the elements required for the electronic commerce market to sustain its current phenomenal growth rate.
The Federal Government should facilitate the growth of electronic commerce by allowing the private sector to continue to take the lead in developing this dynamic global market, and refraining from undue regulatory measures whenever possible.
The Government should unambiguously support the development of electronic commerce as a market-driven phenomenon, yet also signal its strong desire to promote and facilitate the growth of the electronic commerce market.
An important enabler for global electronic commerce is the ability of different systems to communicate and exchange data, referred to as system interoperability.
The continued growth of electronic commerce depends on a fundamental set of technical standards that enable essential technologies to interoperate, and on a policy and legal framework that supports the development that the market demands in a timely manner.
Prompt adoption and deployment of relevant electronic commerce technologies and systems by Federal agencies allow the Government to share in the benefits of the electronic commerce revolution, which can result in reduced cost and increased efficiency, as well as improved quality.
Usage of the technologies will enable the Government to participate more directly and effectively as an active contributor in the collaborative efforts spearheaded by the private sector to develop the frameworks and standards necessary for systems and components to interoperate.
This has the added benefit of allowing the Government to intercede as necessary in a timely manner, either in failure conditions or to remove barriers erected by foreign governments.
In actively deploying such technologies, the United States leadership in electronic commerce is strengthened and, at the same time, establishes a model for other governments and enables the growth of the global electronic commerce market.
Traditionally, small- and medium-sized enterprises play a critical role in enhancing the gross domestic product associated with a growing economic sector.
Electronic commerce technologies have the potential to enable these businesses to enter the market with lower entry costs and compete more effectively.
The United States Government has an inherent interest in ensuring that electronic commerce technologies are deployed widely by these small- and medium-sized businesses so that they can remain competitive in the global economy.
In this Act: (1) Center.--The term ``Center'' means the Center of Excellence for Electronic Commerce.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Interoperability.--The term ``interoperability'' means the ability of different software systems, applications, and services to communicate and exchange data in a predictable and consistent manner.
Interoperability specification.--The term ``interoperability specification'' means the technical documents developed by formal domestic and international standard organizations, industry consortia, and any other informal industry collaborations, for the purpose of creating interoperable systems and technologies.
Institute.--The term ``Institute'' means the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Matrix organization.--The term ``matrix organization'' means an organizational structure that is built based on coordinating the needed resources and expertise from other existing functional organizations.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to enable the electronic commerce market to continue its current growth rate and realize its full potential by supporting the development of relevant standards and interoperability specifications; (2) to signal strong support of the electronic commerce market by promoting the use of electronic commerce technologies within Federal Government agencies; and (3) to establish a Center of Excellence in Electronic Commerce at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, which will act as a central resource for the Federal Government, promote the use of electronic commerce technologies, and represent the Government interest in private sector collaborative efforts to develop electronic commerce technologies and interoperability specifications.
CENTER OF EXCELLENCE FOR ELECTRONIC COMMERCE.
Establishment.--The Director shall establish an office within the Institute to be known as the Center of Excellence for Electronic Commerce.
The Center shall be organized as a matrix organization built upon existing expertise and resources at the Institute.
Functions.--The Center shall-- (1) act as the centralized resource of information for Federal agencies in electronic commerce technologies and issues; (2) provide guidance to the Office of Management and Budget in developing policies pertaining to electronic commerce; (3) promote the use of electronic commerce technologies within Federal agencies and small- and medium-sized businesses; and (4) ensure that the interests of the United States Government are appropriately represented at both domestic and international meetings pertaining to the setting of interoperability specifications for electronic commerce technologies.
Activities.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Center shall-- (1) work with all the affected parts of the Institute, develop a plan for all efforts related to electronic commerce at the Institute, and coordinate these activities on an ongoing basis to achieve the stated functions; (2) coordinate and lead an inter-agency working group to address issues related to the introduction and deployment of electronic commerce technologies and systems in the Federal Government; (3) develop systems guidelines and reference implementations for use by Federal agencies which utilize electronic commerce interoperability specifications, consistent with section 2(b)(13) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 272(b)(13)) and section 12(d) of the National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995 (15 United States Code 272 nt); (4) advise the Secretary of Commerce upon encountering abusive uses of standards as barriers to trade or as unfair commercial practices in the domestic and international arenas in the areas of electronic commerce; and (5) lead a coordinated effort with the Department of Commerce's Manufacturing Extension Program and with the Small Business Administration, consistent with the respective agencies' missions, to provide technical assistance to small- and medium-sized businesses on issues related to the deployment and use of electronic commerce technologies, including developing training modules and software toolkits.
In General.--Within 6 months after the enactment of this Act, the Undersecretary of Technology shall submit a report to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Science of the House of Representatives on the following issues concerning electronic commerce: (1) Current efforts and activities on electronic commerce in the Institute.
The current status of deployment of electronic commerce technologies in the Federal agencies, including any future plans.
Issues Federal agencies are expected to encounter in widespread deployment of electronic commerce technologies.
Any legislative revisions to existing Federal programs necessary to support the advancement of electronic commerce in both the Federal Government and industry.
Report.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Institute, in collaboration with the inter-agency working group referred to in section 5(c)(2), shall submit a report to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Science of the House of Representatives detailing the plan, proposed schedule, and associated costs and benefits for the deployment of electronic commerce technologies in the Federal agencies.