This Act may be cited as the ``Audit of the IRS Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds that the General Accounting Office cannot attest to the reliability of the Internal Revenue Service's financial statements because-- (1) the amount of total revenue and tax refunds could not be verified or reconciled to accounting records maintained for individual taxpayers in the aggregate; (2) the amounts reported for various types of taxes collected, such as social security, income, and excise taxes, could not be substantiated; (3) the reliability of reported estimates for valid accounts receivable and for collectible accounts receivable could not be determined; (4) a significant portion of the Internal Revenue Service's reported nonpayroll operating expenses could not be verified; and (5) amounts reported as appropriations available for operations could not be reconciled fully with the Treasury Department's central accounting records, and hundreds of millions of dollars in differences were identified.
INDEPENDENT AUDIT OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall cause to be conducted an audit of the Internal Revenue Service.
Such audit shall be conducted by an independent external auditor selected by the Secretary in accordance with subsection (b).
Selection of Independent External Auditor.--The independent external auditor shall be selected from among the large, national accounting firms determined by the Secretary to be capable of providing the audit required by this section pursuant to a process by which the Secretary invites such firms to submit a proposal for such audit, together with a bid.
Initiation of Audit.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the independent external auditor selected to conduct the audit required by this section shall begin such audit.
Auditing Procedures.-- (1) In general.--The audit under subsection (a) shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing principles.
The independent external auditor shall consider the deficiencies described in section 2 as well as effectiveness of accounting organizations and systems, internal audit and control, and related administrative practices of the Internal Revenue Service.
Access to information.-- (A) Information given by the internal revenue service.--The Internal Revenue Service shall give the independent external auditor the information such auditor requires about the duties, powers, activities, organization, and financial transactions of the Internal Revenue Service.
The independent external auditor may inspect an agency record to obtain such information.
Books, papers, personnel, etc.--The independent external auditor shall have such access to the personnel and to the books, papers, and other information of the Internal Revenue Service as such auditor considers necessary or appropriate to conduct the audit required by this section.
Protection of Information.-- (1) Level of protection.--The independent external auditor shall maintain the same level of confidentiality for a record made available under this section as is required of the Director of the Internal Revenue Service.
Officers and employees of the independent external auditor shall be subject to the same statutory penalties for unauthorized disclosure or use of any such record as officers or employees of the Internal Revenue Service.
Personnel privacy.--The independent external auditor shall keep information described in section 552(b)(6) of title 5, United States Code, that such auditor obtains in a way that prevents unwarranted invasions of personal privacy.
Providing information to congress.--This section does not authorize information to be withheld from Congress.
Report of Results of Audit.--Not later than one year after the initiation of the audit required by this section, the independent external auditor shall submit a report concerning the results of the audit conducted under this section to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate.
Funding.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), amounts appropriated to the Internal Revenue Service shall be available to carry out this section.
Exceptions.--Amounts made available to the Internal Revenue Service for the following shall not be available to carry out this section: (A) To maintain a training program to ensure that Internal Revenue Service employees are trained in taxpayers' rights, in dealing courteously with the taxpayers, and in cross-cultural relations.
The Tax Counseling for the Elderly Program.