This Act may be cited as the ``STEM Innovation Networks Act of 2013''.
STATE NETWORKS AND CONSORTIA ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING, AND MATHEMATICS EDUCATION (STEM) INNOVATION NETWORKS.
In General.--From amounts made available to carry out this section, the Secretary of Education shall make grants to eligible networks to expand STEM education and STEM educator development.
Eligible Network Defined.--In this section, the term ``eligible network'' means a State-based STEM network or similar organization, which-- (1) may include the participation of State officials, local educational agencies, educators, administrators, afterschool providers, out of school time educators, parents, industry leaders, philanthropists, and representatives from the STEM communities in partnership with institutions of higher education, nonprofit organizations, other public agencies, and businesses; (2) aims to increase the number of students who are effectively prepared for postsecondary education and careers in STEM fields; (3) aims to increase student achievement and experiences in the STEM disciplines at the elementary schools and secondary schools in its State, and out of school programs and particularly for students with a high concentration of historically underrepresented students and at rural schools (within the meaning of part B of title VI of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6201 et sequentes)); and (4) aims to increase the number of quality afterschool programs offering STEM learning opportunities, particularly for students from populations traditionally underrepresented in the STEM fields.
Eligible Network Application.-- (1) In general.--An eligible network seeking a grant under this section shall submit an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Matching requirement.--In order to receive a grant under this section, an eligible network shall agree to provide, either directly or through private contributions, non-Federal matching funds equal to not less than 30 percent of the amount of the grant.
Uses of Funds.--Each eligible network receiving a grant under this section shall use the funds to carry out one or more of the following: (1) Testing, validating, sharing, and scaling up STEM education research, promising practices, and exemplary programs among members of the network and with other eligible networks receiving grants under this section.
Identifying points of weakness and strength among State STEM education efforts, prioritizing strategies for addressing problem areas, and communicating State needs to the Secretary.
Assisting in the implementation of rigorous career and college ready standards in STEM education for grades prekindergarten through grade 12 that reflect and take into consideration-- (A) career and college ready standards in STEM disciplines; (B) established international standards and 21st century skills that include critical thinking, problem solving, communication, collaboration, creativity, and innovation; (C) the needs of English language learners and special education students; and (D) the need to increase STEM literacy of prekindergarten through grade 12 students.
Assisting the development of innovative STEM assessments that measure interest, engagement, and content proficiency.
Supporting the implementation of STEM assessments that measure career and college ready standards.
Promoting and developing rigorous undergraduate pre- service teacher programs in institutions of higher education that emphasize STEM content with emphasis on the elementary educator.
Promoting and developing curriculum tools and professional development for STEM educators both in school and out of school.
Developing STEM career pathways that reflect the projected STEM workforce needs of the 21st century that may include mentoring programs and STEM professional outreach.
Developing STEM-related education and workforce training programs in secondary schools and community colleges to reflect the needs of the local community.
Developing systems for the implementation of expanded learning opportunities on school sites to enhance STEM education inside and outside of the classroom.
Promoting, supporting, and designing programs that develop STEM content coaches and master educators in order to strengthen core competencies of the classroom practitioner.
Evaluation and Report.--Not later than 2 years after receiving a grant under this section, each eligible network receiving such a grant shall-- (1) conduct periodic independent evaluations, by grant or by contract, of the eligible network's effectiveness at accomplishing the activities described in this section, which shall include an assessment of the impact of such activities on STEM teaching and learning; and (2) prepare and submit a report on the results of each evaluation described in paragraph (1) to the Secretary and make for dissemination to other STEM Networks.
Prohibitions.--In implementing this section, the Secretary may not-- (1) endorse, approve, or sanction any STEM curriculum designed for use in any elementary school, secondary school, or institution of higher education; or (2) engage in oversight, technical assistance, or activities that will require the adoption of a specific STEM program or instructional materials by a State, local educational agency, or school.
Total Amount of Grants.--The total amount of grants made under this section in any fiscal year may not exceed $20,000,000.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The terms ``elementary school'', ``local educational agency'', ``secondary school'', and ``State educational agency'' have the meanings given such terms in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
The term ``high concentration of low-income students'' has the meaning given such term in section 1707 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6537).
The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, and the United States Virgin Islands.
The term ``STEM'' means science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
The term ``STEM education'' means the subjects of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, including other academic subjects that build on these disciplines, such as computer science, and other academic subjects that a State identifies as important to the workforce of the State.
The term ``21st century readiness initiative'' means any initiative that-- (A) embeds core academic subjects with critical skills; and (B) is focused on ensuring that students are prepared for postsecondary education and careers, upon graduation from secondary school.