This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security Domestic Employment Tax Simplification Act of 1993''.
INCREASE IN MINIMUM AMOUNT OF CASH REMUNERATION FOR DOMESTIC SERVICES SUBJECT TO SOCIAL SECURITY EMPLOYMENT TAXES.
Determination of Wages under the Social Security Act.-- Subparagraph (B) of section 209(a)(6) of the Social Security Act is amended to read as follows: ``(B)(i) Cash remuneration paid by an employer in any calendar year to an employee for domestic service in a private home of the employer, if the cash remuneration paid in such year by the employer to the employee for such service is less than the minimum assessed wages determined under this subparagraph for such year.
The minimum assessed wages for 1993 shall be the product of $200 and the ratio of the average of the total wages (as defined in regulations of the Secretary and computed without regard to the limitations specified in section 209(a)(1)) for 1992 to the average of the total wages (as so defined) for 1950, with such product, if not a multiple of $10, being rounded to the next higher multiple of $10 where such amount is a multiple of $5 but not of $10 and to the nearest multiple of $10 in any other case.
The Secretary shall, on or after November 1 of 1993 and of every year thereafter, determine and publish in the Federal Register the minimum assessed wages for the succeeding calendar year.
The amount of such minimum assessed wages shall be the larger of-- ``(I) the amount in effect for the calendar year in which the determination under this clause is made, or ``(II) the product of the minimum assessed wages for 1993 and the ratio of the deemed average total wages (as defined in section 209(k)(1)) for the calendar year before the year in which the determination under this clause is made to the deemed average total wages (as so defined) for 1991, with such product, if not a multiple of $10, being rounded to the next higher multiple of $10 where such amount is a multiple of $5 but not of $10 and to the nearest multiple of $10 in any other case.
As used in this subparagraph, the term `domestic service in a private home of the employer' does not include service described in section 210(f)(5).''.
Determination of Wages Under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (B) of section 3121(a)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining wages) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) cash remuneration paid by an employer in any calendar year to an employee for domestic service in a private home of the employer, if the cash remuneration paid in such year by the employer to the employee for such service is less than the minimum assessed wages determined under section 209(a)(6)(B) of the Social Security Act for such year.
As used in this subparagraph, the term `domestic service in a private home of the employer' does not include service described in subsection (g)(5);''.
Conforming amendment.--The second sentence of section 3102(a) of such Code (relating to deduction of tax from wages) is amended-- (A) by striking ``calendar quarter'' each place it appears and inserting ``calendar year'', and (B) by striking ``$50'' and inserting ``the minimum assessed wages determined under section 209(a)(6)(B) of the Social Security Act for such year''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to remuneration paid in calendar years after 1992.
As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall publish in the Federal Register the minimum assessed wages for 1993, determined under section 209(a)(6)(B)(ii) of the Social Security Act (as amended by this Act).
COORDINATION OF COLLECTION OF DOMESTIC SERVICE EMPLOYMENT WITH COLLECTION OF INCOME TAXES.
In General.--Chapter 25 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to general provisions relating to employment taxes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
COORDINATION OF COLLECTION OF DOMESTIC SERVICE EMPLOYMENT TAXES WITH COLLECTION OF INCOME TAXES.
General Rule.--Except as otherwise provided in this section-- ``(1) returns with respect to domestic service employment taxes shall be made on a calendar year basis, ``(2) any such return for any calendar year shall be filed on or before the due date (including extensions) of the income tax return for the employer's taxable year which begins in such calendar year, and ``(3) no requirement to make deposits (or to pay installments under section 6157) shall apply with respect to such taxes.
Domestic Service Employment Taxes Subject to Estimated Tax Provisions.-- ``(1) In general.--Solely for purposes of section 6654, domestic service employment taxes imposed with respect to any calendar year shall be treated as a tax imposed by chapter 2 for the taxable year of the employer which begins in such calendar year.
Annualization.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, appropriate adjustments shall be made in the application of section 6654(d)(2) in respect of the amount treated as tax under paragraph (1).
Transitional rule.--For purposes of applying section 6654 to a taxable year beginning in 1993, the amount referred to in clause (ii) of section 6654(d)(1)(B) shall be increased by 90 percent of the amount treated as tax under paragraph (1) for such taxable year.
Domestic Service Employment Taxes.--For purposes of this section, the term `domestic service employment taxes' means-- ``(1) any taxes imposed by chapter 21 or 23 on remuneration paid for domestic service in a private home of the employer, and ``(2) any amount withheld from such remuneration pursuant to an agreement under section 3402(p).
For purposes of this subsection, the term `domestic service in a private home of the employer' does not include service described in section 3121(g)(5).
Exception Where Employer Liable for Other Employment Taxes.-- To the extent provided in regulations prescribed by the Secretary, this section shall not apply to any employer for any calendar year if such employer is liable for any tax under this subtitle with respect to remuneration for services other than domestic service in a private home of the employer.
Authority To Enter Into Agreements To Collect State Unemployment Taxes.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with any State to collect, as the agent of such State, such State's unemployment taxes imposed on remuneration paid for domestic service in a private home of the employer.
Any taxes to be collected by the Secretary pursuant to such an agreement shall be treated as domestic service employment taxes for purposes of this section.
Transfers to state account.--Any amount collected under an agreement referred to in paragraph (1) shall be transferred by the Secretary to the account of the State in the Unemployment Trust Fund.
Subtitle f made applicable.--For purposes of subtitle F, any amount required to be collected under an agreement under paragraph (1) shall be treated as a tax imposed by chapter 23.
State.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `State' has the meaning given such term by section 3306(j)(1).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 25 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Sec.
Coordination of collection of domestic service employment taxes with collection of income taxes.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to remuneration paid in calendar years after 1992.
STUDY REGARDING MINIMUM ASSESSED WAGES FOR DOMESTIC SERVICE.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Secretary of the Treasury shall conduct a joint study of the effects of the amendments made by this Act.
In the course of such study, the Secretaries shall-- (1) analyze the effect of the amounts of minimum assessed wages established pursuant to such amendments on the integrity of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund, the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund, and the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, (2) evaluate the annual savings to the Government caused by the annualization of the employment taxes provided in such amendments, and (3) such other related matters as they consider appropriate.
Report.--Not later than January 1, 1996, the Secretaries shall transmit a report to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate setting forth the results of their study conducted pursuant to subsection (a).
Such study shall include such recommendations for legislative changes as such Secretaries may consider appropriate.