This Act may be cited as the ``Kenai Natives Association Equity Act of 1994''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and Kenai Natives Association, Inc. (KNA), have agreed to an exchange and acquisition program pursuant to Public Law 102-458, of lands and interests in lands in and near the Kenai National Wildlife Refuge (Refuge); (2) this acquisition of and exchange of lands will significantly enhance the ability of the Service to conserve fish and wildlife populations and habitats, fulfill migratory bird treaties, ensure water quality and quantity, provide opportunities for environmental research and education, improve access to fish and wildlife oriented recreation, and further enhance the Refuge management objectives; (3) the amount to be paid for the Swanson River Road West Tract, the sole issue upon which the Service and KNA could not agree, is established by Congress at $7,500,000; and (4) it is in the public interest to complete this exchange, and to provide for the economic and beneficial use of lands conveyed to KNA in fulfillment of the purpose of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971, as amended (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes) (Settlement Act).
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to authorize and direct the Secretary to complete an exchange and acquisition as provided by Public Law 102-458 of lands owned by KNA that will provide for and enhance the management opportunities and objectives of the Refuge, and assist KNA in achieving economic viability and use of its retained lands in furtherance of the Settlement Act.
For purposes of this Act, the term-- (1) ``ANILCA'' means the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, as amended (16 United States Code 3101 et sequentes); (2) ``conservation system unit'' has the same meaning as in ANILCA; (3) ``KNA'' means the Kenai Natives Association, Inc., an urban corporation incorporated in the State of Alaska pursuant to the terms of the Settlement Act; (4) ``lands'' means both the surface and subsurface estates or any interest therein whenever both estates are owned by the United States or KNA, as applicable; (5) ``property'' has the same meaning given such term by section 12(b)(7) of the Settlement Act; (6) ``refuge'' means the Kenai National Wildlife Refuge; (7) ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior; (8) ``Service'' means the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; and (9) ``Settlement Act'' means the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971, as amended (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes).
EXCHANGE AND ACQUISITION OF LANDS (a) Exchange of Lands; Acquisition and Equalization Payment.-- (1) In general.--No later than June 1, 1995, the Secretary shall offer to convey to KNA, in accordance with the provisions of the report to Congress issued pursuant to Public Law 102-458 and subject to the provisions of paragraph (3) and valid existing rights, approximately 1,831 acres of land, portions of the Federal subsurface estate underlying the same, and portions of the Federal subsurface estate underlying another 3,238 acres, all as identified in subsection (b)(2), in exchange for approximately 14,338 acres of KNA land, and the relinquishment by KNA of its unpatented selections and all entitlement to selections under the Settlement Act, consisting of approximately 1,207 acres, all located within the Refuge and identified in subsection (b)(1).
The Secretary shall develop the offer required by this section in consultation with KNA.
Limitation.--The Secretary may not convey any lands or make any payment to KNA under this section unless title to the lands to be conveyed by KNA in exchange for such lands and payments is in accordance with the Department of Justice standards for preparation of title evidence in land acquisitions by the United States.
Sources of funds.--The Secretary shall utilize any combination of Land and Water Conservation Act of 1965 funds, funds otherwise appropriated by the Congress, Exxon Valdez Oil Spill settlement funds, and lands or other Federal property within the Secretary's jurisdiction as payment to KNA to equalize the values in the exchange.
Interest.--If a bonafide offer required by this section is not made by June 1, 1995, interest on the value of the property and interests to be conveyed to KNA shall accrue beginning October 1, 1993.
Exchange and Acquisition Lands.-- (1) KNA lands to be acquired.--The lands or interests to be conveyed by KNA to the United States, all situated within the existing authorized boundary of the Refuge, and identified on the map titled ``Kenai Natives Association, Inc. and United States Fish and Wildlife Service Negotiated Exchange/ Acquisition Package,'' dated October 1993, on file and available for inspection in the Office of the Secretary, generally include, subject to reservations of existing road easements-- (A) approximately 803 acres located along the Kenai River, known as the Stephanka Tract; (B) approximately 1,243 acres located along the Moose River, known as the Moose River Patented Lands Tract; (C) approximately 2,120 acres located along Marathon Road, known as the Beaver Creek Tract; (D) approximately 10,172 acres located along the Swanson River Road and the Sunken Island Lake Road, known as the Swanson River Road West Tract; (E) all of the remaining KNA selections under the Settlement Act, consisting of approximately 1,207 acres, are hereby relinquished and all remaining entitlement of KNA is hereby extinguished; and (F) an easement for access to and use of less than one acre of land, located in the NE\1/4\ NE\1/4\ of section 24, T.6N., R.9W., Seward Meridian, within the Swanson River Road East Tract, for so long as the site is used by the Service as a radio communications repeater site.
Lands to be exchanged.--The lands or interests to be conveyed by the United States to KNA, and identified (except for the parcel identified in subparagraph (A)) on the map titled ``Kenai Natives Association, Inc. and United States Fish and Wildlife Service Negotiated Exchange/Acquisition package,'' dated October 1993, on file and available for inspection in the Office of the Secretary, generally include, subject to reservations of existing road easements-- (A) approximately five acres, located within the city of Kenai, Alaska, identified as United States Survey 1435, and known as the old Fish and Wildlife Service Headquarters site; (B) approximately 1,826 acres located along the Swanson River Road, known as the Swanson River Road East Tract; and (C) the subsurface estate (less oil, coal, and gas) to approximately 5,064 acres, including approximately 1,826 acres underlying the Swanson River Road East Tract and approximately 3,238 adjacent acres underlying lands previously patented to KNA which are located east of the Swanson River Road.
Acquisition authority.--The lands identified for acquisition by the United States, specifically identified on the maps referenced in subsection (c) as the Stephanka Tract, the Beaver Creek Tract, and the Moose River Patented Lands Tract, collectively referred to as the ``Kenai River Project'', may be acquired by the United States pursuant to the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965.
National register of historic places.--Upon completion of the exchange authorized in subsection (a), the Secretary shall promptly undertake to nominate the Stephanka Tract to the National Register of Historic Places, in recognition of the archeological artifacts from the original Kenaitze Indian settlement.
Valuations.--This exchange and acquisition shall be accomplished utilizing the valuations established in the report to Congress issued pursuant to Public Law 102-458, with the exception of the Swanson River Road West Tract which value is established at $7,500,000.
General Provisions.-- (1) Removal of restrictions.--(A) Those lands retained by KNA, and those parcels within the Refuge, including designated wilderness, conveyed to KNA pursuant to the terms of this Act, shall be removed in their entirety from inclusion within the boundaries of the Refuge by operation of this Act.
Such removal from the boundaries of the Refuge shall terminate any application of Federal management and patent restrictions applicable to lands within the Refuge for which conveyance was made pursuant to the terms of the Settlement Act or any other law or regulation applicable solely to Federal lands.
The Secretary shall execute and file such instruments as are necessary to convey lands and remove the restrictions referred to in this section at the time of the conveyances provided in subsection (a)(1).
Any lands KNA shall receive from the United States pursuant to this Act shall be deemed to have been conveyed pursuant to the Settlement Act.
Maps and legal descriptions.--The maps described in this section and a legal description of the lands depicted on the maps shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the United States Department of the Interior.
Not later than 120 days after the day of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare a legal description of the lands depicted on the maps referred to in this section.
Such maps and legal descriptions shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors.
Acceptance.--KNA may accept the offer made pursuant to subsection (a) by notifying the Secretary in writing of its decision within 120 days of receipt of the offer.
In the event the offer is rejected, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress describing the reasons why agreement was not reached.
Final maps.--Not later than 120 days after the conclusion of the exchange authorized by subsection (a), the Secretary shall transmit a final report and maps accurately depicting the lands transferred and conveyed pursuant to this Act and the acreage and legal descriptions of such lands to the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
ADJUSTMENTS TO NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM.
Addition to the Kenai National Wildlife Refuge.--The Secretary shall add the lands conveyed to the United States pursuant to subsection (a)(1) to the Refuge.
The Secretary shall manage such lands in accordance with the provisions of the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd-668ee) and ANILCA.
Kenai National Wildlife Refuge Boundary Adjustment.--The boundaries of the Refuge as set forth in section 303(4)(A) of ANILCA are hereby adjusted to include those lands generally depicted on the map described in section 4(c)(4) entitled ``Proposed Boundary Extension'', dated October 1993.
Addition to Wilderness Area.--Upon acquisition of lands by the United States pursuant to section 4(a)(1), that portion of the Stephanka Tract lying south and west of the Kenai River, consisting of approximately 592 acres and as generally depicted as ``To be included in wilderness'' on the map referenced in section 4(b)(1), shall be included in and managed as part of the Kenai Wilderness.
Upon their inclusion into the Kenai Wilderness, such lands shall be managed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Wilderness Act and ANILCA.
Removal of Conveyed Lands From Wilderness Area.--Upon conveyance to KNA of those lands under section 4(b)(2), a portion of which is currently designated wilderness, consisting of approximately 623.5 acres and identified as ``To be removed from wilderness'' on the map referenced in section 4(b)(2), such lands are removed from the Kenai Wilderness and the National Wilderness Preservation System.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
LIMITATION ON APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENT FOR ACQUISITIONS BY UNITED STATES UNDER MIGRATORY BIRD CONSERVATION ACT.
Section 7 of the Migratory Bird Conservation Act (16 United States Code 715f) is amended by inserting ``in fee'' after ``conveyance''.
Passed the House of Representatives October 3, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.