This Act may be cited as the ``Chinese Human Rights Act of 1995''.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Political prisoner.--The term ``political prisoner'' means an individual citizen of the People's Republic of China who for political thoughts and/or actions in opposition to the Chinese Government has been imprisoned.
Thought control.--The term ``thought control'' means intensive, forcible indoctrination aimed at replacing a person's basic convictions with an alternative set of beliefs.
Political reprisal.--The term ``political reprisal'' means retaliation for political injuries, real or imagined.
Forced abortion.--The term ``forced abortion'' describes the act of coercing a female against her will, by threat of bodily damage, death, or imprisonment, to undergo a surgical procedure for the purpose of inducing termination of pregnancy and expulsion of an embryo or fetus.
Forced sterilization.--The term ``forced sterilization'' describes the act of coercing a male or female against their will, by threat of bodily damage, death, or imprisonment, to undergo a surgical procedure for the purpose of causing them to be unable to produce offspring.
Cannibalism.--The term ``cannibalism'' means the consumption of a human embryo or fetus by another human.
Congress finds-- (1) that, on October 8, 1984, the People's Republic of China promulgated an internal document detailing the conditions and measures for removing, for purposes of human transplant, the organs of prisoners executed by the Chinese Government; (2) that, pursuant to the document, China has, in some cases, scheduled the execution of political dissidents on the basis of the need for the internal organs of those political dissidents; (3) that, in China, prisoners are routinely executed because of their opposition to the policies of their communist government or because of their unwillingness to submit to forms of thought control imposed by reeducation camps operated by the Chinese Government; (4) that, because of fear of the government, relatives of executed dissidents are reluctant to claim the bodies of their kin, for fear of political reprisal; (5) that China's birth control policy routinely results in forced abortion, forced sterilization, infanticide, and even cannibalism; and (6) that, by its actions, China has separated itself from the community of civilized nations.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to use the economic power of the United States to lessen the brutality imposed by the Chinese Government against its people, and for other purposes.
MOST FAVORED NATION STATUS.
Notwithstanding anything in section 402 of Public Law 83-618, as amended, to the contrary, any waiver by the President of subsections (a) and (b) of section 2432 of title 19, United States Code, with respect to the People's Republic of China is null and void.
The People's Republic of China shall not be granted nondiscriminatory treatment (most-favored-nation treatment) until Congress shall by statute provide.
TRADING WITH THE ENEMY ACT.
Section 2 of title 50 Appendix, United States Code, is amended by adding after ``enemy,'' the first time it appears the following new subsection: ``(d) For purposes of products possessing a military application, for a period beginning on the date of enactment of the Chinese Human Rights Act of 1995, to the date on which Congress, by joint resolution, determines that the People's Republic of China does not engage in any significant violation of human rights and poses no significant threat to the United States, the government of the People's Republic of China.''.
PERSECUTION FOR RESISTANCE TO COERCIVE POPULATION CONTROL MEASURES.
Section 101(a)(42) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(42)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``For purposes of determinations under this Act, a person who has been forced to abort a pregnancy or to undergo involuntary sterilization, or who has been persecuted for failure or refusal to undergo such a procedure or for other resistance to a coercive population control program, shall be deemed to have been persecuted on account of political opinion, and a person who has a well founded fear that he or she will be forced to undergo such a procedure or subjected to persecution for such failure, refusal, or resistance shall be deemed to have a well founded fear of persecution on account of political opinion.''.
This Act shall take effect immediately upon enactment.