This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Mental Health Accessibility Act of 2001''.
AMENDMENT TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254b et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
MENTAL HEALTH COMMUNITY EDUCATION PROGRAM.
Program Authorized.--The Director of the Office of Rural Health Policy (of the Health Resources and Services Administration) shall award grants to eligible entities to conduct mental health community education programs.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' includes a State entity, public or private school, mental health clinic, rural health clinic, local public health department, nonprofit private entity, federally qualified health center, Rural Area Health Education Center, Indian tribe and tribal organization, and any other entity deemed eligible by the Secretary.
Mental health community education program.--The term `mental health community education program' means a program regarding mental illness, mental retardation, suicide prevention and co-occurring mental illness and substance abuse disorder.
Preference.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Director shall give a preference to eligible entities that are or propose to be in a network, or work in collaboration, with other eligible entities to carry out the programs under this section, such as a rural public or nonprofit private entity that represents a network of local health care providers or other entities that provide or support delivery of health care services, and a State office of rural health or other appropriate State entity.
Duration.--The Director shall award grants under subsection (a) for a period of 3 years.
Amount.--Each grant awarded under this section shall not be greater than $200,000 each fiscal year.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds received through such grant to administer a mental health community education program to rural populations that provides information to dispel myths regarding mental illness and to reduce any stigma associated with mental illness.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require, including-- ``(1) a description of the activities which the eligible entity intends to carry out using amounts provided under the grant; ``(2) a plan for continuing the project after Federal support is ended; ``(3) a description of the manner in which the educational activities funded under the grant will meet the mental health care needs of underserved rural populations within the State; and ``(4) a description of how the local community or region to be served by the network or proposed network, if the eligible entity is in such a network, will be involved in the development and ongoing operations of the network.
Evaluations; Report.--Each eligible entity that receives a grant under this section shall submit to the Director of the Office of Rural Health Policy (of the Health Resources and Services Administration) an evaluation describing the programs authorized under this section and any other information that the Director deems appropriate.
After receiving such evaluations, the Director shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report describing such evaluations.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2003 through 2006.
Program Authorized.--The Director of the Office of Rural Health Policy (of the Health Resources and Services Administration) shall award grants to eligible entities to establish interdisciplinary training programs that include significant mental health training in rural areas for certain health care providers.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means a public university or other educational institution that provides training for mental health care providers or primary health care providers.
Mental health care provider.--The term `mental health care provider' means-- ``(A) a physician with postgraduate training in a residency program of psychiatry; ``(B) a licensed psychologist (as defined by the Secretary for purposes of section 1861(ii) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ii))); ``(C) a clinical social worker (as defined in section 1861(hh)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(hh)(1)); or ``(D) a clinical nurse specialist (as defined in section 1861(aa)(5)(B) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(aa)(5)(B))).
Primary health care provider.--The term `primary health care provider' includes family practice, internal medicine, pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, geriatrics, and emergency medicine physicians as well as physician assistants and nurse practitioners.
Rural area.--The term `rural area' means a rural area as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act, or such an area in a rural census tract of a metropolitan statistical area (as determined under the most recent modification of the Goldsmith Modification, originally published in the Federal Register on February 27, 1992 (57 Fed.
6725)), or any other geographical area that the Director designates as a rural area.
Duration.--Grants awarded under subsection (a) shall be awarded for a period of 5 years.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds received through such grant to administer an interdisciplinary, side-by-side training program for mental health care providers and primary health care providers, that includes providing, under appropriate supervision, health care services to patients in underserved, rural areas without regard to patients' ability to pay for such services.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require, including-- ``(1) a description of the activities which the eligible entity intends to carry out using amounts provided under the grant; ``(2) a description of the manner in which the activities funded under the grant will meet the mental health care needs of underserved rural populations within the State; and ``(3) a description of the network agreement with partnering facilities.
Evaluations; Report.--Each eligible entity that receives a grant under this section shall submit to the Director of the Office of Rural Health Policy (of the Health Resources and Services Administration) an evaluation describing the programs authorized under this section and any other information that the Director deems appropriate.
After receiving such evaluations, the Director shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report describing such evaluations.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.
STUDY OF MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES DELIVERED WITH TELEHEALTH TECHNOLOGIES.
In General.--The Director of the National Institute of Mental Health, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Rural Health Policy, shall carry out activities to research the efficacy and effectiveness of mental health services delivered remotely by a qualified mental health professional (psychiatrist or doctoral level psychologist) using telehealth technologies.
Mandatory Activities.--Research described in subsection (a) shall include-- ``(1) objective measurement of treatment outcomes for individuals with mental illness treated remotely using telehealth technologies as compared to individuals with mental illness treated face-to-face; ``(2) objective measurement of treatment compliance by individuals with mental illness treated remotely using telehealth technologies as compared to individuals with mental illness treated face-to-face; and ``(3) any other variables as determined by the Director.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary.
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES DELIVERED VIA TELEHEALTH.
Program Authorized.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Office for the Advancement of Telehealth of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award grants to eligible entities to establish demonstration projects for the provision of mental health services to special populations as delivered remotely by qualified mental health professionals using telehealth and for the provision of education regarding mental illness as delivered remotely by qualified mental health professionals and qualified mental health education professionals using telehealth.
Number of demonstration projects.--Ten grants shall be awarded under paragraph (1) to provide services for the children and adolescents described in subsection (d)(1)(A) and not less than 6 of such grants shall be for services rendered to individuals in rural areas.
Ten grants shall also be awarded under paragraph (1) to provide services for the elderly described in subsection (d)(1)(B) in rural areas.
If the maximum number of grants to be awarded under paragraph (1) is not awarded, the Secretary shall award the remaining grants in a manner that is equitably distributed between the populations described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (d)(1).
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means a public or nonprofit private telehealth provider network which has as part of its services mental health services provided by qualified mental health providers.
Qualified mental health education professionals.--The term `qualified mental health education professionals' refers to teachers, community mental health professionals, nurses, and other entities as determined by the Secretary who have additional training in the delivery of information on mental illness to children and adolescents or who have additional training in the delivery of information on mental illness to the elderly.
Qualified mental health professionals.--The term `qualified mental health professionals' refers to providers of mental health services currently reimbursed under medicare who have additional training in the treatment of mental illness in children and adolescents or who have additional training in the treatment of mental illness in the elderly.
Special populations.--The term `special populations' refers to the following 2 distinct groups: ``(A) Children and adolescents located in primary and secondary public schools in mental health underserved rural areas or in mental health underserved urban areas.
Elderly individuals located in long-term care facilities in mental health underserved rural areas.
Telehealth.--The term `telehealth' means the use of electronic information and telecommunications technologies to support long-distance clinical health care, patient and professional health-related education, public health, and health administration.
Amount.--Each entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall receive not less than $1,500,000 with no more than 40 percent of the total budget outlined for equipment.
Use of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under this section shall use such funds-- ``(A) for the populations described in subsection (b)(3)(A)-- ``(i) to provide mental health services, including diagnosis and treatment of mental illness, in primary and secondary public schools as delivered remotely by qualified mental health professionals using telehealth; ``(ii) to provide education regarding mental illness (including suicide and violence) in primary and secondary public schools as delivered remotely by qualified mental health professionals and qualified mental health education professionals using telehealth, including early recognition of the signs and symptoms of mental illness, and instruction on coping and dealing with stressful experiences of childhood and adolescence (such as violence, social isolation, and depression); and ``(iii) to collaborate with local public health entities and the eligible entity to provide the mental health services; and ``(B) for the populations described in subsection (b)(3)(B)-- ``(i) to provide mental health services, including diagnosis and treatment of mental illness, in long-term care facilities as delivered remotely by qualified mental health professionals using telehealth; ``(ii) to provide education regarding mental illness to primary staff (including physicians, nurses, and nursing aides) as delivered remotely by qualified mental health professionals and qualified mental health education professionals using telehealth, including early recognition of the signs and symptoms of mental illness, and instruction on coping and dealing with stressful experiences of old age (such as loss of physical and cognitive capabilities, death of loved ones and friends, social isolation, and depression); and ``(iii) to collaborate with local public health entities and the eligible entity to provide mental health services.
Other uses.--An eligible entity receiving a grant under this section may also use funds to-- ``(A) acquire telehealth equipment to use in primary and secondary public schools and long-term care facilities for the purposes of this section; ``(B) develop curriculum to support activities described in subsections (d)(1)(A)(ii) and (d)(1)(B)(ii); ``(C) pay telecommunications costs; and ``(D) pay qualified mental health professionals and qualified mental health education professionals on a reasonable cost basis as determined by the Secretary for services rendered.
Prohibited uses.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under this section shall not use funds received through such grant to-- ``(A) purchase or install transmission equipment (other than such equipment used by qualified mental health professionals to deliver mental health services using telehealth under the project); or ``(B) build upon or acquire real property (except for minor renovations related to the installation of reimbursable equipment).
Equitable Distribution.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall ensure, to the greatest extent possible, that such grants are equitably distributed among geographical regions of the United States.
Application.--An entity that desires a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary determines to be reasonable.
Report.--Not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and submit a report to the appropriate committees of Congress that shall evaluate activities funded with grants under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums that are required to carry out this program for fiscal years 2003 through 2009.
Sunset Provision.--This section shall be effective for 7 years from the date of enactment of this section.