This Act may be cited as the ``Child Labor Amendments of 1993''.
TITLE I--CHILD LABOR PROVISIONS SEC.
NO PRIOR OFFENSE PREREQUISITE FOR CHILD LABOR VIOLATION.
The second sentence of section 16(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 216(a)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, except that this sentence shall not apply to a violation of section 12''.
CIVIL PENALTIES FOR CHILD LABOR VIOLATIONS.
Section 16(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 216(e)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) as subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), respectively; (2) by inserting ``(1)'' after the subsection designation; (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(2) Any person who willfully violates the provisions of section 12, relating to child labor, or any regulation issued under such section, on more than one occasion, shall, on such additional violation, be ineligible-- ``(A) for any grant, contract, or loan provided by an agency of the United States or by appropriated funds of the United States, for 3 years after the date of such additional violation; or ``(B) to pay the training wage authorized by section 6 of Fair Labor Standards Amendments of 1989 (29 United States Code 206 note), unless the Secretary otherwise recommends, because of unusual circumstances.
The Secretary shall make available to affected school districts for posting and distribution the name of each employer who violates the provisions of section 12, relating to child labor, or any regulation issued under such section, together with a description of the location and nature of the violation.''.
Section 12 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 212) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e)(1) As used in this subsection: ``(A) The term `minor' means an individual who is under the age of 18 and who has not received a high school diploma or its equivalent.
The term `parent' means a biological parent of a minor or other individual standing in place of the parent to a minor.
No employer shall employ a minor unless the minor possesses a valid certificate of employment issued in accordance with this subsection.
The Governor of a State shall designate a State agency to issue certificates of employment to minors in the State.
The agency shall make available, on request, a form for the application described in paragraph (4) and shall make available, as part of the certification process, materials describing applicable Federal requirements governing the employment of minors.
To be eligible to receive a certificate of employment, a minor must submit to the appropriate State agency an application that contains-- ``(A) the name and address of the minor; ``(B) the name and address of the employer; ``(C) proof of age of the minor; and ``(D) if the minor is under the age of 16-- ``(i) a written statement by a parent of the minor that the parent grants consent for employment of the minor; and ``(ii) written verification from the minor's school that the minor is meeting any applicable minimum school attendance requirements established under State law.
On receipt of an application under paragraph (4), a State agency shall issue to the minor-- ``(A) a certificate of employment, if the requirements of paragraph (4) are met; or ``(B) a statement of the denial of a certificate of employment (including the reasons for the denial), if the requirements of paragraph (4) are not met.
A certificate of employment issued to a minor under this subsection shall be valid during the period in which the minor is employed by the employer listed on the certificate.
A certificate of employment issued to a minor under this subsection shall indicate-- ``(A) the name, address, and date of birth of the minor; ``(B) the name and address of the employer; ``(C) restrictions on the times of day and maximum number of hours the minor may be employed and on the employment of the minor in hazardous occupations; and ``(D) the name, address, and telephone number of the State agency that may be contacted for additional information concerning applicable Federal requirements governing the employment of minors.
The State agency shall provide a copy of a certificate of employment issued to a minor under the age of 16 to the parent of the minor who granted consent pursuant to paragraph (4).
A State agency shall report annually to the Secretary concerning certificates of employment issued under this subsection.
The agency shall include such information as the Secretary requires (including information on the number of deaths and injuries of minors reported pursuant to subsection (f)).''.
INFORMATION ON DEATHS AND INJURIES INVOLVING MINORS; INFORMATION DESCRIBING PROVISIONS OF FEDERAL CHILD LABOR LAW.
Section 12 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 212) (as amended by section 103 of this Act) is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(f) If a minor in the course of employment suffers death, or an injury resulting in lost work time of more than 3 working days, not later than 10 days after the employer of the minor obtains knowledge of the death or injury, such employer shall provide to the State agency a written description of the death or injury.
The Secretary shall prepare and distribute to State employment agencies written materials (suitable for posting and mass distribution) that describe the provisions of Federal law and regulations governing the employment of minors.''.
HAZARDOUS CHILD LABOR OCCUPATIONS.
Section 3(l) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 203(l)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The Secretary shall find and by order declare that poultry processing, fish and seafood processing, and pesticide handling (among other occupations declared by the Secretary) are occupations that are particularly hazardous for the employment of children between the ages of 16 and 18 for purposes of this subsection.''.
PROTECTION OF MINORS WHO ARE MIGRANT OR SEASONAL AGRICULTURAL WORKERS.
Definition of Oppressive Child Labor.--The first sentence of section 3(l) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 203(l)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' before ``(2)''; and (2) by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, or (3) any employee under the age of 14 years is employed in agriculture, except where such employee is employed by a parent of the employee, or by a person standing in the place of a parent of the employee, on a farm owned or operated by such parent or person''.
Exemptions.--Section 13(c) of such Act (29 United States Code 213(c)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``(2) or (4)'' and inserting ``(2)''; and (B) by striking ``employed, if such employee--'' and all that follows through the end and inserting ``employed, if such employee is 14 years of age or older.
''; and (2) by striking paragraph (4).
Not later than 1, 2, and 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall provide to the Committee on Education and Labor of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate a report on actions taken to carry out, and the effect of, this title and the amendments made by this title, including national and State-by-State information on-- (1) certificates of employment issued to minors under section 12(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (as added by section 103 of this Act); and (2) deaths and injuries of minors occurring in the course of employment that are reported under section 12(f) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (as added by section 104 of this Act).
The Secretary of Labor shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
This Act shall become effective 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.