This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Programs Amendments of 1996''.
PRESUMPTION THAT BRONCHIOLO-ALVEOLAR CARCINOMA IS SERVICE- CONNECTED.
Section 1112(c)(2) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(P) Bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma.''.
PRESUMPTION OF PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY FOR VETERANS OVER AGE 65 WHO ARE NURSING HOME PATIENTS.
Section 1502(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``is 65 years of age or older and a patient in a nursing home or, regardless of age,'' after ``such a person''.
PILOT PROGRAM FOR USE OF CONTRACT PHYSICIANS FOR DISABILITY EXAMINATIONS.
Authority.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may conduct a pilot program under this section under which examinations with respect to medical disability of applicants for benefits under laws administered by the Secretary that are carried out through the Under Secretary for Benefits may be made by persons other than employees of the Department of Veterans Affairs pursuant to contracts entered into with those persons.
Limitation.--The Secretary may carry out the pilot program under this section through not more than 10 regional offices of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Source of Funds.--Payments for contracts under the pilot program under this section shall be made from amounts available to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for payment of examinations of applicants for benefits.
Report to Congress.--Not later than three years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the effect of the use of the authority provided by subsection (a) on the timeliness and thoroughness of medical disability examinations.
INCREASE IN AUTOMOBILE ALLOWANCE.
In General.--Section 3902(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``$5,500'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$6,000''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to purchases of automobiles and other conveyances on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EFFECTIVE DATE OF DISCONTINUANCE OF CERTAIN VETERANS' BENEFITS BY REASON OF DEATH OF RECIPIENT.
In General.--Section 5112(b)(1) of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(1) by reason of-- ``(A) the marriage or remarriage of the payee, shall be the last day of the month before the month during which such marriage or remarriage occurs; and ``(B) the death of the payee, shall be (i) the last day of the month before the month during which the death occurs, or (ii) in the case of a payee who was in receipt of compensation or pension and who has a surviving spouse, the date on which the death occurs;''.
Payment of Benefit for Final Month.--Section 5112 of such title is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) In the case of discontinuance of payment of compensation or pension covered by subsection (b)(1)(B)(ii), the payment for the final calendar month (or any portion thereof) for which such benefit is payable shall (notwithstanding any other provision of law) be payable to the surviving spouse.''.
Commencement Date for DIC.--Section 5110(d) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the effective date of an award of dependency and indemnity compensation for which application is received within one year from the date of death shall, in the case of a surviving spouse to whom an amount is payable pursuant to section 5111(d) of this title, be the day following the date on which the death occurred.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to the death of compensation and pension recipients occurring after October 1, 1998.
INCREASE IN PERIOD FOR WHICH ACCRUED BENEFITS PAYABLE.
Section 5121(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``one year'' in the matter preceding paragraph (1) and inserting in lieu thereof ``two years''.
LIMITATION ON CLOTHING ALLOWANCE FOR INCARCERATED VETERANS.
Pro Rata Reduction.--Chapter 53 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 5313 the following new section: ``Sec.
Limitation on payment of clothing allowance to incarcerated veterans ``In the case of a veteran who is incarcerated in a Federal, State, or local penal institution for a period in excess of 60 days and who is furnished clothing without charge by the institution, the amount of an annual clothing allowance payable to such veteran under section 1162 of this title shall be reduced on a pro rata basis for each day on which the veteran was so incarcerated during the 12-month period preceding the date on which payment of the allowance would be due.
This section shall be carried out under regulations prescribed by the Secretary.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5313 the following new item: ``5313A.
Limitation on payment of clothing allowance to incarcerated veterans.''.
REPAIR AND LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE OF WAR MEMORIALS.
Section 5(b)(2) of the Act of March 4, 1923 (36 United States Code 125(b)(2)), is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(2)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(B) In assuming responsibility for a war memorial under paragraph (1), the Commission may enter into arrangements with the sponsors of the memorial to provide for the repair or long-term maintenance of the memorial.
Any funds transferred to the Commission for the purpose of this subparagraph shall, in lieu of subparagraph (A), be deposited by the Commission in the fund established by paragraph (3).
(A) There is established in the Treasury a fund which shall be available to the Commission for expenses for the maintenance and repair of memorials with respect to which the Commission enters into arrangements under paragraph (2)(B).
The fund shall consist of (i) amounts deposited, and interest and proceeds credited, under subparagraph (B), and (ii) obligations obtained under subparagraph (C).
The Commission shall deposit in the fund such amounts from private contributions as may be accepted under paragraph (2)(B).
The Secretary of the Treasury shall credit to the fund the interest on, and the proceeds from sale or redemption of, obligations held in the fund.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest any portion of the fund that, as determined by the Commission, is not required to meet current expenses.
Each investment shall be made in an interest bearing obligation of the United States or an obligation guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States that, as determined by the Commission, has a maturity suitable for the fund.