This Act may be cited as the ``Honoring Our Nation's Obligation to Returning Warriors Act'' or ``HONOR Warriors Act''.
SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE SPECIALISTS FOR VET CENTERS.
Program Required.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, acting through the Under Secretary for Health of the Department of Veterans Affairs, carry out a program to provide scholarships to individuals pursuing education or training in behavioral health care specialties that are critical to the operations of Vet Centers in order to recruit and retain individuals with such specialties for service as behavioral health care specialists in Vet Centers.
Eligibility.--An individual shall be eligible for a scholarship under the program under this section if the individual-- (1) is pursuing education or training leading to licensure or other certified proficiency in such behavioral health care specialties critical to the operations of Vet Centers as the Secretary shall designate for purposes of the program; and (2) otherwise meets such other criteria or requirements as the Secretary shall establish for purposes of the program.
Amount.--The amount of any scholarship provided under the program under this section shall be determined by the Secretary.
Agreement To Serve as Behavioral Health Care Specialist in Vet Centers.--As a condition of receipt of a scholarship under the program under this section, an individual receiving a scholarship shall enter into an agreement with the Secretary to serve as an employee of a Vet Center in the behavioral health care specialty of the individual for such period as the Secretary shall specify in the agreement.
Repayment.--Each agreement under subsection (c) shall contain such provisions as the Under Secretary shall establish for purposes of the program under this section relating to repayment of the amount of a scholarship provided under this section in the event the individual entering into such agreement does not fulfill the service requirements in such agreement.
Such provisions shall, to the maximum extent practicable, apply uniformly to all recipients of scholarships provided under this section.
Funding.--(1) Amounts for scholarships under the program under this section shall be derived from amounts available to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for readjustment benefits.
The total amount available for scholarships under the program under this section in any fiscal year may not exceed $2,000,000.
Vet Centers Defined.--In this section, the term ``Vet Centers'' means the centers for readjustment counseling and related mental health services for veterans under section 1712A of title 38, United States Code.
ELIGIBILITY OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES WHO SERVE IN OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM OR OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM FOR COUNSELING AND SERVICES THROUGH VETS CENTERS.
In General.--Any member of the Armed Forces, including a member of the National Guard or Reserve, who serves on active duty in the Armed Forces in Operation Iraqi Freedom or Operation Enduring Freedom is eligible for readjustment counseling and related mental health services under section 1712A of title 38, United States Code, through the centers for readjustment counseling and related mental health services (commonly referred to as ``Vet Centers'') operated under that section.
No Requirement for Current Active Duty Service.--A member of the Armed Forces who meets the requirements for eligibility for counseling and services under subsection (a) is entitled to counseling and services under that subsection regardless of whether or not the member is currently on active duty in the Armed Forces at the time of receipt of counseling and services under that subsection.
Regulations.--The eligibility of members of the Armed Forces for counseling and services under subsection (a) shall be subject to such regulations as the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall jointly prescribe for purposes of this section.
RESTORATION OF AUTHORITY OF VETS CENTERS TO PROVIDE REFERRAL AND OTHER ASSISTANCE UPON REQUEST TO FORMER MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES NOT AUTHORIZED COUNSELING.
Section 1712A of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection (c): ``(c) Upon receipt of a request for counseling under this section from any individual who has been discharged or released from active military, naval, or air service but who is not otherwise eligible for such counseling, the Secretary shall-- ``(1) provide referral services to assist such individual, to the maximum extent practicable, in obtaining mental health care and services from sources outside the Department; and ``(2) if pertinent, advise such individual of such individual's rights to apply to the appropriate military, naval, or air service, and to the Department, for review of such individual's discharge or release from such service.''.
TREATMENT OF SUICIDES OF CERTAIN FORMER MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AS DEATHS IN LINE OF DUTY FOR PURPOSES OF ELIGIBILITY OF SURVIVORS FOR CERTAIN BENEFITS.
Treatment as Death in Line of Duty of Suicides of Certain Former Members of the Armed Forces.--The suicide of a former member of the Armed Forces described in subsection (b) that occurs during the two-year period beginning on the date of the separation or retirement of the former member from the Armed Forces shall be treated as a death in line of duty of a member of the Armed Forces on active duty in the Armed Forces for purposes of the eligibility of the survivors of the former member for the benefits described in subsection (c).
Covered Former Members of the Armed Forces.--A former member of the Armed Forces described in this subsection is any former member of the Armed Forces with a medical history of a combat-related mental health condition or Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI).
Covered Benefits.--The benefits described in this subsection are the benefits as follows: (1) Burial benefits.
Benefits under the Survivor Benefit Plan under subchapter II of chapter 73 of title 10, United States Code.
Benefits under the laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Benefits under the Social Security Act.
Dates for Purposes of Certain Determinations.-- (1) Date of death.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), for purposes of the benefits under this section, the date of death of a former member of the Armed Forces described by subsection (a) shall be the date of the separation or retirement of the former member from the Armed Forces.
Date for nature of eligibility.--In determining the scope and nature of the entitlement a survivor of a former member of the Armed Forces described by subsection (a) to benefits under this section, the date of death of the former member shall be the date of the suicide of the former member.
Refund of Reduction in Retired Pay Under SBP.--Any reduction in the retired pay of a former member of the Armed Forces described by subsection (a) under the Survivor Benefit Plan under subchapter II of chapter 73 of title 10, United States Code, during the period beginning on the date of the retirement of the former member from the Armed Forces and ending on the date of the suicide of the former member shall be refunded to the surviving spouse or children, as applicable, of the former member.
GRANTS FOR NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS FOR THE PROVISION OF EMOTIONAL SUPPORT SERVICES TO SURVIVORS OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND VETERANS.
In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall carry out a program to award grants to non-profit organizations that provide emotional support services for survivors of deceased members of the Armed Forces (including members of the National Guard and Reserve) and deceased veterans through peers of such survivors.
Award of Grants.-- (1) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under the program under this section a non-profit organization shall meet such criteria as the Secretary shall establish for purposes of the program.
Application.--A non-profit organization seeking a grant under the program shall submit to the Secretary an application for the grant in such form and manner as the Secretary shall specify for purposes of the program.
Grants.-- (1) Amount.--The amount of each grant awarded a non-profit organization under the program under this section shall be such amount as the Secretary determines appropriate for purposes of the program.
Duration.--The duration of each grant awarded a non- profit organization shall be such period as the Secretary determines appropriate for purposes of the program.
Use of Grant Funds.--Each non-profit organization awarded a grant under the program under this section shall utilize amounts under the grant to provide such emotional support services for survivors of deceased members of the Armed Forces (including members of the National Guard and Reserve) and deceased veterans through peers of such survivors as the Secretary shall specify in the grant.
Funding.--Amounts for grants under the program under this section shall be derived from amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for military personnel.
PILOT PROGRAMS ON AWARENESS ENHANCEMENT FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMY REGARDING POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.
Pilot Programs Required.--The Secretary of the Army shall carry out at each location specified in subsection (b) a pilot program to assess the feasability and advisability of various means of enhancing awareness among members of the Army of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).
Locations.--The locations specified in this subsection for the pilot programs required by subsection (a) are the following: (1) Fort Carson, Colorado.
Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri.
Activities.-- (1) In general.--The activities under the pilot programs required by subsection (a) shall include the following: (A) For members of the Army about to undergo deployment, such activities as the Secretary considers appropriate to enhance the understanding of members of the Army of-- (i) the neurophysiological effects of the stress and trauma associated with combat, including Post Traumatic Stress Disorder; and (ii) the means of eliminating or mitigating such effects after the return from combat.
For members of the Army undergoing deployment, appropriate reinforcement of the lessons provided through activities under subparagraph (A).
For members of the Army after the return from deployment, appropriate activities to assist the members in reintegrating into non-combat life.
For families of members of the Army who will deploy or are deployed, appropriate training and assistance (including Internet-based training and assistance) at each stage of the deployment of such members in order to assist such families and members in recognizing and addressing Post Traumatic Stress Disorder after the return of such members from deployment (2) Development of activities.--In developing activities for purposes of the pilot programs, the Secretary shall utilize lessons in addressing stress and trauma learned by other appropriate populations, including special operations forces and their communities and elite athlete communities.