This Act may be cited as the ``National Security Sealift Enhancement Act of 1999''.
The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
TITLE I--CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION FUND Sec.
Amendments of Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Amendment to the Tariff Act of 1930.
TITLE II--ELECTION TO EXPENSE UNITED STATES FLAG VESSELS Sec.
Election to expense certain United States flag vessels.
TITLE III--INCOME EXCLUSION FOR MERCHANT SEAMEN Sec.
Income of merchant seaman excludable from gross income as foreign earned income.
TITLE IV--EXEMPTION FROM ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX Sec.
Exemption from alternative minimum tax for corporations that operate United States flag vessels.
TITLE V--CONVENTIONS ON UNITED STATES-FLAG CRUISE SHIPS Sec.
Conventions on United States-flag cruise ships.
TITLE I--CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION FUND SEC.
AMENDMENTS OF INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.
Treatment of Certain Lease Payments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 7518(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``, or'', and by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph: ``(D) the payments of amounts which reduce the principal amount (as determined under regulations) of a qualified lease of a qualified vessel or container which is part of the complement of an eligible vessel.''.
Paragraph (4) of section 7518(f) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or to reduce the principal amount of any qualified lease'' after ``indebtedness''.
Authority To Make Deposits Under The Tariff Act of 1930.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 7518(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) the amount elected for deposit under subsection (i) of section 466 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1466).''.
Subparagraph (A) of section 7518(d)(2) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(A) amounts referred to in subsections (a)(1)(B) and (E).''.
Authority To Make Deposits for Prior Years Based on Audit Adjustments.--Subsection (a) of section 7518 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) Deposits for prior years.--To the extent permitted by joint regulations, deposits may be made in excess of the limitation described in paragraph (1) (and any limitation specified in the agreement) for the taxable year if, by reason of a change in taxable income for a prior taxable year that has become final pursuant to a closing agreement or other similar agreement entered into during the taxable year, the amount of the deposit could have been made for such prior taxable year.''.
Treatment of Capital Gains and Losses.-- (1) Paragraph (3) of section 7518(d) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Capital gain account.--The capital gain account shall consist of-- ``(A) amounts representing long-term capital gains (as defined in section 1222) on assets held in the fund, reduced by ``(B) amounts representing long-term capital losses (as defined in such section) on assets held in the fund.''.
Subparagraph (B) of section 7518(d)(4) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(B)(i) amounts representing short-term capital gains (as defined in section 1222) on assets held in the fund, reduced by ``(ii) amounts representing short-term capital losses (as defined in such section) on assets held in the fund,''.
Subparagraph (B) of section 7518(g)(3) of such Code is amended by striking ``gain'' and all that follows and inserting ``long-term capital gain (as defined in section 1222), and''.
The last sentence of subparagraph (A) of section 7518(g)(6) of such Code is amended by striking ``20 percent (34 percent in the case of a corporation)'' and inserting ``the rate applicable to net capital gain under such section 1(h)(1)(C) or 1201(a), as the case may be''.
Computation of Interest With Respect to Nonqualified Withdrawals.-- (1) Subparagraph (C) of section 7518(g)(3) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking clause (i) and inserting the following new clause: ``(i) no addition to the tax shall be payable under section 6651, and'', and (B) by striking ``paid at the applicable rate (as defined in paragraph (4))'' in clause (ii) and inserting ``paid in accordance with section 6601''.
Subsection (g) of section 7518 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (4) and by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively.
Subparagraph (A) of section 7518(g)(5) of such Code, as redesignated by paragraph (2), is amended by striking ``paragraph (5)'' and inserting ``paragraph (4)''.
Other Changes.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 7518(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``interest-bearing securities approved by the Secretary'' and inserting ``interest-bearing securities and other income-producing assets (including accounts receivable) approved by the Secretary''.
The last sentence of paragraph (1) of section 7518(e) of such Code is amended by striking ``and containers'' each place it appears.
Subparagraph (B) of section 543(a)(1) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(B) interest on amounts set aside in a capital construction fund under section 607 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936 (46 App.
United States Code 1177), or in a construction reserve fund under section 511 of such Act (46 App.
United States Code 1161),''.
Subsection (c) of section 56 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (2) and by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).
Section 7518(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Qualified withdrawal.--In the case of amounts in any fund as of the date of the enactment of this paragraph, and any earnings thereon, for purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified withdrawal' has the meaning given such term by applying subsection (i)(2) as of such date.''
Definitions.--Subsection (i) of section 7518 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(i) Definitions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), terms used in this section shall have the same meaning as in section 607(k) of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936.
Other definitions.--For the purposes of this section-- ``(A) The term `eligible vessel' means any vessel-- ``(i) documented under the laws of the United States, and ``(ii) operated in the foreign or domestic commerce of the United States or in the fisheries of the United States.
Qualified vessel.--The term `qualified vessel' means any vessel-- ``(i) constructed in the United States and, if reconstructed, reconstructed in the United States, ``(ii) documented under the laws of the United States, and ``(iii) which the person maintaining the fund agrees with the Secretary will be operated in the fisheries of the United States, or in the United States foreign, Great Lakes, noncontiguous domestic trade, or other oceangoing domestic trade between two coastal points in the United States or in support of operations conducted on the Outer Continental Shelf.
Vessel.--The term `vessel' includes containers or trailers intended for use as part of the complement of one or more eligible vessels and cargo handling equipment which the Secretary determines is intended for use primarily on the vessel.
The term `vessel' also includes an ocean-going towing vessel or an ocean-going barge or comparable towing vessel or barge operated on the Great Lakes.
Foreign commerce.--The terms `foreign commerce' and `foreign trade' have the meanings given such terms in section 905 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936, except that these terms shall include commerce or trade between foreign ports.
Qualified lease.--The term `qualified lease' means any lease with a term of at least 5 years.''
AMENDMENT TO THE TARIFF ACT OF 1930.
Section 466 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1466) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Election To Deposit Duty Into a Capital Construction Fund In Lieu of Payment to the Secretary of the Treasury.--At the election of the owner or master of any vessel referred to in subsection (a) of this section which is an eligible vessel (as defined in section 7518(i)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), the portion of any duty imposed by subsection (a) which is deposited in a fund established under section 607 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936 shall be treated as paid to the Secretary of the Treasury in satisfaction of the liability for such duty.''
In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the amendments made by this title shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Changes in Computation of Interest.--The amendments made by section 101(e) shall apply to withdrawals made after December 31, 1998, including for purposes of computing interest on such a withdrawal for periods on or before such date.
Qualified Leases.--The amendments made by section 101(a) shall apply to leases in effect on, or entered into after, December 31, 1998.
Amendment to the Tariff Act of 1930.--The amendment made by section 102 shall apply with respect to entries not yet liquidated by December 31, 1998, and to entries made on or after such date.
TITLE II--ELECTION TO EXPENSE UNITED STATES FLAG VESSELS SEC.
ELECTION TO EXPENSE CERTAIN UNITED STATES FLAG VESSELS.
In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after section 179A the following new section: ``SEC.
DEDUCTION FOR UNITED STATES FLAG VESSELS.
Treatment as Expenses.--A taxpayer may elect to treat the cost of any vessel that is a qualified United States flag vessel as an expense which is not chargeable to its capital account.
Year in Which Deduction Allowed.--The deduction under subsection (a) shall be allowed for the taxable year in which the vessel first becomes a qualified United States flag vessel.
Definitions.-- ``(1) Qualified united states flag vessel.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified United States flag vessel' means a United States flag vessel that is operated exclusively in the foreign trade of the United States.
Cost.--For purposes of this section, the term `cost' means an amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(A) the purchase price of the vessel, or ``(B) the adjusted basis of the vessel, determined under section 1011, at the time that the vessel becomes a qualified United States flag vessel.
Basis Reduction.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the basis of any property shall be reduced by the portion of the cost of such property taken into account under subsection (a).
Ordinary income recapture.--For purposes of section 1245, the amount of the deduction allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any property which is of a character subject to the allowance for depreciation shall be treated as a deduction allowed for depreciation under section 167.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 263(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (G), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``; or'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(I) expenditures for which a deduction is allowed under section 179B.''.
Subparagraph (B) of section 312(k)(3) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 179A'' each place it appears and inserting ``, 179A, or 179B''.
Subparagraph (C) of section 1245(a)(2) of such Code is amended by inserting ``179B,'' after ``179A,''.
The table of sections for part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 179A the following new item: ``Sec.
Deduction for United States flag vessels.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--INCOME EXCLUSION FOR MERCHANT SEAMEN SEC.
INCOME OF MERCHANT SEAMAN EXCLUDABLE FROM GROSS INCOME AS FOREIGN EARNED INCOME.
Section 911 Exclusion.--Section 911(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to citizens or residents of the United States living abroad) is amended by redesignating paragraph (9) as paragraph (10) and by inserting after paragraph (8) the following: ``(9) Application to certain merchant marine crews.--In applying this section to an individual who is a citizen or resident of the United States and who is employed for a minimum of 90 days during a taxable year as a regular member of the crew of a vessel or vessels owned, operated, or chartered by a United States citizen-- ``(A) the individual shall be treated as a qualified individual without regard to the requirements of paragraph (1); and ``(B) any earned income attributable to services performed by that individual so employed on such a vessel while it is engaged in transportation between the United States and a foreign country or possession of the United States shall be treated (except as provided by subsection (b)(1)(B)) as foreign earned income regardless of where payments of such income are made.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE IV--EXEMPTION FROM ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX SEC.
EXEMPTION FROM ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX FOR CORPORATIONS THAT OPERATE UNITED STATES FLAG VESSELS.
In General.--Section 55 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Exemption for Corporations That Operate United States Flag Vessels.-- ``(1) In General.--The tentative minimum tax of a corporation shall be zero for any taxable year in which the corporation is a qualified corporation.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Qualified corporation.--The term `qualified corporation' means any domestic corporation if-- ``(i) substantially all of the assets of such corporation are related to the maritime transportation business, and ``(ii) such corporation owns or demise charters a fleet of 4 or more qualified United States flag vessels.
Qualified united states flag vessel.--The term `qualified United States flag vessel' means a United States flag vessel having a deadweight tonnage of not less than 10,000 deadweight tons that is operated exclusively in the foreign trade of the United States during each of the 360 days immediately preceding the last day of the taxable year.
Days during which the vessel is drydocked, surveyed, inspected, or repaired shall be considered days of operation for purposes of this subsection.
Foreign trade.--The term `foreign trade' has the meaning given to such term by section 7518(i)(2).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE V--CONVENTIONS ON UNITED STATES-FLAG CRUISE SHIPS SEC.
CONVENTIONS ON UNITED STATES-FLAG CRUISE SHIPS.
In General.--Section 274(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to conventions on cruise ships) is amended by striking ``that--'' and all that follows through ``possessions of the United States.''
and inserting ``that the cruise ship is a vessel registered in the United States.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.