This Act may be cited as the ``Metropolitan Washington Airports Amendments Act of 1995''.
AMENDMENT OF METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS ACT OF 1986.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986 (100 United States Statutes at Large 3341-376 et sequentes).
USE OF LEASED PROPERTY.
Section 6005(c)(2) is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the second sentence the following: ``which are not inconsistent with the needs of aviation''.
Appointment of Additional Members.--Section 6007(e)(1) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by striking ``11'' and inserting ``15''; (2) in subparagraph (D) by striking ``one member'' and inserting ``five members''.
Restrictions.--Section 6007(e)(2) is amended by striking ``except that'' and all that follows through the period and inserting ``except that the members appointed by the President shall be registered voters of States other than Maryland, Virginia, or the District of Columbia.''.
Terms.--Section 6007(e)(3) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (C) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(D) by the President after the date of the enactment of this subparagraph, 2 shall be appointed for 4 years.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.''.
Vacancies.--Section 6007(e) is further amended by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs (7) and (8), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following: ``(4) Vacancies.--A vacancy in the board of directors shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of such term.''.
Political Parties of Presidential Appointees.--Section 6007(e) is further amended by inserting after paragraph (4), as inserted by subsection (d) of this section, the following: ``(5) Political parties of presidential appointees.--Not more than 3 of the members of the board appointed by the President may be of the same political party.''.
Duties of Presidential Appointees.--Section 6007(e) is further amended by inserting after paragraph (5), as inserted by subsection (e) of this section, the following: ``(6) Duties of presidential appointees.--In carrying out their duties on the board, members of the board appointed by the President shall ensure that adequate consideration is given to the national interest.''.
Required Number of Votes.--Section 6007(e)(8), as redesignated by subsection (d) of this section, is amended by striking ``Seven'' and inserting ``Nine''.
In General.--Section 6007(f) is amended by striking the subsection designation, heading and paragraph (1) and inserting the following: ``(f) Federal Advisory Commission.-- ``(1) Composition.--There is established a Federal Advisory Commission of the Airports Authority which shall represent the interests of users of the Metropolitan Washington Airports and shall be composed of 9 members appointed by the Secretary of Transportation.''.
References to Board of Review.--The Act is amended-- (1) in section 6007(f) by striking ``Board of Review'' each place it appears and inserting ``Federal Advisory Commission''; (2) in section 6007(f)(3)-- (A) in the third sentence by striking ``Board'' each place it appears and inserting ``Commission''; and (B) in the fourth sentence by striking ``Board'' the second place it appears and inserting ``Commission''; (3) in the second sentence of section 6007(f)(6), as redesignated by section 8(a) of this Act, by striking ``Board'' and inserting ``Commission''; (4) in section 6007(f)(7), as redesignated by section 8(a) of this Act, by striking ``Board'' the second place it appears and inserting ``Commission''; and (5) in section 6009(b) by striking ``Board of Review'' and inserting ``Federal Advisory Commission''.
Other Conforming Amendments.--Section 6007(f)(2) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A)-- (A) by striking ``paragraphs (1)(A) and (1)(B)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)''; and (B) by striking the second sentence; and (2) in subparagraph (D) by striking ``and lists have been provided for appointments to fill such vacancies''.
Submission of Actions.--Section 6007(f)(4)(A) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) Submission required.-- ``(i) In general.--An action of the Airports Authority described in subparagraph (B) shall be submitted to the Federal Advisory Commission, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate at least 60 days before the action is to become effective.
Urgent and compelling circumstances.--An action submitted to the Federal Advisory Commission and Congress in accordance with clause (i) may become effective before the expiration of the 60-day period referred to in clause (i) if the board of directors certifies, in writing, to the Secretary and Congress that urgent and compelling circumstances exist that significantly affect the interests of the traveling public and will not permit waiting for the expiration of such 60-day period.''.
Recommendations.--Section 6007(f)(4)(C) is amended to read as follows: ``(C) Recommendations.--The Federal Advisory Commission may make to the board of directors and Congress recommendations regarding an action within 30 calendar days of its submission under this paragraph.
Such recommendations may include a recommendation that the action not take effect.''.
Effect of Recommendations.-- (1) Repeal.--Section 6007(f)(4) is amended by striking subparagraph (D) and by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (D).
Conforming amendment.--Section 6007(f)(5)(B) is amended by striking ``paragraph (4)(D)(ii)'' and inserting ``paragraph (4)''.
Expiration of Authority.--Section 6007(f)(4) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(E) Expiration of authority.-- ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in clause (ii), the authority of the Airports Authority to take any of the actions described in subparagraph (B) shall expire on April 30, 1997.
Special rule.--If on any day after April 29, 1997, all of the members to be appointed to the board of directors by the President under section 6007(e)(1)(D) are serving on the board, the authority of the board referred to in clause (i) shall be effective beginning on such day and shall expire on September 30, 1998.''.
Protection of Certain Actions.--Actions taken by the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority and submitted to the Board of Review pursuant to section 6007(f)(4) of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986 before the date of the enactment of this Act shall remain in effect and shall not be set aside solely by reason of a judicial order invalidating certain functions of the Board of Review.
Committee Referral.--Section 6007(f)(5)(C) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Public Works and Transportation'' and inserting ``Transportation and Infrastructure''; and (2) by striking ``Commerce, Science and Technology'' and inserting ``Commerce, Science, and Transportation''.
House Procedure.--Section 6007(f)(5) is amended-- (1) by striking subparagraphs (D), (E), and (F); (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (G) and (H) as subparagraphs (E) and (F), respectively; and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following: ``(D) House procedure.--When the committee of the House has reported a resolution, it is at any time in order to move that the House resolve into the Committee of the Whole House on the State of the Union for consideration of the resolution.
All points of order against the resolution and against consideration of the resolution are waived.
The motion is highly privileged.
The previous question shall be considered as ordered on that motion to its adoption without intervening motion.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
Debate thereon shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, the time to be divided in the House equally between a proponent and an opponent.
During consideration of the resolution in the Committee of the Whole, the first reading of the resolution shall be dispensed with.
General debate shall proceed without intervening motion, shall be confined to the resolution, and shall not exceed 2 hours equally divided and controlled by a proponent and an opponent of the resolution.
After general debate, the Committee shall rise and report the bill to the House.
The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the resolution to final passage without intervening motion.
A motion to reconsider the vote on passage of the resolution shall not be in order.''.
OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMISSION.
Request for Consideration of Other Matters; Participation in Meetings.--Section 6007(f) is amended by striking paragraphs (6) and (7) and by redesignating paragraphs (8), (9), (10), and (11) as paragraphs (6), (7), (8), and (9), respectively.
Removal of Federal Advisory Commission Members.--Section 6007(f)(9), as redesignated by subsection (a) of this section, is amended by striking ``by a two-thirds vote of the board of directors'' and inserting ``by the Secretary of Transportation''.
EFFECT OF JUDICIAL ORDERS.
In General.--Section 6007 is amended by striking subsection (h) and by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (h).
Conforming Amendment.--Section 6011 is amended by striking ``Except as provided in section 6007(h), if'' and inserting ``If''.
FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT.
Section 6007 is further amended by inserting after subsection (h), as redesignated by section 9(a) of this Act, the following: ``(i) Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Federal Advisory Commission.''.
USE OF DULLES ACCESS HIGHWAY.
The Act is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
USE OF DULLES ACCESS HIGHWAY.
Restrictions.--The Airports Authority shall continue in effect and enforce paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 4.2 of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Regulations, as in effect on February 1, 1995.
Enforcement.--The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to compel the Airports Authority and its officers and employees to comply with the requirements of this section.
An action may be brought on behalf of the United States by the Attorney General, or by any aggrieved party.''.
The Secretary of Transportation shall amend the lease entered into with the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority under section 6005(a) of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority Act of 1986 to secure the Airports Authority's consent to the amendments made to such Act by this Act.
In General.--Section 41714 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsections (a)(1), (b)(1), and (c)(1) by striking ``(other than Washington National Airport)''; and (2) by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i) and by inserting after subsection (g) the following: ``(h) Limitation on Authority To Grant Exemptions.--The Secretary shall not issue an exemption under this section to the requirements of subparts K and S of part 93 of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (pertaining to slots at high density airports) if the grant of such exemption would adversely affect safety.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 6009(e)(1) is amended by striking ``The Administrator'' and inserting ``Except as provided by section 41714 of title 49, United States Code, the Administrator''.