This Act may be cited as the ``21st Century Scholars Act of 1997''.
Amendment.--Subpart 1 of part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by inserting after section 401 (20 United States Code 1070a) the following new section: ``SEC.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to require the Secretary to establish a program to provide to eligible 21st Century Scholars (in this section referred to as `eligible Scholars') a legally binding promise, secured by the full faith and credit of the United States, to provide, for each of up to 4 years of attendance at an eligible institution, the maximum authorized Pell Grant to cover the costs of attendance at such institution.
Eligible Scholars.-- ``(1) Eligible scholars.--For purposes of this section, a student is an eligible Scholar if the student successfully completed the uppermost grade at a qualifying elementary school and was a resident of the school attendance area of such school during the school year in which such grade was completed.
Qualifying elementary schools.--For purposes of paragraph (1), an elementary school is a qualifying elementary school if such school serves a school attendance area in which the concentration of children from low-income families exceeds 75 percent, as determined under section 1113(a)(3)(A) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6313(a)(3)(A)).
Notification to Eligible Scholars.-- ``(1) Initial notification.--Upon receipt of notification from a qualifying elementary school of the identities and addresses of each student meeting the requirements of subsection (b), the Secretary shall send to each such student at their school, and to the parents or guardians of such student, a written commitment to provide, for each of up to 4 years of attendance at an eligible institution, the maximum authorized Pell Grant to cover the costs of attendance at an eligible institution.
A copy of the notice shall be maintained in the student's official record.
Such notice shall contain-- ``(A) a statement of the value of the award and its character as a legal obligation of the United States; and ``(B) the obligations of students and parents or guardians, including the obligation to meet current Pell requirements at the time of admission to postsecondary education, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Annual notices.--The Secretary shall annually provide to each school, for each student notified under paragraph (1), and to the parents or guardians of such student, a notice restating the written commitment provided under paragraph (1) and containing-- ``(A) a statement of the maximum Pell Grant then currently authorized; ``(B) a notification to the parents or guardians of the status of the Secretary's records of the Scholar's current address, grade, and school where currently enrolled; and ``(C) instructions to the parents or guardians of how to inform the Secretary of any changes of the Scholar's address, grade, or school where currently enrolled.
Pledge of full faith and credit.--The full faith and credit of the United States is pledged to the payment of the written commitments provided under this subsection.
Maximum Authorized Pell Grant.-- ``(1) In general.--The commitments provided under subsection (c) shall guarantee to each eligible Scholar an amount that, subject to paragraph (2), is equal to the greater of-- ``(A) the maximum Pell Grant available, pursuant to an appropriations Act, for the academic year for which the Scholar is seeking payment of the commitment; or ``(B) the maximum Pell Grant available, pursuant to an appropriations Act, for the academic year during which the Scholar is first notified under subsection (c)(2) of such commitment.
Cost of attendance.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the amount guaranteed to an eligible Scholar for any academic year shall not exceed such Scholar's cost of attendance at the eligible institution at which such Scholar is enrolled or accepted for enrollment.
Other limitations not applicable.--Except as provided in paragraphs (1) and (2), the Pell Grant awarded under this section shall not be subject to any reduction based on expected family contribution, or to any other limitation or reduction pursuant to section 401 or any other law.
Applications for Grants.--The Secretary shall from time to time set dates by which eligible Scholars shall file applications for payments of the commitments provided under this section.
Each such Scholar shall file an application therefor containing such information and assurances as the Secretary may deem necessary to enable the Secretary to carry out the functions and responsibilities of this section.
Distribution of Grants to Students.--Payments under this section shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary for such purpose, in such manner as will best accomplish the purpose of this section.
Any disbursement allowed to be made by crediting the student's account shall be limited to tuition and fees and, in the case of institutionally owned housing, room and board.
The student may elect to have the institution provide other such goods and services by crediting the student's account.''.
TRIO Participation and Mentoring.-- (1) TRIO eligibility.--Section 402A(g) of Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070a-11(g)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Any individual who has been identified as an eligible 21st Century Scholar under section 401A shall be treated as a low-income individual for purposes of this section.''.
Talent search mentoring.--Section 402B(b) of such Act (20 United States Code 1070a-12(b)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (10) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) special mentoring programs and activities for eligible 21st Century Scholars identified under section 401A.''.
Early intervention mentoring, counseling, outreach, and supportive services.--Section 404C(c) of such Act (20 United States Code 1070a-23(c)) is amended by striking ``who is eligible'' and inserting ``who is an eligible 21st Century Scholars identified under section 401A or who is eligible''.
Conforming Amendments to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.-- (1) State assurances.--Section 1111(c) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended-- (A) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (B) in paragraph (6), by striking the period and adding ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) the State educational agency annually will notify the recipients of awards under subpart 2 of part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 and the Secretary of the identities and addresses of all students who meet the requirements of section 401A(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965.''.
Local assurances.--Section 1112(c)(1) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (G), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (B) in subparagraph (H), by striking the period and adding ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(I) notify the State educational agency annually of the identities and addresses of all students who meet the requirements of section 401A(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965.''.
Evaluation.--The Secretary of Education shall establish a system for the evaluation of the 21st Century Scholars Program established pursuant to the amendments made by this section.
Such evaluation shall include measurements of the impact of the Program on Pell Grant participation by low-income individuals, the educational attainment of 21st Century Scholars as compared to control groups, and any change in social behavior such as teenage pregnancy, drop-out rates, and juvenile detention and incarceration rates.