This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Energy Jobs Act of 2012''.
TITLE I--INCREASE AND EXTENSION OF CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING ADVANCED ENERGY PROJECTS SEC.
INCREASE AND EXTENSION OF CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING ADVANCED ENERGY PROJECTS.
In General.--Subsection (d) of section 48C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Additional 2012 allocations.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Energy, shall establish a program to consider and award certifications for qualified investments eligible for credits under this section to qualifying advanced energy project sponsors with respect to applications received on or after the date of the enactment of this paragraph.
Limitation.--The total amount of credits that may be allocated under the program described in subparagraph (A) shall not exceed $5,000,000,000.
Application of certain rules.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (5) shall apply for purposes of the program described in subparagraph (A), except that applicants shall have 2 years from the date that the Secretary establishes such program to submit applications.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--REVENUE OFFSETS Subtitle A--Close Big Oil Tax Loopholes SEC.
MODIFICATIONS OF FOREIGN TAX CREDIT RULES APPLICABLE TO MAJOR INTEGRATED OIL COMPANIES WHICH ARE DUAL CAPACITY TAXPAYERS.
In General.--Section 901 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (n) as subsection (o) and by inserting after subsection (m) the following new subsection: ``(n) Special Rules Relating to Major Integrated Oil Companies Which Are Dual Capacity Taxpayers.-- ``(1) General rule.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any amount paid or accrued by a dual capacity taxpayer which is a major integrated oil company (as defined in section 167(h)(5)(B)) to a foreign country or possession of the United States for any period shall not be considered a tax-- ``(A) if, for such period, the foreign country or possession does not impose a generally applicable income tax, or ``(B) to the extent such amount exceeds the amount (determined in accordance with regulations) which-- ``(i) is paid by such dual capacity taxpayer pursuant to the generally applicable income tax imposed by the country or possession, or ``(ii) would be paid if the generally applicable income tax imposed by the country or possession were applicable to such dual capacity taxpayer.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to imply the proper treatment of any such amount not in excess of the amount determined under subparagraph (B).
Dual capacity taxpayer.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `dual capacity taxpayer' means, with respect to any foreign country or possession of the United States, a person who-- ``(A) is subject to a levy of such country or possession, and ``(B) receives (or will receive) directly or indirectly a specific economic benefit (as determined in accordance with regulations) from such country or possession.
Generally applicable income tax.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `generally applicable income tax' means an income tax (or a series of income taxes) which is generally imposed under the laws of a foreign country or possession on income derived from the conduct of a trade or business within such country or possession.
Exceptions.--Such term shall not include a tax unless it has substantial application, by its terms and in practice, to-- ``(i) persons who are not dual capacity taxpayers, and ``(ii) persons who are citizens or residents of the foreign country or possession.''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxes paid or accrued in taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Contrary treaty obligations upheld.--The amendments made by this section shall not apply to the extent contrary to any treaty obligation of the United States.
LIMITATION ON SECTION 199 DEDUCTION ATTRIBUTABLE TO OIL, NATURAL GAS, OR PRIMARY PRODUCTS THEREOF.
Denial of Deduction.--Paragraph (4) of section 199(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Special rule for certain oil and gas income.--In the case of any taxpayer who is a major integrated oil company (as defined in section 167(h)(5)(B)) for the taxable year, the term `domestic production gross receipts' shall not include gross receipts from the production, transportation, or distribution of oil, natural gas, or any primary product (within the meaning of subsection (d)(9)) thereof.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011.
LIMITATION ON DEDUCTION FOR INTANGIBLE DRILLING AND DEVELOPMENT COSTS.
In General.--Section 263(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``This subsection shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer in any taxable year in which such taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (as defined in section 167(h)(5)(B)).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011.
LIMITATION ON PERCENTAGE DEPLETION ALLOWANCE FOR OIL AND GAS WELLS.
In General.--Section 613A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Application With Respect to Major Integrated Oil Companies.-- In the case of any taxable year in which the taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (as defined in section 167(h)(5)(B)), the allowance for percentage depletion shall be zero.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011.
LIMITATION ON DEDUCTION FOR TERTIARY INJECTANTS.
In General.--Section 193 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Application With Respect to Major Integrated Oil Companies.-- This section shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer in any taxable year in which such taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (as defined in section 167(h)(5)(B)).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011.
Subtitle B--Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Natural Gas SEC.
REPEAL OF OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF DEEP WATER AND DEEP GAS ROYALTY RELIEF.
In General.--Sections 344 and 345 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 15904, 15905) are repealed.
Administration.--The Secretary of the Interior shall not be required to provide for royalty relief in the lease sale terms beginning with the first lease sale held on or after the date of the enactment of this Act for which a final notice of sale has not been published.
The net amount of any savings realized as a result of the enactment of this Act and the amendments made by this Act (after any expenditures authorized by this Act and the amendments made by this Act) shall be deposited in the Treasury and used for Federal budget deficit reduction or, if there is no Federal budget deficit, for reducing the Federal debt in such manner as the Secretary of the Treasury considers appropriate.
The budgetary effects of this Act, for the purpose of complying with the Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010, shall be determined by reference to the latest statement titled ``Budgetary Effects of PAYGO Legislation'' for this Act, submitted for printing in the Congressional Record by the Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, provided that such statement has been submitted prior to the vote on passage.