DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS-USABLE PLUTONIUM AT THE SAVANNAH RIVER SITE, AIKEN, SOUTH CAROLINA.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) In September 2000, the United States and the Russian Federation signed a Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement by which each agreed to dispose of 34 metric tons of weapons-grade plutonium.
The agreement with Russia is a significant step toward safeguarding nuclear materials and preventing their diversion to rogue states and terrorists.
The Department of Energy plans to dispose of 34 metric tons of weapons-grade plutonium of the United States before the end of 2019 by converting the plutonium to a mixed-oxide fuel to be used in commercial nuclear power reactors.
The Department has formulated a plan for implementing the agreement with Russia through construction of a mixed-oxide fuel fabrication facility and a pit disassembly and conversion facility at the Savannah River Site.
The United States and the State of South Carolina have a compelling interest in the safe, proper, and efficient operation of the plutonium disposition facilities at the Savannah River Site.
The MOX facility will also be economically beneficial to the State of South Carolina, and that economic benefit will not be fully realized unless the MOX facility is built.
The State of South Carolina therefore desires to ensure that all plutonium transferred to the State of South Carolina is stored safely; that the full benefits of the MOX facility are realized as soon as possible; and, specifically, that all defense plutonium or defense plutonium materials transferred to the Savannah River Site either be processed or be removed expeditiously.
Plan Required.-- (1) Not later than February 1, 2003, the Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress a plan for the construction and operation of the MOX facility.
The plan shall include a schedule for construction and operations so as to achieve, as of January 1, 2009, the MOX production objective and to produce one metric ton of mixed-oxide fuel by December 31, 2009.
The plan shall also include a schedule of operations designed so that 34 metric tons of defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials at the Savannah River Site will be processed into mixed-oxide fuel by January 1, 2019.
Not later than February 15 of each year beginning in 2004 and continuing for as long as the MOX facility is in use, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the implementation of the plan required by paragraph (1).
Each such report shall include an assessment of compliance with the schedule referred to in paragraph (1) and a certification by the Secretary that the MOX production objective can be met by January 1, 2009.
For years after 2009, each such report shall address whether the MOX production objective has been met and shall report progress toward meeting the obligations of the United States under the United States Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement dated September 2000.
For years after 2017, each such report shall also include an assessment of compliance with the MOX production objective and, if not in compliance, the plan of the Secretary for achieving one of the following: (A) Compliance with such objective.
Removal of all remaining defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials from the State of South Carolina.
Corrective Actions.-- (1) If any report under subsection (b)(2) for a year after 2003 indicates that construction or operation at the MOX facility is behind, by 12 months or more, the schedule required by subsection (b)(1), the Secretary shall submit to Congress, not later than August 15 of the same year, a plan for corrective actions to be implemented by the Secretary to ensure that the project is capable of meeting the MOX production objective by January 1, 2009.
For years after 2009, such plan shall include corrective actions to be implemented by the Secretary to ensure that the MOX production objective is met.
The plan for corrective actions shall establish milestones for achieving such compliance with that objective.
If, by reason of a failure to achieve milestones set forth in the corrective action plan referred to in paragraph (1), there is a substantial and material risk that the MOX production objective will not be achieved by 2009, the Secretary shall suspend further transfers of defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials to be processed by the MOX facility until such risk is addressed and the Secretary certifies that the MOX production objective can be met by 2009.
After January 1, 2009, if, by reason of a failure to achieve milestones set forth in the corrective action plan referred to in paragraph (1), the MOX production objective has not been achieved, the Secretary shall suspend further transfers of defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials to be processed by the MOX facility until the Secretary certifies that the MOX production objective can be met.
Upon a suspension of transfers under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the options for removing from the State of South Carolina an amount of defense plutonium or defense plutonium materials equal to the amount of such plutonium or plutonium materials transferred to the State of South Carolina after April 15, 2002.
The report shall include an analysis of each such option, including costs, schedules, and any implications relating to the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) (hereinafter referred to as ``NEPA'').
Upon submission of the report, the Secretary shall commence any NEPA analysis that may be required to select among the options analyzed.
Limitation.--If the MOX production objective is not achieved as of January 1, 2009, the Secretary shall, consistent with NEPA and other governing laws, remove from the State of South Carolina, for storage or disposal elsewhere-- (1) not later than January 1, 2011, not less than one metric ton of defense plutonium or defense plutonium materials; and (2) not later than January 1, 2017, an amount of defense plutonium or defense plutonium materials equal to the amount of such plutonium or plutonium materials transferred to the Savannah River Site between April 15, 2002, and January 1, 2017, but not processed by the MOX facility.
Economic/Impact Assistance.-- (1) If the MOX production objective is not achieved as of January 1, 2011, the Secretary shall, from funds available to the Secretary, pay economic/impact assistance to the State of South Carolina in the amount of $1,000,000 per day, not to exceed $100,000,000 per calendar year, until the MOX production objective is achieved or until the Secretary has removed at least one metric ton of defense plutonium or defense plutonium materials from South Carolina.
If, as of January 1, 2017, the MOX facility has not processed mixed-oxide fuel from defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials in the amount of not less than-- (A) one metric ton, in each of any two consecutive calendar years; and (B) three metric tons total, the Secretary shall, from funds available to the Secretary, pay economic/impact assistance to the State of South Carolina in the amount of $1,000,000 per day, not to exceed $100,000,000 per calendar year, until an amount of defense plutonium or defense plutonium material equal to the amount of such defense plutonium or defense plutonium materials transferred to the Savannah River Site between April 15, 2002, and January 1, 2017, but not processed by the MOX facility has been removed from the State of South Carolina.
Nothing in this paragraph extinguishes other legal obligations set forth in this section.
If the State of South Carolina obtains an injunction that prohibits the Department of Energy from taking any action necessary for it to meet any deadline specified by this section, that deadline shall be extended for a period of time equal to the period of time during which the injunction is in effect.
Failure To Complete Planned Disposition Program.--For each year beginning with 2020 and continuing for as long as the MOX facility is in use, if on July 1 of that year less than 34 metric tons of defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials have been processed by the MOX facility, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a plan for either-- (1) completing the processing of 34 metric tons of defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials; or (2) removing from the State of South Carolina an amount of defense plutonium or defense plutonium materials equal to the amount of such plutonium or plutonium materials transferred to the Savannah River Site after April 15, 2002, but not processed by the MOX facility.
Removal of Mixed-Oxide Fuel Upon Completion of Operations of the MOX Facility.--If, one year after the date on which operation of the MOX facility permanently ceases, any mixed-oxide fuel remains at the Savannah River Site, the Secretary shall submit to Congress either-- (1) a report on when such fuel will be transferred for use in commercial nuclear reactors; or (2) a plan for removing such fuel from the State of South Carolina.
MOX Production Objective Defined.--In this section, the term ``MOX production objective'' means production at the MOX facility of mixed-oxide fuel from defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials at an average rate equivalent to not less than one metric ton of mixed- oxide fuel per year.
The average rate shall be determined by measuring production at the MOX facility from the date the facility is declared operational to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission through the date of assessment.
MOX Facility Defined.--In this section, the term ``MOX facility'' means the mixed-oxide fuel fabrication facility at the Savannah River Site, Aiken, South Carolina.
Defense Plutonium and Defense Plutonium Materials Defined.--In this section, the term ``defense plutonium or defense plutonium materials'' means weapons-usable plutonium.
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board Study.-- (1) The Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board shall conduct a study of the adequacy of the K-Area Materials Storage facility (KAMS) at the Savannah River Site for storage of defense plutonium and defense plutonium materials in connection with the disposition program provided in this section and in the Department of Energy's amended Record of Decision for fissile materials disposition.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board shall submit to Congress and the Secretary of Energy a report on the study.
The report shall-- (A) at a minimum, address-- (i) the suitability of KAMS and related support facilities for monitoring and observing any such plutonium and plutonium materials stored in KAMS; (ii) the adequacy of the provisions the Department has made for remote monitoring of such plutonium and plutonium materials by way of sensors and for handling of retrieval of such plutonium and plutonium materials; and (iii) the adequacy of KAMS should such plutonium and plutonium materials continue to be stored there beyond 2019; and (B) contain such recommendations as the Board considers necessary or desirable to enhance the safety, reliability, and functionality of KAMS.
Not later than six months after the date on which the report under paragraph (1) is submitted to Congress, and every one year thereafter, the Secretary and the Board shall each submit to Congress a report on the Secretary's action with respect to the recommendations.