This Act may be cited as the ``Territorial Consultation and Notification Act of 1994''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Article IV, Section 3, Clause 2 of the Constitution, also known as the territorial clause, grants Congress plenary authority to provide for the governance of the United States territories, including the determination of status.
The President and all executive branch officials should closely consult with Congress on territorial matters.
Congress has the responsibility to promote the progress of the people of the territories toward self-government consistent with the principle of self-determination as defined in the United Nations Charter, and this requires that the Congress have regular and reliable information with respect to the views of the voters in the territories on political status issues.
The majority view of the voters in the territories can be acquired by Congress most effectively and directly through periodic plebiscites which are recognized by the people as the opportunity to freely express their wishes.
Under Federal statutes approved by Congress, limited self-government has been authorized for each of the United States territories, and all persons born in the territories are native born citizens of the United States pursuant to the law.
The decade of the 1990s has been declared by the United Nations as the ``Decade to Eradicate Colonialism''.
In the November 4, 1993, plebiscite, a majority of Puerto Rican voters for the first time voted against their current status as a United States territory and supported significant changes in the political and legal relationship between the United States and Puerto Rico.
REFERENDUMS ON TERRITORIAL STATUS.
In General.--All territories of the United States shall conduct referendums on the sentiments of their citizens regarding territorial status at least every five years.
Report of Results to Congress.--Within 30 days after the date results of an election held under subsection (a) are certified, the Governor of the territory concerned shall submit a report of such results to the President and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate, who shall refer the report to the appropriate committees.
Report by Appropriate Committees of Congress.--Within 180 calendar days after the report described in subsection (b) is referred, each committee to whom the report is referred may submit a report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives or the President of the Senate, as the case may be, in which the results of the election are evaluated and recommendations (if any) are made for changes to the laws or policies of United States are made.
Implementation of Change in Status.--Within one year after a vote under subsection (a) in which a change regarding the territorial status has been approved, the President shall develop and report to the committees of Congress specified in subsection (a) the plans of the President for implementing the change in status.
REPORT ON IMPACT OF POLICY AND REGULATORY MATTERS ON THE STATUS OF UNITED STATES TERRITORIES.
The President shall submit annually to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives a report on all policy and regulatory matters impacting the status of United States territories.
NOTICE OF REGULATORY CHANGE AFFECTING THE STATUS OF UNITED STATES TERRITORIES.
No regulation that affects the status of United States territories may take effect until after 90 days after such regulation has been submitted to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives.
REPORT BY THE UNITED STATES REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS ON MATTERS PERTAINING TO UNITED STATES TERRITORIES.
Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the United States Representative to the United Nations shall submit a report to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and the House Committee on Foreign Affairs.
The report shall include the following: (1) A description of any issues formally considered by the United Nations during the past two years relating to the status of United States territories.
A description of any such issues that are expected to receive formal consideration in the United Nations in the next year.
DEFINITION OF UNITED STATES TERRITORIES.
For the purposes of this Act, the term ``United States territories'' means the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the Virgin Islands.