This Act may be cited as the ``Alien Children Protection Act of 2000''.
USE OF APPROPRIATE FACILITIES FOR THE DETENTION OF ALIEN CHILDREN.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), in the case of any alien under 18 years of age who is awaiting final adjudication of the alien's immigration status and who does not have a parent, guardian, or relative in the United States into whose custody the alien may be released, the Attorney General shall place such alien in a facility appropriate for children not later than 72 hours after the Attorney General has taken custody of the alien.
Exception.--The provisions of subsection (a) do not apply to any alien under 18 years of age who the Attorney General finds has engaged in delinquent behavior, is an escape risk, or has a security need greater than that provided in a facility appropriate for children.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``facility appropriate for children'' means a facility, such as foster care or group homes, operated by a private nonprofit organization, or by a local governmental entity, with experience and expertise in providing for the legal, psychological, educational, physical, social, nutritional, and health requirements of children.
The term ``facility appropriate for children'' does not include any facility used primarily to house adults or delinquent minors.
ADJUSTMENT TO PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS.
Section 245 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1255) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(l)(1) The Attorney General may, in the Attorney General's discretion, adjust the status of an alien under 18 years of age (or who was under 18 years of age when taken into Government custody) who has no lawful immigration status in the United States to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence if-- ``(A)(i) the alien (or a parent or legal guardian acting on the alien's behalf) has applied for the status; and ``(ii) the alien has resided in the United States for a period of 5 consecutive years; or ``(B)(i) no parent or legal guardian requests the alien's return to the country of the parent's or guardian's domicile, or with respect to whom the Attorney General finds that returning the child to his or her country of origin would subject the child to mental or physical abuse; and ``(ii) the Attorney General determines that it is in the best interests of the alien to remain in the United States notwithstanding the fact that the alien is not eligible for asylum protection under section 208 or protection under section 101(a)(27)(J).
The Attorney General shall make a determination under paragraph (1)(B)(ii) based on input from a person or entity that is not employed by or a part of the Service and that is qualified to evaluate children and opine as to what is in their best interest in a given situation.
Upon the approval of adjustment of status of an alien under paragraph (1), the Attorney General shall record the alien's lawful admission for permanent residence as of the date of such approval, and the Secretary of State shall reduce by one the number of visas authorized to be issued under sections 201(d) and 203(b)(4) for the fiscal year then current.
Not more than 500 aliens may be granted permanent resident status under this subsection in any fiscal year.''.
ASSIGNMENT OF GUARDIANS AD LITEM TO ALIEN CHILDREN.
Assignment.--Whenever a covered alien is a party to an immigration proceeding, the Attorney General shall assign such covered alien a child welfare professional or other individual who has received training in child welfare matters and who is recognized by the Attorney General as being qualified to serve as a guardian ad litem (in this section referred to as the ``guardian'').
The guardian shall not be an employee of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Responsibilities.--The guardian shall ensure that-- (1) the covered alien's best interests are promoted while the covered alien participates in, or is subject to, the immigration proceeding; and (2) the covered alien understands the proceeding.
Requirements on the Attorney General.--The Attorney General shall serve notice of all matters affecting a covered alien's immigration status (including all papers filed in an immigration proceeding) on the covered alien's guardian.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``covered alien'' means an alien-- (1) who is under 18 years of age; (2) who has no lawful immigration status in the United States and is not within the physical custody of a parent or legal guardian; and (3) whom no parent or legal guardian requests the person's return to the country of the parent's or guardian's domicile or with respect to whom the Attorney General finds that returning the child to his or her country of origin would subject the child to physical or mental abuse.
Congress commends the Immigration and Naturalization Service for its issuance of its ``Guidelines for Children's Asylum Claims'', dated December 1998, and encourages and supports the Service's implementation of such guidelines in an effort to facilitate the handling of children's asylum claims.
GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE REPORT.
The General Accounting Office shall prepare a report to Congress regarding whether and to what extent United States Reports Embassy and consular officials are fulfilling their obligation to reunify, on a priority basis, children in foreign countries whose parent or parents are legally present in the United States.