This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Transition Act of 2000''.
AMENDMENTS TO PRESIDENTIAL TRANSITION ACT OF 1963.
Section 3(a) of the Presidential Transition Act of 1963 (3 United States Code 102 note) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by striking ``including--'' and inserting ``including the following:''; (2) in each of paragraphs (1) through (6) by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting a period; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(8)(A)(i) Payment of expenses during the transition for briefings, workshops, or other activities to acquaint key prospective Presidential appointees with the types of problems and challenges that most typically confront new political appointees when they make the transition from campaign and other prior activities to assuming the responsibility for governance after inauguration.
Activities under this paragraph may include interchange between such appointees and individuals who-- ``(I) held similar leadership roles in prior administrations; ``(II) are department or agency experts from the Office of Management and Budget or an Office of Inspector General of a department or agency; or ``(III) are relevant staff from the General Accounting Office.
Activities under this paragraph may include training in records management to comply with section 2203 of title 44, United States Code, including training on the separation of Presidential records and personal records to comply with subsection (b) of that section.
Activities under this paragraph may include training in human resources management and performance-based management.
Activities under this paragraph shall be conducted primarily for individuals the President-elect intends to nominate as department heads or appoint to key positions in the Executive Office of the President.
(A) Development of a transition directory by the Administrator for activities conducted under paragraph (8).
The transition directory shall be a compilation of Federal publications and materials with supplementary materials developed by the Administrator that provides information on the officers, organization, and statutory and administrative authorities, functions, duties, responsibilities, and mission of each department and agency.
(A) Notwithstanding subsection (b), consultation by the Administrator with any candidate for President or Vice President to develop a systems architecture plan for the computer and communications systems of the candidate to coordinate a transition to Federal systems, if the candidate is elected.
Consultations under this paragraph shall be conducted at the discretion of the Administrator.''.
REPORT ON IMPROVING THE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE PROCESS FOR PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEES.
In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Office of Government Ethics shall conduct a study and submit a report on improvements to the financial disclosure process for Presidential nominees required to file reports under section 101(b) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
to the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Government Reform of the House of Representatives.
Content of Report.-- (1) In general.--The report under this section shall include recommendations and legislative proposals on-- (A) streamlining, standardizing, and coordinating the financial disclosure process and the requirements of financial disclosure reports under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
for Presidential nominees; (B) avoiding duplication of effort and reducing the burden of filing with respect to financial disclosure of information to the White House Office, the Office of Government Ethics, and the Senate; and (C) any other relevant matter the Office of Government Ethics determines appropriate.
Limitation relating to conflicts of interest.--The recommendations and proposals under this subsection shall not (if implemented) have the effect of lessening substantive compliance with any conflict of interest requirement.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.