This Act may be cited as the ``Taxpayer Protection Lock-box Act of 1999''.
TAXPAYER PROTECTION LOCK-BOX LEDGER.
Establishment of Ledger.--Title III of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``taxpayer protection lock-box ledger ``Sec.
Establishment of Ledger.--The Director of the Congressional Budget Office (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Director') shall maintain a ledger to be known as the `Taxpayer Protection Lock-box Ledger'.
The Ledger shall be divided into entries corresponding to the subcommittees of the Committees on Appropriations.
Each entry shall consist of three parts: the `House Lock-box Balance'; the `Senate Lock-box Balance'; and the `Joint House-Senate Lock-box Balance'.
Components of Ledger.--Each component in an entry shall consist only of amounts credited to it under subsection (c).
No entry of a negative amount shall be made.
Credit of Amounts to Ledger.--(1) The Director shall, upon the engrossment of any appropriation bill by the House of Representatives and upon the engrossment of that bill by the Senate, credit to the applicable entry balance of that House amounts of new budget authority and outlays equal to the net amounts of reductions in new budget authority and in outlays resulting from amendments agreed to by that House to that bill.
The Director shall, upon the engrossment of Senate amendments to any appropriation bill, credit to the applicable Joint House-Senate Lock-box Balance the amounts of new budget authority and outlays equal to-- ``(A) an amount equal to one-half of the sum of (i) the amount of new budget authority in the House Lock-box Balance plus (ii) the amount of new budget authority in the Senate Lock-box Balance for that bill; and ``(B) an amount equal to one-half of the sum of (i) the amount of outlays in the House Lock-box Balance plus (ii) the amount of outlays in the Senate Lock-box Balance for that bill.
For purposes of calculating under this section the net amounts of reductions in new budget authority and in outlays resulting from amendments agreed to by the Senate on an appropriation bill, the amendments reported to the Senate by its Committee on Appropriations shall be considered to be part of the original text of the bill.
Definition.--As use in this section, the term `appropriation bill' means any general or special appropriation bill, and any bill or joint resolution making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations through the end of a fiscal year.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 313 the following new item: ``Sec.
Taxpayer protection lock-box ledger.''.
TALLY DURING HOUSE OR SENATE CONSIDERATION.
There shall be available to Members in the House of Representatives and the Senate during consideration of any appropriations bill by the House and the Senate a running tally of the amendments adopted reflecting increases and decreases of budget authority in the bill as reported.
DOWNWARD ADJUSTMENT OF 602(A) ALLOCATIONS AND SECTION 602(B) SUBALLOCATIONS.
Allocations.--Section 602(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Upon the engrossment of House or Senate amendments to any appropriation bill (as defined in section 314(d)) for a fiscal year, the amounts allocated under paragraph (1) or (2) to the Committee on Appropriations of each House upon the adoption of the most recent concurrent resolution on the budget for that fiscal year shall be adjusted downward by the amounts credited to the applicable Joint House-Senate Lock-box Balance under section 314(c)(2).
The revised levels of budget authority and outlays shall be submitted to each House by the chairman of the Committee on the Budget of that House and shall be printed in the Congressional Record.''.
Suballocations.--Section 602(b)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Whenever an adjustment is made under subsection (a)(5) to an allocation under that subsection, the chairman of the Committee on Appropriations of each House shall make downward adjustments in the most recent suballocations of new budget authority and outlays under subparagraph (A) to the appropriate subcommittees of that committee in the total amounts of those adjustments under section 314(c)(2).
The revised suballocations shall be submitted to each House by the chairman of the Committee on Appropriations of that House and shall be printed in the Congressional Record.''.
PERIODIC REPORTING OF LEDGER STATEMENTS.
Section 308(b)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such reports shall also include an up-to-date tabulation of the amounts contained in the ledger and each entry established by section 314(a).''.
DOWNWARD ADJUSTMENT OF DISCRETIONARY SPENDING LIMITS.
The discretionary spending limits for new budget authority and outlays for any fiscal year set forth in section 601(a)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, as adjusted in strict conformance with section 251 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, shall be reduced by the amounts set forth in the final regular appropriation bill for that fiscal year or joint resolution making continuing appropriations through the end of that fiscal year.
Those amounts shall be the sums of the Joint House-Senate Lock-box Balances for that fiscal year, as calculated under section 602(a)(5) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
That bill or joint resolution shall contain the following statement of law: ``As required by section 6 of the Taxpayer Protection Lock-box Act of 1999, for fiscal year [insert appropriate fiscal year] and each outyear, the adjusted discretionary spending limit for new budget authority shall be reduced by $ [insert appropriate amount of reduction] and the adjusted discretionary limit for outlays shall be reduced by $ [insert appropriate amount of reduction] for the budget year and each outyear.''
Notwithstanding section 904(c) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, section 306 of that Act as it applies to this statement shall be waived.
This adjustment shall be reflected in reports under sections 254(g) and 254(h) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
In General.--The provisions of sections 1 through 6 of this Act shall apply to all appropriation bills making appropriations for fiscal year 1999 or any subsequent fiscal year.
FY99 Application.--In the case of any appropriation bill for fiscal year 1999 engrossed by the House of Representatives or the Senate after January 28, 1999, and before the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the Committees on Appropriations and the Committees on the Budget of the House of Representatives and of the Senate shall, within 10 calendar days after that date of enactment of this Act, carry out the duties required by this Act and amendments made by it that occur after the date this Act was engrossed by the House of Representatives or the Senate.
FY99 Allocations.--The duties of the Director of the Congressional Budget Office and of the Committees on the Budget and on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate pursuant to this Act and the amendments made by it regarding appropriation bills for fiscal year 1999 shall be based upon the revised section 602(a) allocations in effect on January 28, 1999.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``appropriation bill'' means any general or special appropriation bill, and any bill or joint resolution making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations through the end of a fiscal year.
ADJUSTMENT FOR STIMULATIVE EFFECT OF REVENUE REDUCTIONS.
Amount of Adjustment.-- (1) OMB.--Effective in 1999 and not later than October 15 of each year, the Director of OMB shall calculate stimulative effect by determining the amount by which actual revenues exceed the projected level of revenues set forth in paragraph (2) and then estimating the amount of the excess (fiscal dividend excess) attributable to provisions of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 reducing revenues.
Projected level of revenues.--The projected level of revenues referred to in paragraph (1) are as follows: (A) For fiscal year 1999, $1,815,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2000, $1,870,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2001, $1,930,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2002, $2,015,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2003, $2,091,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2004, $2,184,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2005, $2,288,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2006, $2,393,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2007, $2,500,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2008, $2,611,000,000,000.
For fiscal year 2009, $2,727,000,000,000.
CBO certification.--Not later than October 20, the Director of the CBO shall certify the estimates and projections of the Director of OMB made under this subsection.
If the Director of CBO cannot certify the estimates and projections, the Director shall notify Congress and the President of the disagreement and submit revised estimates.
Reduction of Deficit.--If the Director of OMB determines that a fiscal dividend excess exists under subsection (a) and on November 1, the President may-- (1) direct the Secretary of the Treasury to pay an amount not to exceed the levels of excess to retire debt obligations of the United States; or (2) submit a legislative proposal to Congress for reducing taxes by the amount of excess not dedicated to deficit reduction to be considered by Congress as provided in subsection (c); or (3) submit a legislative proposal to Congress for saving social security by the amount of excess not dedicated to deficit reduction and/or tax relief.
Expedited Procedure.-- (1) Introduction.--Not later than 3 days after the President submits a legislative proposal under subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3), the Majority Leaders of the Senate and the House of Representatives shall introduce the proposal in their respective Houses as a bill.
If the bill described in the preceding sentence is not introduced as provided in the preceding sentence, then, on the 4th day after the submission of the legislative proposal by the President, any Member of the House may introduce the bill.
Referral to committee.--A bill described in paragraph (1) introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives.
A bill described in paragraph (1) introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Finance of the Senate.
If more than 1 bill is introduced as provided in paragraph (1), the committee shall consider and report the first bill introduced.
Amendments to the bill in committee may not reduce revenues in the bill below the amount proposed by the President.
Such a bill may not be reported before the 8th day after its introduction.
Discharge of committee.--If the committee to which is referred a bill described in paragraph (1) has not reported such bill at the end of 15 calendar days after its introduction, such committee shall be deemed to be discharged from further consideration of such bill and such bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Floor consideration.-- (A) In general.--When the committee to which a bill is referred has reported, or has been deemed to be discharged (under paragraph (3)) from further consideration of, a bill described in paragraph (1), it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the bill, and all points of order against the bill (and against consideration of the bill) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the bill is agreed to, the bill shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate.--Consideration of the bill, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 20 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
A motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the bill is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the bill is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Debate on amendments to the bill shall be limited to 30 minutes equally divided.
Amendments to the bill may not reduce revenues in the bill below the amount proposed by the President.
Vote on final passage.--Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on a bill described in paragraph (1), and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the bill shall occur.
Rulings of the chair on procedure.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a bill described in paragraph (1) shall be decided without debate.
Coordination with action by other house.--If, before the passage by one House of a bill of that House described in paragraph (1), that House receives from the other House a bill described in paragraph (1), then the following procedures shall apply: (A) The bill of the other House shall not be referred to a committee.
With respect to a bill described in paragraph (1) of the House receiving the bill-- (i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no bill had been received from the other House; but (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the bill of the other House.
Rules of house of representatives and senate.--This subsection is enacted by Congress-- (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a bill described in paragraph (1), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Deficit Reduction if Tax Reductions or Social Security Reforms Are Not Enacted.--If tax reductions or social security reforms are not enacted by December 31 of the year of the submission of a legislative proposal under subsection (b)(2), the President shall pay an amount equal to the amount by which revenues are not reduced to deficit reduction as provided in subsection (b)(1).
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``stimulative economic effect of any laws reducing revenues'' refers to laws that have the effect of stimulating savings, investment, job creation, and economic growth.
MDA Point of Order.--Section 605(b) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Maximum deficit point of order.-- ``(A) In general.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, or conference report that includes any provision that would result in a deficit for a fiscal year.
Waiver or suspension.--This subsection may be waived or suspended in the House of Representatives or the Senate only by the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members, duly chosen and sworn.''.
Sixty Vote Point of Order.--Section 904 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended-- (1) in the second sentence of subsection (c) by inserting ``605(b),'' after ``601(b),''; and (2) in the third sentence of subsection (d) by inserting ``605(b),'' after ``601(b),''.