This Act may be cited as the ``Agricultural Water Conservation Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the Federal Government has an historic commitment to assisting areas of the Nation in need of developing adequate water supplies, (2) water is becoming increasingly scarce and expensive in many parts of the United States, which is compounded when multiple years of drought occur, (3) in most areas of the United States, farms are overwhelmingly the largest water consumers, and (4) it is in the national interest for farmers to implement water conservation measures which are a least-cost approach to addressing critical water needs and for the Federal Government to promote such conservation measures.
CREDIT FOR PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF WATER CONSERVATION SYSTEMS ON FARM LAND.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF WATER CONSERVATION SYSTEMS ON FARM LAND.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 75 percent of the water conservation system expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during such year.
Water Conservation System Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `water conservation system expenses' means expenses for the purchase and installation of materials or equipment which are primarily designed to substantially conserve water on farm land.
Farm land.--The term `farm land' means land used in a trade or business by the taxpayer or a tenant of the taxpayer for-- ``(A) the production of crops, fruits, or other agricultural products, ``(B) the raising, harvesting, or growing of trees, or ``(C) the sustenance of livestock.
Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) Liability for tax.--The credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(A) the regular tax for the taxable year, reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and the preceding sections of this subpart, over ``(B) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
Carryforward of unused credit.--If the amount of the credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds the limitation under paragraph (1) for the taxable year, the excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the amount allowable as a credit under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
Additional Limitations.-- ``(1) Approved water conservation plan.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any expense unless-- ``(A) the taxpayer has in effect a water conservation plan which has been reviewed and approved by the Soil Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture, and ``(B) such expense is consistent with such plan.
Drought area.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any expense unless the land on which the water conservation system is installed is entirely in an area which has been identified, in the taxable year or in any of the 3 preceding taxable years, as an area of extreme drought severity on the Palmer Drought Severity Index published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter with respect to any expense which is taken into account in determining the credit under this section, and any increase in the basis of any property which would (but for this subsection) result from such expense shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowed under this section for such expense.''
Technical Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (25), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (26) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(27) to the extent provided in section 30A(e), in the case of amounts with respect to which a credit has been allowed under section 30A.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Purchase and installation of water conservation systems on farm land.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending after such date.