This Act may be cited as the ``National Archives 75th Anniversary Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) The year 2010 commemorates the 75th Anniversary of the opening of the National Archives Building, which houses the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights (known collectively as the Charters of Freedom).
The National Archives and Records Administration has, over the course of its history, established itself as public trust on which our democracy depends and has proven itself to be a vital and invaluable resource within the Federal Government.
The National Archives and Records Administration has expanded its role as the nation's recordkeeper and raised its public profile as democracy's beacon.
The National Archives and Records Administration serves American democracy by ensuring that the people can discover, use, and trust the records of our government.
The National Archives and Records Administration fulfills this role by-- (A) preserving for the American people and their public servants the records of our Federal Government; (B) ensuring continuing access to the essential documentation of the rights of American citizens and the actions of their Government; and (C) promoting democracy, civic education, and historical understanding of our national experience.
In 1935, the National Archives Building was opened on the Washington Mall, featuring a grand rotunda designed for the display of the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue such number of $1 coins as the Secretary may determine to be appropriate, in the quantities described in section 4, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
DESIGN AND QUANTITIES OF COINS.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the National Archives Building and shall honor the National Archives and Records Administration as a public trust on which our democracy depends and of the Charters of Freedom that the Administration enshrines for posterity.
Obverse.--The obverse of the coins minted under this Act shall be representative of the 75th Anniversary of the National Archives Building.
Reverse.-- (A) Declaration of independence.--Not more than 350,000 of the $1 coins minted under this Act shall feature an image of the Declaration of Independence.
United states constitution.--Not more than 350,000 of the $1 coins minted under this Act shall feature an image of the Constitution of the United States.
Bill of rights.--Not more than 350,000 of the $1 coins minted under this Act shall feature an image of the Bill of Rights.
Designation and Inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (1) a designation of the value of the coin; (2) an inscription of the year ``2010''; and (3) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts and the Foundation for the National Archives; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee established under section 5135 of title 31, United States Code.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act only during the period beginning on January 1, 2010, and ending on December 31, 2010.
Sale Price.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge required under section 7(a) for the coins, and the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, and marketing).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders at a Discount.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Promotion Consultation.--The Secretary shall-- (1) consult with the National Archives and Records Administration to determine the feasibility of providing a role for the National Archives and Records Administration in the promotion, advertising, and marketing of the coins minted under this Act; and (2) if the Secretary determines that such action would be beneficial to the sale of coins minted under this Act, enter into a memorandum of agreement with the National Archives and Records Administration to carry out the role established under paragraph (1).
Surcharge Required.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, all surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be paid by the Secretary to, and divided equally between, the Foundation for the National Archives and the National Archives and Records Administration Trust Fund to be used for the purpose of supporting public programs, educational outreach activities, and archival programs of the National Archives and Records Administration.
Audits.--The Foundation for the National Archives and the National Archives and Records Administration Trust Fund shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code, with regard to the amounts received by the Fund under subsection (b).