This Act may be cited as the ``Youth Violence Prevention Act of 1999''.
TITLE I--EXPANSION OF INSTANT GUN CHECK CAPABILITIES SEC.
EXPANSION OF BYRNE PURPOSES.
Section 501(b) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3751(b)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (16) through (26) as (17) through (27), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (15) the following: ``(16) developing or expanding a State instant criminal background check system that includes allowing only limited access of the system, regarding the eligibility status of a proposed firearm purchaser (after receiving the purchaser's express authorization), to a person who sells a firearm and is not a licensed dealer;''.
IMPROVEMENT OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE RECORDS.
Section 509 of Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3759) is amended by-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``5 percent'' and insert ``6 percent''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (B) in the first paragraph (4), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; (C) by redesignating the second paragraph (4) that ends with ``1993.
''as paragraph (6); and (B) by inserting after the first paragraph (4) the following: ``(5) developing or expanding a State instant criminal background check system that includes allowing only limited access of the system, regarding the eligibility status of a proposed firearm purchaser (after receiving the purchaser's express authorization), to a person who sells a firearm and is not a licensed dealer; and''.
TITLE II--NONREFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR PURCHASE OF SAFE STORAGE DEVICES FOR FIREARMS SEC.
NONREFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR PURCHASE OF SAFE STORAGE DEVICES FOR FIREARMS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25A the following new section: ``SEC.
PURCHASE OF SAFE STORAGE DEVICES FOR FIREARMS.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for a taxable year an amount equal to the qualified firearm safe storage device expenses for the taxable year.
Lifetime Dollar Limitation.--The aggregate amount of expenses paid by an individual which may be treated as qualified firearm safe storeage device expenses for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(1) $250, over ``(2) the aggregate amounts treated as qualified firearm safe storeage device expenses with respect to such individual for all prior taxable years.
Qualified Firearm Safe Storage Device Expense.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified firearm safe storage device expense' means amounts paid for a trigger lock, secure locked cabinet, or other safety device used solely for the storeage of a firearm.
Firearm.--The term `firearm' has the meaning given such term by section 921(a)(3) of title 18, United States Code.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Purchase of safe storage devices for firearms.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998.
TITLE III--HANDGUN CHILD SAFETY LOCKS SEC.
PROHIBITION AGAINST MANUFACTURE OF A HANDGUN WITHOUT CHILD SAFETY LOCKS.
Prohibition Against Manufacture of Handgun Without Child Safety Lock Attached.-- (1) Prohibition.--It shall be unlawful for any person, in or affecting commerce, to manufacture a handgun in the United States, unless a child safety lock which meets the requirement of subsection (b) is attached to, or is an integral part of, the firearm.
Penalties.--The Secretary shall impose a civil fine of $5,000 on any person who violates paragraph (1).
Child Safety Lock Requirements.--A lock meets the requirements of this subsection if the lock, while activated or attached to the firearm, prevents the firearm from being discharged.
Judicial Review.--Not later than 60 days after an individual receives notice from the Secretary of a decision to impose a fine on the individual under this section, the individual may bring an action against the Secretary in any United States district court for de novo review of the decision.
Inapplicability to Governmental Entities.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to conduct of, or authorized by, the United States or any department or agency thereof, or any State or any department, agency, or political subdivision thereof.
Definitions.--As used in this section, the terms ``State'', ``handgun'', and ``Secretary'' shall have the meanings given such terms in section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code.
TITLE IV--CHILD FIREARM ACCESS PREVENTION SEC.
CHILDREN AND FIREARMS SAFETY.
Secure Gun Storage or Safety Device.--Section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(35) The term `secure gun storage or safety device' means-- ``(A) a device that, when installed on a firearm, prevents the firearm from being operated without first deactivating or removing the device; ``(B) a device incorporated into the design of the firearm that prevents the operation of the firearm by anyone not having authorized access to the device; or ``(C) a safe, gun safe, gun case, lock box, or other device that is designed to be or can be used to store a firearm and that can be unlocked only by means of a key, a combination, or other similar means.''.
Prohibition and Penalties.--Section 922 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after subsection (y) the following: ``(z) Prohibition Against Giving Juveniles Access to Certain Firearms.-- ``(1) Definition of juvenile.--In this subsection, the term `juvenile' means an individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
Prohibition.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), any person that-- ``(A) keeps a loaded firearm, or an unloaded firearm and ammunition for the firearm, any of which has been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce or otherwise substantially affects interstate or foreign commerce, within any premise that is under the custody or control of that person; and ``(B) knows, or reasonably should know, that a juvenile is capable of gaining access to the firearm without the permission of the parent or legal guardian of the juvenile, shall, if a juvenile obtains access to the firearm and thereby causes death or bodily injury to the juvenile or to any other person, or exhibits the firearm either in a public place, or in violation of subsection (q), be imprisoned not more than 1 year, fined not more than $10,000, or both.
Exceptions.--Paragraph (2) does not apply if-- ``(A) the person uses a secure gun storage or safety device for the firearm; ``(B) the person is a peace officer, a member of the Armed Forces, or a member of the National Guard, and the juvenile obtains the firearm during, or incidental to, the performance of the official duties of the person in that capacity; ``(C) the juvenile obtains, or obtains and discharges, the firearm in a lawful act of self-defense or defense of 1 or more other persons; ``(D) the person has no reasonable expectation, based on objective facts and circumstances, that a juvenile is likely to be present on the premises on which the firearm is kept; or ``(E) the juvenile obtains the firearm as a result of unlawful entry by the juvenile.''.
Role of Licensed Firearms Dealers.--Section 926 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) The Secretary shall ensure that a copy of section 922(z) appears on the form required to be obtained by a licensed dealer from a prospective transferee of a firearm.''.
No Effect on State Law.--Nothing in this section or the amendments made by this section shall be construed to preempt any provision of the law of any State, the purpose of which is to prevent children from injuring themselves or others with firearms.