This Act may be cited as the ``Secure Traveler Improvement Act of 2006''.
IMPROVING THE ``NEXUS'' AND ``FAST'' REGISTERED TRAVELER PROGRAMS.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Section 7208(k) of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 required that the Secretary of Homeland Security implement a registered traveler program to expedite the processing of registered travelers who enter and exit the United States.
In order to include as many participants as possible, the Congress mandated that the Secretary of Homeland Security create a program that-- (A) minimizes the cost of enrollment; (B) makes the program enrollment convenient and easily accessible; and (C) provides applicants with clear and consistent eligibility requirements.
According to the Department of State Bureau of Consular Affairs, 400,000 individuals made 48 percent of cross-border trips between the United States and Canada in 2004.
These are the frequent travelers that must be encouraged to enroll in expedited traveler programs.
Barriers to enrollment in the Free and Secure Trade program (``FAST'' or ``FAST'' program) and the ``NEXUS'' dedicated commuter lane system (``NEXUS'' or ``NEXUS program'') include inadequate numbers and locations of enrollment centers, a confusing application process, and high enrollment fees for non-commercial users.
Consistent with the report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, it is imperative that the Department of Homeland Security expand the NEXUS and FAST programs.
Merging Requirements of NEXUS and FAST.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall merge the procedures for the programs described in subsection (l) into a single procedure, with common eligibility and security screening requirements, enrollment processes, and sanctions regimes.
Specific requirements.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall ensure that-- (A) the procedures for the programs known as ``NEXUS Highway'', ``NEXUS Marine'', and ``NEXUS Air'' are integrated into such single procedure; and (B) the processes relating to eligibility and security screening are identical to those for the FAST program described in subsection (l)(2) on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Integrating NEXUS and FAST Information Systems.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall integrate all databases and information systems for the programs described in subsection (l) in a manner that will permit any identification card issued to a participant to operate in all locations where a program described in such subsection is operating.
Creation of NEXUS Convertible Lanes.--In order to expand the NEXUS program described in subsection (l)(2) to major northern border crossings, the Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Canadian government, shall equip the following northern border crossings with NEXUS technology: (1) Pembina, North Dakota; (2) Sault Ste.
Marie, Michigan; (3) Alexandria Bay, New York; (4) Portal, North Dakota; (5) Sweet Grass, Montana; and (6) International Falls, Minnesota.
Creation of Remote Enrollment Centers.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Canadian government, shall create a minimum of 6 remote enrollment centers for the programs described in subsection (l).
A remote enrollment center shall be established at each of the border crossings described in subsection (d).
Creation of Mobile Enrollment Centers.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Canadian government, shall create a minimum of 4 mobile enrollment centers for the programs described in subsection (l).
Such mobile enrollment centers shall be used to accept and process applications in areas currently underserved by such programs.
The Secretary shall work with State and local authorities in determining the locations of mobile enrollment centers.
On-Line Application Process.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall design an on-line application process for the programs described in subsection (l).
Such process shall permit individuals to securely submit their applications on-line and schedule a security interview at the nearest enrollment center.
Promoting Enrollment.-- (1) Creating incentives for enrollment.--In order to encourage applications for the programs described in subsection (l), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall develop a plan to admit participants at a rate that does not exceed $20 per card issued.
The fee for the first renewal shall be waived.
Customer service phone number.--In order to provide potential applicants with timely information for the programs described in subsection (l), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall create a customer service telephone number for such programs.
Publicity campaign.--The Secretary shall carry out a program to educate the public regarding the benefits of the programs described in subsection (l).
Travel Document for Travel Into United States.--For purposes of the plan required under section 7209(b) of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (8 United States Code 1185 note), an identification card issued to a participant in a program described in subsection (l) shall be considered a document sufficient on its own when produced to establish identity and citizenship for travel into the United States by United States citizens and by categories of individuals for whom documentation requirements have previously been waived under section 212(d)(4)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1182(d)(4)(B)).
Consolidated Background Check Process.-- (1) Requirement.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall establish a single process for conducting the security screening and background checks on individuals participating in any of the programs identified under paragraph (2).
Included programs.--The process established under paragraph (1) shall apply to the following programs: (A) The Transportation Worker Identification Credential.
The security risk determination and related background checks under section 5103a of title 49, United States Code, performed by the Transportation Security Administration as part of the Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Endorsement credentialing program.
The programs described in subsection (l).
The Secure Electronic Network for Travelers Rapid Inspection, or ``SENTRI'', program authorized under section 286(q) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1356(q)).
The Registered Traveler program of the Transportation Security Administration.
Features of process.--The process established under paragraph (1) shall include the following: (A) A single submission of security screening information, including personal data and biometric information as appropriate, necessary to meet the security requirements of all applicable departmental programs.
An ability to submit such security screening information at any location or through any process approved by the Secretary with respect to any of the applicable departmental programs.
Acceptance by the Department of a security clearance or other credential issued by a Federal agency, to the extent that the security clearance process of the agency satisfies requirements that are at least as stringent as those of the applicable departmental programs under subsection (b).
Appropriate standards and procedures for protecting individual privacy, confidentiality, record retention, and addressing other concerns relating to information security.
Deadlines.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall-- (A) submit a description of the process developed under subsection (a) to the appropriate congressional committees (as defined in section 2 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101)) by not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) begin implementing such process by not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Inclusion of other programs.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall review other existing or developing Department of Homeland Security programs that include security screening or background checks for participating individuals, and report to the appropriate congressional committees (as defined in section 2 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101)) any recommendations for inclusion of such additional programs in the consolidated screening process established under this section.
Relationship to other laws.--Nothing in this subsection affects: (A) any statutory or regulatory requirement relating to the operation or standards of the programs described in paragraph (2).
any statutory requirement relating to title III of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (50 United States Code 435b et sequentes).
Reports.-- (1) Report on implementation.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees (as defined in section 2 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101)) a report on the implementation of subsections (b) through (h) of this Act.
Report on coordination.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees (as defined in section 2 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101)) a report on the work being performed to streamline and coordinate the following programs: (A) The programs described in subsection (l).
The Secure Electronic Network for Travelers Rapid Inspection, or ``SENTRI'', program authorized under section 286(q) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1356(q)).
The Registered Traveler program of the Transportation Security Administration.
Programs.--The programs described in this subsection are the following: (1) The FAST program authorized under subpart B of title IV of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1411 et sequentes) (2) The NEXUS program authorized under section 286(q) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (United States Code 1356(q)).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Homeland Security such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2007 to carry out this section.