This Act may be cited as the ``Public Safety Ex-Offender Self- Sufficiency Act of 2002''.
TEMPORARY EX-OFFENDER LOW-INCOME HOUSING CREDIT.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EX-OFFENDER LOW-INCOME HOUSING CREDIT.
In General.--For purposes of section 38, the amount of the ex-offender low-income housing credit determined under this section for any taxable year in the credit period shall be an amount equal to-- ``(1) the applicable percentage of ``(2) the qualified basis of each qualified ex-offender residential building.
Applicable Percentage.--In the case of any qualified ex- offender residential building, the term `applicable percentage' has the meaning given such term in section 42(b)(2) with respect to qualified low-income buildings, except that, for the purposes of this subsection, the percentages prescribed by the Secretary under section 42(b)(2)(B) shall yield amounts of credit which have a present value equal to 70 percent of the qualified basis of any qualified ex-offender residential building.
Qualified Basis.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a) and except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the term `qualified basis' means the adjusted basis of a qualified ex- offender residential building as of the close of the 1st taxable year of the credit period.
Qualified basis to include portion of building used to provide ex-offender support services.--The qualified basis of any qualified ex-offender residential building for any taxable year shall be increased by the lesser of-- ``(A) so much of the qualified basis of such building as is used throughout the year to provide ex- offender support services, or ``(B) 20 percent of the qualified basis of such building (determined without regard to this paragraph).
Special rules.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (4), (5) (other than subparagraph (A) thereof), and (7) of section 42(d) shall apply in determining the adjusted basis of any qualified ex-offender residential building.
Rehabilitation Expenditures.--Rules similar to the rules of section 42(e) shall apply in determining the treatment of rehabilitation expenditures paid or incurred by the taxpayer with respect to a qualified ex-offender residential building.
Credit Period.--For purposes of this section, rules similar to the rules of section 42(f) shall apply in determining the credit period with respect to any qualified ex-offender residential building.
Qualified Ex-Offender Residential Building.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified ex-offender residential building' means any building which, at all times during the compliance period, meets the following requirements: ``(1) Single occupancy ex-offender residential units.--Each residential unit in such building may be made available for occupancy to not more than 1 individual.
Such individual must be an ex-offender who-- ``(A) meets the residency requirements under subsection (g); ``(B) has failed to meet such requirements for fewer than 14 days; or ``(C) is in the process of being evicted from such building for failing to meet such requirements.
``A building shall not be determined to fail to satisfy the requirements of this paragraph solely because some or all of the residential units in such building are single room occupancy (as defined in section (8)(n) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437f(n))).
Self-sufficiency centers for ex-offenders.--The building shall include a self-sufficiency center for ex- offenders that-- ``(A) is specifically designed to accommodate, and reserved for, the provision of ex-offender support services to residents of the facility and other ex- offenders; ``(B) is made available for rental by providers of such services at a rate determined by the owner of the facility; and ``(C) provides an array of such services sufficient to meet a significant portion of the needs of ex- offenders for ex-offender support services.
Rent limitations.--The portion of the monthly rent payable by the occupant of each unit in the building may not exceed 30 percent of the adjusted monthly income (as such term is defined in section 3(b) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437a(b)) of the occupant.
Residency Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--An ex-offender meets the residency requirements for a qualified ex-offender residential building if such ex-offender-- ``(A) has a low income; ``(B) is participating in an ex-offender support services program as described in paragraph (3)(B); ``(C) has not been prohibited from residency under paragraph (4); and ``(D) commences occupancy of a unit in a qualified ex-offender residential building on a date that is not later than-- ``(i) in the case of an ex-offender who has been discharged from prison, jail, a half-way house, or any other correctional facility, 12 months after such discharge; or ``(ii) in the case of any ex-offender whose sentence did not include confinement to a correctional facility, 12 months after the date of the ex-offender's conviction.
Low-income.--For purposes of this section, an ex- offender is considered to have a low income if, at the commencement of the ex-offender's occupancy of a residential unit, the income (if any) of the ex-offender does not exceed 60 percent of area median gross income (as determined consistent with section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937).
Participation in ex-offender support services program.-- ``(A) Program.--For purposes of this section, an ex-offender support services program is a program for the provision of specific ex-offender support services for an ex-offender that-- ``(i) is created and managed by a coordinating individual or entity having education, training, and experience with ex- offenders and their support services needs; ``(ii) is specifically designed to meet the needs of the particular ex-offender for ex- offender support services; ``(iii) sets forth a specific duration over which the ex-offender support services are to be provided and goals by which to assess the progress of the ex-offender; and ``(iv) provides for continual oversight to monitor the progress and needs of the ex- offender and to ensure that the ex-offender is being provided the appropriate ex-offender support services and is complying with the requirements of the program.
Participation.--For purposes of this section, an ex-offender is considered to be participating in an ex-offender support services program if the ex- offender-- ``(i) has entered into a written agreement with the coordinator for the program that-- ``(I) sets forth the ex-offender support services that are appropriate for, and will be made available to, the ex-offender and the duration of the program for the ex-offender; and ``(II) provides that the ex- offender's continued attendance at scheduled program meetings and events and obtaining of program services are a condition of the ex-offender's continued residency in the facility; and ``(ii) is not in default with regard to the ex-offender's obligations under such agreement.
Ex-offender support services.--For purposes of this section, the term `ex-offender support services' means services that assist ex-offenders to develop skills necessary for life outside of the environment of a correctional institution, and includes-- ``(i) job training; ``(ii) employment counseling and placement; ``(iii) entrepreneurial training; ``(iv) financial management training; ``(v) homeownership and rental counseling; ``(vi) drug and alcohol abuse counseling; ``(vii) self-esteem and peer development assistance; ``(viii) anger management counseling; ``(ix) health care services, including mental health services and behavioral counseling; ``(x) probation services; ``(xi) family and crisis management counseling; and ``(xii) general educational assistance and counseling.
Limitation on term of residency.--An ex-offender may not reside in an ex-offender residential facility at any time after the expiration of the 2-year period beginning upon the commencement of the ex-offender's occupancy in the ex-offender residential facility.
Ex-Offender.--For purposes of this section, the term `ex- offender' means any individual who has been convicted of a felony under State or Federal law.
Allocation and Determination of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, rules similar to the rules of section 42(h) (other than subparagraphs (E) and (F) of paragraph (1) thereof) shall apply with respect to allocating and determining any credit under this section.
State housing credit ceiling.--For purposes of this section: ``(A) In general.--The State housing credit ceiling shall be calculated by substituting the amount determined under section 42(h)(3)(C)(ii) with the greater of-- ``(i) $85,000,000 multiplied by the State ratio, or ``(ii) $500,000.
Termination.--The State housing credit ceiling applicable to any State for any calendar year beginning after December 31, 2007, shall be zero.
State ratio.--The State ratio for any State is equal to-- ``(i) the reported number of sentenced prisoners released from State or Federal jurisdiction in such State during the most recent year for which information is available, divided by ``(ii) the reported number of sentenced prisoners released from State or Federal jurisdiction in the United States during the most recent year for which information is available.
Reported number of sentenced prisoners.--The reported number of sentenced prisoners is the number of such prisoners reported to the Attorney General by the National Prison Statistics Program.
Involvement of qualified non-profit organizations.-- For purposes of this section, section 42(h)(5)(A) shall be applied by substituting `0' for `90'.
Recapture of Credit.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (i)(1) and (j) of section 42 shall apply for purposes of this section.
Application of At-Risk Rules.--Rules similar to the rules of section 42(k) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Certification and Other Reports to Secretary.--Subject to such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, rules similar to the rules of section 42(l) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Responsibilities of the Secretary and Housing Credit Agencies.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (m) and (n) of section 42 shall apply for purposes of this section.''.
Inclusion as Current Year Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) the ex-offender low-income housing credit under section 45G(a).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Ex-offender low-income housing credit.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to qualified ex-offender residential buildings placed in service during taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.