This Act may be cited as the ``National Guard Amendments of 1993''.
REVISION OF NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU CHARTER.
In General.--(1) Subtitle A of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 11 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 12--NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU ``291.
Chief of the National Guard Bureau: appointment; principal adviser on National Guard matters; grade.
Chief of the National Guard Bureau: functions; annual report.
Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau.
Other senior National Guard Bureau officers.
Assignment of officers: joint duty assignment.
National Guard Bureau ``(a) National Guard Bureau.--There is in the Department of Defense the National Guard Bureau, which is a joint bureau of the Department of the Army and the Department of the Air Force.
Purposes.--The National Guard Bureau is the supervisory and operating agency of the Department of Defense for the Army National Guard of the United States and the Air National Guard of the United States.
The Bureau is also the channel of communications between (1) the Department of the Army, Department of the Air Force, and other components of the Department of Defense, and (2) the several States, on all matters pertaining to the National Guard, the Army National Guard of the United States, and the Air National Guard of the United States.
Chief of the National Guard Bureau: appointment; adviser on National Guard matters; grade ``(a) Appointment.--There is a Chief of the National Guard Bureau, who is responsible for the organization and operations of the National Guard Bureau.
The Chief of the National Guard Bureau is appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Such appointment shall be made from officers of the Army National Guard of the United States or officers of the Air National Guard of the United States who-- ``(1) are recommended for such appointment by their respective Governors or, in the case of the District of Columbia, the commanding general of the District of Columbia National Guard; ``(2) have had at least 10 years of federally recognized commissioned service in an active status in the National Guard; and ``(3) are in a grade above the grade of brigadier general.
Term of Office.--An officer appointed as Chief of the National Guard Bureau serves for a term of four years, but may be removed for cause at any time.
An officer may not hold that office after becoming 64 years of age.
An officer may be reappointed as Chief of the National Guard Bureau.
Adviser on National Guard Matters.--(1) The Chief of the National Guard Bureau is the principal adviser to the Secretary of the Army and the Chief of Staff of the Army, and to the Secretary of the Air Force and the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, on matters relating to the Army National Guard of the United States and the Air National Guard of the United States.
The Chief of the National Guard Bureau is an adviser to the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on matters relating to the Army National Guard of the United States and the Air National Guard of the United States.
Grade.--The Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall be appointed to serve in a grade above major general.
Chief, National Guard Bureau: functions; annual report ``(a) Functions.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Army, and the Secretary of the Air Force, the Chief of the National Guard Bureau is responsible for the following: ``(1) Allocating unit structure, strength authorizations, and other resources to the Army National Guard of the United States and the Air National Guard of the United States.
Determining and directing the training requirements of the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard and the allocation of Federal funds for the training of the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard.
Ensuring that units and members of the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard are trained by the States in accordance with approved programs and policies of, and guidance from, the Chief, the Secretary of the Army, and the Secretary of the Air Force.
Assisting the States in the organization, maintenance, and operation of National Guard units so as to provide well-trained and well-equipped units capable of augmenting the active forces in time of war or national emergency.
Planning and administering the budget for the Army National Guard of the United States and the Air National Guard of the United States.
Supervising the acquisition, supply, maintenance, and accountability of Federal property issued to the National Guard through the property and fiscal officers designated, detailed, or appointed under section 708 of title 32.
Granting and withdrawing, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, Federal recognition of (A) National Guard units, and (B) officers of the National Guard.
Establishing policies and programs for the employment and use of National Guard technicians under section 709 of title 32.
Supervising and administering the Active Guard and Reserve program as it pertains to the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard.
Prescribing the forfeiture of Federal funds and other aid, benefit, or privilege pursuant to section 108 of title 32.
Issuing directives, regulations, and publications consistent with approved policies of the Army and Air Force, as appropriate.
Facilitating and supporting the training of members and units of the National Guard to meet State requirements.
Appointing and administering civilian personnel necessary to perform the functions of the National Guard Bureau.
Performing such other functions as may be prescribed by the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Army, or the Secretary of the Air Force.
Annual Report.--Not later than 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall submit to Congress a report on the state of readiness of the National Guard and its ability to meet its missions.
The report may be submitted in classified and unclassified versions.
Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau ``(a) Appointment.--(1) There is a Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau, selected by the Secretary of Defense from officers of the Army National Guard of the United States or the Air National Guard of the United States who-- ``(A) are recommended for such appointment by their respective Governors or, in the case of the District of Columbia, the commanding general of the District of Columbia National Guard; ``(B) have had at least 10 years of federally recognized commissioned service in an active status in the National Guard; and ``(C) are in a grade above the grade of colonel.
The Chief and Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau may not both be members of the Army or of the Air Force.
(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), an officer appointed as Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau serves for a term of four years, but may be removed from office at any time for cause.
The term of the Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall end upon the appointment of a Chief of the National Guard Bureau who is a member of the same armed force as the Vice Chief.
The Secretary of Defense may waive the restrictions in paragraph (2) and the provisions of paragraph (3)(B) for a limited period of time to provide for the orderly transition of officers appointed to serve in the positions of Chief and Vice Chief.
Duties.--The Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau performs such duties as may be prescribed by the Chief of the National Guard Bureau.
Grade.--The Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall be appointed to serve in a grade above brigadier general.
Functions as Acting Chief.--When there is a vacancy in the office of the Chief of the National Guard Bureau or in the absence or disability of the Chief, the Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau acts as Chief and performs the duties of the Chief until a successor is appointed or the absence or disability ceases.
Succession After Chief and Vice Chief.--When there is a vacancy in the offices of both Chief and Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau or in the absence or disability of both the Chief and Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau, or when there is a vacancy in one such office and in the absence or disability of the officer holding the other, the senior officer of the Army National Guard of the United States or the Air National Guard of the United States on duty with the National Guard Bureau shall perform the duties of the Chief until a successor to the Chief or Vice Chief is appointed or the absence or disability of the Chief or Vice Chief ceases, as the case may be.
Other senior National Guard Bureau officers ``(a) Additional General Officers.--(1) In addition to the Chief and Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau, there shall be assigned to the National Guard Bureau-- ``(A) two general officers selected by the Secretary of the Army from officers of the Army National Guard of the United States who have been nominated by their respective Governors or, in the case of the District of Columbia, the commanding general of the District of Columbia National Guard, the senior of whom while so serving shall hold the grade of major general; and ``(B) two general officers selected by the Secretary of the Air Force from officers of the Air National Guard of the United States who have been nominated by their respective Governors or, in the case of the District of Columbia, the commanding general of the District of Columbia National Guard, the senior of whom while so serving shall hold the grade of major general.
The officers so selected shall assist the Chief of the National Guard Bureau in carrying out the functions of the National Guard Bureau as they relate to their respective branches.
Other Officers.--There are in the National Guard Bureau a general counsel, a comptroller, and an inspector general, each of whom shall be appointed by the Chief of the National Guard Bureau.
They shall perform such duties as the Chief may prescribe.
Assignment of officers: joint duty assignment ``Under such regulations as the Secretary of Defense may prescribe, a duty assignment to the Office of the Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall be considered a joint duty assignment for the purposes of section 668, of this title.''.
Definition ``In this chapter, the term `State' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and Guam and the Virgin Islands.''.
The table of chapters at the beginning of subtitle A of title 10, United States Code, and at the beginning of part I of such subtitle, are each amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 11 the following: ``12.
National Guard Bureau 291''.
Conforming Repeal.--(1) Section 3040 of title 10, United States Code, is repealed.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 305 of such title is amended by striking out the item relating to section 3040.
Other Conforming Amendments.--(1) Sections 3079 and 8079 of such title are each amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, under the guidance and supervision of the National Guard Bureau''.
The text of section 108 of title 32, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``If, within a time fixed by the President, a State fails to comply with a requirement of this title, or a regulation prescribed under this title, the National Guard of that State shall be barred in whole or in part, as the President may prescribe, from receiving money or other aid, benefits, or privileges authorized by law.
The President shall administer this section through the Chief of the National Guard Bureau.''.
RESERVE COMPONENT GENERAL AND FLAG OFFICERS ON ACTIVE DUTY.
Authorized Strength of General and Flag Officers on Active Duty.--Section 526 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Reserve component general and flag officers serving in the National Guard Bureau, the Office of a Chief of a reserve component, or the headquarters of a reserve component command are in addition to the numbers authorized for the armed forces under subsections (a) and (b) in numbers as follows: Army National Guard of the United States................................ 4 general officers.
Army Reserve........................... 4 general officers.
Naval Reserve.......................... 3 flag officers.
Marine Corps Reserve................... 1 general officer.
Air National Guard of the United States 4 general officers.
Air Force Reserve...................... 3 general officers.
Two positions to be filled by a Guard or Reserve officer: Military Executive to the Reserve Forces Policy Board and Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff....................... 2 general or flag officers.
The limitation of this section does not apply to a reserve general or flag officer who is not on the active list.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraphs (1) through (4) of section 526(a) of such title are amended to read as follows: ``(1) For the Army, 378 before October 1, 1995, and 294 on and after that date.
For the Navy, 247 before October 1, 1995, and 213 on and after that date.
For the Air Force, 319 before October 1, 1995, and 272 on and after that date.
For the Marine Corps, 67 before October 1, 1995, and 60 on and after that date.''.
DEFINITION OF ACTIVE GUARD AND RESERVE DUTY.
Section 101(d) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(7)(A) The term `active Guard and Reserve duty' means active duty or full-time National Guard duty performed by a member of a reserve component or of the National Guard pursuant to an order to active duty or full-time National Guard duty for a period of more than 180 consecutive days for the purpose of organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training the reserve components or the National Guard.
Such term does not include-- ``(i) duty performed as a member of the Reserve Forces Policy Board provided for under section 175 of this title; ``(ii) duty performed as a property and fiscal officer under section 708 of title 32; or ``(iii) service as a State director of the Selective Service System under section 10(b)(2) of the Military Selective Service Act (50 United States Code App.