This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Commission Act of 1995''.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on the Long-Term Solvency of the Medicare Program (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members appointed as follows: (1) Five members shall be appointed by the President from among officers or employees of the executive branch, private citizens of the United States, or both.
Not more than 3 members selected by the President shall be members of the same political party.
Five members shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate from among members of the Senate, private citizens of the United States, or both.
Not more than 3 of the members selected by the Majority Leader shall be members of the same political party.
Five members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among members of the House of Representatives, private citizens of the United States, or both.
Not more than 3 of the members selected by the Speaker shall be members of the same political party.
Date.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made no later than November 30, 1995.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--No later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairman.--The Commission shall select a Chairman from among its members.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Analyses and Recommendations.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall-- (A) review relevant analyses of the current and long-term financial condition of the medicare trust funds; (B) identify problems that may threaten the long- term solvency of such trust funds; (C) analyze potential solutions to such problems that will both assure the financial integrity of the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) and the provision of appropriate health benefits; and (D) provide appropriate recommendations to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the President, and the Congress.
Definition of medicare trust funds.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``medicare trust funds'' means the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund established under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund established under section 1841 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395t).
Report.--The Commission shall submit its report to the President and the Congress not later than December 31, 1996.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Compensation of Members.-- (1) Officers and employees of the federal government.--All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Private citizens of the united states.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), all members of the Commission who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation for their work on the Commission.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, to the extent funds are available therefore.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
At the request of the Chairman, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide the Commission with any necessary administrative and support services.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairman of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 2(b).
FUNDING FOR THE COMMISSION.
Any expenses of the Commission shall be paid from such funds as may be otherwise available to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.