OF CERTAIN CLAIMS AGAINST IRAQ.
Resolution by Iraq of Certain Claims.-- (1) In general.--Unless the President, before the end of the 90-day period beginning on the date described in paragraph (2)(A), certifies to the Congress that the Government of Iraq has adequately settled the claims in the cases referred to in subsection (b), then, upon the expiration of that 90-day period, the waiver authority granted to the President in section 1083(d) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (Public Law 110-181; 122 United States Statutes at Large 343), and any waiver granted before the end of that 90-day period under such authority, shall terminate.
Date described.-- (A) In general.--The date described in this paragraph is-- (i) 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, unless the President has certified to the Congress, before the end of that 30-day period, that-- (I) the Government of Iraq has not, before, on, or after the enactment of this Act, compensated any foreign persons or entities for claims or liabilities incurred by or under the control of the Saddam Hussein regime, including, but not limited to, commercial or financial claims, and claims for acts against individuals similar to those described in section 1605A(a)(1) of title 28, United States Code; or (II) negotiations are ongoing with the Government of Iraq to settle the claims in the cases referred to in subsection (b), and the President believes that those negotiations are being conducted in good faith and could lead to a satisfactory settlement of those claims; or (ii) if a certification is made under clause (i), the day after the date on which that certification terminates or, if a subsequent certification is in effect under subparagraph (B), the day after the date on which the last such certification terminates.
Duration of certifications.--A certification under subclause (I) or (II) of subparagraph (A)(i) terminates 180 days after it is made.
The President may make subsequent certifications under subclause (I) or (II) of subparagraph (A)(i) for periods of not more than 180 days each.
Cases.--The cases referred to in subsection (a)(1) are cases numbered 99:00CV03346 (TPJ), 1:01CV02674 (HHK), CIV.A.
02-632 (RWR) (July 7, 2003), 1:03CV00691 (HHK), and 1:03CV00888 (HHK), in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia.
Adequate Settlement.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1), adequate settlement means payment by the Government of Iraq of, or an unqualified and unconditional guarantee made by a United States depository institution to pay within 30 days after the end of the 90- day period described in subsection (a)(1), at least the following amounts to the following persons: (1) To any person-- (A) whose claim in the applicable case referred to in subsection (b) arose from an act of hostage taking or from being held in hostage status, and (B) who has not obtained a judgment on the claim before the date of the enactment of this Act, $150,000, plus $6,000 for each day the person was held as a hostage, but in no event more than $900,000.
To any person-- (A) whose claim in the applicable case referred to in subsection (b) arose from an act of hostage taking or from being held in hostage status, (B) who, while a hostage, was subjected to torture, and (C) who has not obtained a judgment on the claim before the date of the enactment of this Act, $2,500,000, plus $6,000 for each day the person was held as a hostage.
To a plaintiff in the applicable case referred to in subsection (b) who is the spouse or child of any person who qualifies for receipt of payment under paragraph (1) or (2), one third of the amount that such person qualifies for receipt under such paragraph.
To any person who, before the date of the enactment of this Act, obtained a judgment for compensatory damages in a case referred to in subsection (b) (regardless of whether such judgment was subsequently vacated)-- (A) payment of the unsatisfied amount of such judgment, in an amount that is the lesser of $1,000,000 or the unsatisfied amount of the award; and (B) if the amount of the judgment exceeds $1,000,000, one third of the unsatisfied amount of such excess.
Additional Condition in Case of Guarantee of Payment.--If the claims in the cases referred to in subsection (b) are adequately settled for purposes of subsection (a)(1) because of a guarantee of payment by a depository institution within the 30-day period specified in subsection (c), and such payment is not made within that 30-day period, then upon the expiration of that 30-day period, the waiver authority described in subsection (a)(1), and any waiver granted before the end of that 30-day period under such authority, shall terminate.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Foreign person or entity.--The term ``foreign person or entity'' means-- (A) an individual other than a national of the United States; and (B) a person or entity, other than an individual, that is organized under the laws of a country other than the United States.
Hostage.--The term ``hostage'' means an individual in hostage status or an individual seized or detained in the commission of an act of hostage taking.
Hostage status.--The term ``hostage status'' has the meaning given that term in section 599C(d)(1) of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1991 (Public Law 101-513).
Hostage taking.--The term ``hostage taking'' has the meaning given that term in section 1605A(h)(2) of title 28, United States Code.
National of the united states.--The term ``national of the United States'' has the meaning given that term in section 1605A(h)(5) of title 28, United States Code.
Torture.--The term ``torture'' has the meaning given that term in section 3 of the Torture Victim Protection Act of 1991 (28 United States Code 1350 note).
United states.--The term ``United States'' means the several States, the District of Columbia, and any commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.
United states depository institution.--The term ``United States depository institution'' means a depository institution organized under the laws of any State, the District of Columbia, or the United States, including a branch or agency of a foreign depository institution.
LIMITATION ON CERTAIN CLAIMS.
No funds of the United States Government may be used to pay any claim-- (1) that is cognizable under section 1605A of title 28, United States Code, as added by section 1083 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008, for money damages against Iraq for personal injury or death that was caused by acts committed by an official, officer, or employee of the Iraqi Government under Saddam Hussein; and (2) with respect to which the waiver authority under section 1083(d) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 has been or may be exercised.
Passed the House of Representatives September 15, 2008.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.