This Act may be cited as the ``Community Hospital Preservation Act''.
AUTHORITY TO MAKE GRANTS.
In General.--From any amounts made available to carry out this Act, the Secretary may make grants under this Act to eligible community hospitals.
Amount of Grant.--The aggregate amount of grant amounts provided to any single eligible community hospital that is awarded a grant may not be-- (1) less than $100,000; (2) greater than $2,500,000; or (3) greater than 10 percent of the total assets of the hospital.
Matching Requirement.--The Secretary may not award grant amounts under this Act to any eligible community hospital for any fiscal year in an amount that exceeds the amount that the hospital receives, in cash contributions, loans, or any combination thereof, for that fiscal year from non-Federal sources.
Hospitals With HUD-Insured Mortgages.--The Secretary may not award grant amounts under this Act to a hospital that is subject to a mortgage insured by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development under section 242 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1715z-7) unless the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development approves the award before the date of the award.
USE OF GRANT AMOUNTS.
Grant amounts under this Act may be used only for legitimate hospital purposes.
The Secretary may award grant amounts under this Act only to an eligible community hospital that has submitted an application to the Secretary at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may require, and containing such information and certifications as the Secretary may require to ensure compliance with this Act.
The Secretary shall award grant amounts under this Act in accordance with competitive criteria established by the Secretary.
RECOVERY OF GRANT AMOUNTS.
Recovery.--For each award of grant amounts under this Act, the Secretary shall recover, upon the date specified in subsection (b), the amount specified in subsection (c).
Date of Recovery.--The date specified in this subsection is the first to occur of the following: (1) The date on which the recipient fails to comply substantially with section 3.
The date on which the recipient fails to be a hospital that meets the requirements of any of subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 8(1).
The date of the expiration of the 10-year period beginning on the date of the award.
Amount of Recovery and Forgiveness of Such Amount.--The amount specified in this subsection is an amount equal to the amount of the award, reduced by 10 percent of the amount of such award for each full year from the date of the award through the date specified in subsection (b) throughout which the recipient continues to be a hospital that meets the requirements of any one or more of subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 8(1).
Manner of Recovery.--Any amount that the Secretary recovers under this section shall be recovered as if such amount had been loaned by the Secretary on the date specified in subsection (b), amortized over a 20-year period, with interest at a rate equal to the average annual cost of borrowing by the Department of the Treasury.
Not later than February 1 of each year, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report describing the activities carried out under this Act in the preceding calendar year and containing any related information that the Secretary considers appropriate.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Eligible community hospital.--The term ``eligible community hospital'' means a hospital that meets the following requirements: (A) The hospital is nonprofit.
The hospital has total assets of not more than $75,000,000.
The hospital is an essential source of basic hospital health care services within the community in which the hospital is located.
The hospital meets objective financial criteria, to be established by the Secretary, that indicate the hospital is experiencing ongoing financial difficulties.
The hospital is operating in an efficient manner or has a viable financial recovery plan reviewed by an independent public accountant, or financial consultant, who has expertise in the industry of providing health care services.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The Secretary shall issue any regulations necessary to carry out this Act.
For grants under this Act, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $1,000,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004, to remain available until expended.