SHORT TITLE AND REFERENCE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Amendment Act''.
Reference.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Act (Public Law 102-579).
Section 2 is amended by striking paragraphs (11), (13), (18) and (19).
ACQUISITION OF EXISTING OIL AND GAS LEASES.
Section 4(b)(5)(B) is amended by striking ``the Administrator determines, after consultation with the Secretary and the Secretary of the Interior, that the acquisition of such leases by the Secretary is required to comply with the final disposal regulations or with the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes)'' and inserting ``the Secretary determined that acquisition of such leases are necessary for the long-term protection of the WIPP''.
TEST PHASE AND RETRIEVAL PLANS.
Section 5 is repealed.
Section 6 is amended-- (1) by striking subsections (a) and (b), (2) in subsection (c) by striking ``(c) Limitations.--'' and all that follows through ``(B) Study.--'', and redesignating subparagraphs (i), (ii), and (iii) as subsections (a), (b), and (c) respectively, and (3) by striking subsection (d).
Section 7(a) is amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Non-defense waste.--Within the capacity prescribed by paragraph (4) and subject to other applicable restrictions, WIPP may receive transuranic waste from the Secretary which did not result from a defense activity but that is under the control of the Secretary on the date of enactment of this Act.''.
REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMENCEMENT OF DISPOSAL OPERATIONS.
Section 7(b) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Requirements'' and inserting ``Requirement'', (2) by striking ``The Secretary'' and all that follows and inserting: ``The Secretary may begin the disposal phase after the completion of the Administrator's review and certification under section 8(d) that DOE's application reasonably addresses the final disposal standards.''.
SURVEY AND RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING DISPOSAL.
At the end of section 7, insert the following new subsections: ``(c) Recommendations Regarding Disposal.--Within 3 years of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress comprehensive recommendations for the disposal of all transuranic waste under the control of the Secretary, including a timetable for the disposal of such waste.
The recommendations shall provide for compliance with all agreements entered into by the Secretary regarding the disposal of transuranic waste stored at Department of Energy facilities.
If the Secretary has completed other reports or timetables which contain information required by this subsection, the Secretary may incorporate the reports into the recommendations by reference.
Survey.--Within 3 years of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete, with notice and an opportunity for public comment, a survey identifying all transuranic waste types at all sites from which wastes are to be shipped to WIPP, and-- ``(1) the results of such survey shall be made available to the public and be provided to the Administrator; and ``(2) such survey shall not be subject to rulemaking or judicial review.
If the Secretary has completed other reports or timetables which contain information required by this subsection, the Secretary may incorporate the reports into the recommendations by reference.''.
Section 8(c) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Criteria for Certification of Compliance With Disposal Regulations.--The Administrator, in reviewing the Secretary's application submitted under subparagraph (A) shall limit such review to consideration of the Secretary's methods used in compiling information for the application.
The Administrator shall disapprove the application only if the Administrator finds through a preponderance of the evidence in the record that the Secretary has failed to adequately address long- term environmental and human-health related risks.
The Administrator shall not conduct an independent evaluation of the Secretary's analyses used to evaluate long-term disposal system performance.
The Administrator's review of the application shall be limited to the following criteria for certification of compliance with the final disposal regulations: ``(1) Completeness of the application.--Whether or not the Secretary's application addresses the topics mandated by the final disposal standards and listed in the certification criteria.
Reasonableness of the application.--If the Secretary's application provides a reasonable, scientifically sound approach to determining compliance with the final disposal standards.
Quality of the application.--If the Secretary has provided in the application objective evidence of quality.
The Administrator shall determine that the Secretary prepared the application using a recognized national nuclear quality standard.
Result of the application.--The Administrator shall determine if the bounding assumptions made by the Secretary in assessing long-term performance of the WIPP disposal system are reasonable and that any conditions imposed are technically feasible.''.
Section 8(d) is amended by striking ``Disposal Regulations.--'' and inserting ``Certification.--''.
Section 8(d)(1) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``Within 7 years of the date of the first receipt of transuranic waste at WIPP, the'' and inserting ``The'', (2) by amending subparagraph (B) to read as follows: ``(B) Certification by administrator.--Within 6 months of receipt of the application under subparagraph (A) the Administrator shall review the application for compliance with the final disposal regulations.
The application shall be deemed certified 6 months after receipt of the application by the Administrator unless the Administrator disapproves the application according to the criteria set forth in subsection (c).
The Administrator shall issue any such disapproval by rule pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United States Code, and sections 556 and 557 of such title shall not apply.
'', and (3) by striking subparagraph (D).
Section 8(d)(2) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Incremental submission of application for compliance.--Within 30 days after the passage of this bill, the Secretary shall provide to Congress a schedule for the incremental submission of the final version of chapters of the application to the Administrator.
The Secretary shall notify Congress of the submission of such chapters.
The Administrator shall review the submitted chapters according to the criteria in subsection (c) and provide requests for additional information for the Secretary only if the administrator makes a prima facie showing that the information is needed to avoid a rejection of the application under the criteria.
The Administrator shall provide comments within 45 days of receipt of each chapter, and the Administrator shall notify Congress when comments are provided to the Secretary under this subparagraph.
The Administrator shall be prohibited from rejecting the final application submitted under paragraph (1)(A) upon grounds that the Administrator did not raise under this section if the Administrator knew or could have reasonably anticipated the grounds for the rejection.
The comments or failure to comment of the Administrator under this subparagraph shall not be a final agency action for purposes of the Administrative procedures Act.''.
Section 8(d)(3) is repealed.
Section 8(g) is amended to read as follows: ``(g) Engineered and Natural Barriers, etc.--The Secretary shall determine whether or not engineered barriers, or both, will be required at WIPP to comply with regulations published as part 191 of 40 Code of Federal Regulations''.
COMPLIANCE WITH ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
Section 9 is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1)(C) by inserting after ``et sequentes)'' the following: ``, except that the Secretary shall not be required to comply with the requirements of 42 United States Code 6924(d)'', (2) in subsection (a) by striking ``In General.--(1)'' and renumbering subparagraphs (A) through (H) as paragraphs (1) through (8) respectively, (3) in subsection (a) by striking paragraphs (2)(3), (4) by striking subsections (b), and (c), and (5) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (b) and inserting after ``7401 et sequentes)'' the following: ``, except that the Secretary shall not be required to comply with the requirements of 42 United States Code 6924(d).''.
Section 10 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
DISPOSAL OF TRANSURANIC WASTE.
``It is the intent of Congress that, after the completion of the administrator's review and certification under section 8(d), the Secretary will begin the disposal phase no later than June 30, 1997.''.
Section 13 is amended-- (1) by repealing subsection (a), and (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``(b) Management Plan for the Withdrawal After Decommissioning.--Within 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the'' and inserting ``The''.
Section 14 is amended in subsection (b)(2) by striking ``including all terms and conditions of the No-Migration Determination'' and inserting ``except that the Administrator and the State shall not enforce, and the Secretary shall not be obligated to comply with, the requirements of 42 United States Code 6924(d)''.
ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE AND MISCELLANEOUS PAYMENTS.
Section 15(a) is amended-- (1) by striking ``to the Secretary for payments to the State $20,000,000 for each of the 15 fiscal years beginning with the fiscal year in which the transport of transuranic waste to WIPP is initiated'' and inserting ``to the State $20,000,000 for each of the 15 fiscal years beginning with the date of the enactment of the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Amendment Act'', and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``An appropriation to the State shall be in addition to any appropriation for WIPP.