This Act may be cited as the ``Iraq Troop Protection and Reduction Act of 2007''.
The purpose of this Act is to protect and reduce levels of United States military forces in Iraq.
If the President follows the provisions of this Act, the United States should be able to complete a redeployment of United States troops from Iraq by the end of the current term in office of the President.
LIMITATION ON UNITED STATES MILITARY FORCE LEVELS IN IRAQ ABSENT SPECIFIC AUTHORIZATION BY CONGRESS.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to limit the number of United States military forces deployed in Iraq.
Limitation.--Subject to subsection (c), the levels of United States military forces in Iraq after the date of the enactment of this Act may not exceed the levels of United States military forces in Iraq as of January 1, 2007, unless specifically authorized by Congress in a statute enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Waiver.-- (1) In general.--The President may waive the limitation in subsection (b) if the President determines, and certifies to Congress in writing, that the waiver is necessary to address an emergency that threatens the national security of the United States.
Duration of waiver.--The levels of United States military forces in Iraq may exceed the levels of United States military forces in Iraq as of January 1, 2007, pursuant to a waiver under this subsection only during the 60-day period beginning on the date of the waiver unless otherwise specifically authorized by Congress in a statute enacted after the date of the waiver.
LIMITATION ON UNITED STATES AID TO IRAQ FOR SECURITY AND RECONSTRUCTION ABSENT SATISFACTION OF CERTAIN CONDITIONS BY THE IRAQIS.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to require that Iraqis meet certain conditions within 90 days in order to continue receiving United States funds for their security forces and for reconstruction.
Limitation.--Commencing as of the date that is 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, no appropriated funds may be made available to the Government of Iraq for security purposes (including for activities of the security forces of the Government or Iraq and for private contractors employed by the Government of Iraq for the discharge of security and security-related functions), or for reconstruction, unless the President submits to Congress by such date the certification described in subsection (c).
Certification.--A certification described in this subsection is a certification by the President with respect to the following: (1) That the security forces of the Government of Iraq are free of sectarian and militia influences.
That the security forces of the Government of Iraq are assuming greater responsibility for security in Iraq.
If the President is unable to make a certification set forth in paragraph (1) or (2), a certification by the President that the security forces of the Government of Iraq are making substantial progress toward achieving the objective otherwise covered by the applicable paragraph will satisfy the certification requirements of subsection (b).
That the Government of Iraq provides for an equitable distribution of the oil revenues of Iraq.
That the constitution of Iraq has been modified or amended to ensure civil rights for each ethnic community in Iraq.
That the Iraq Government has reversed the policy of ``de-Baathification'' in a manner that permits former lower- level members of the Baath Party in Iraq to serve in the Government of Iraq if such individuals do not pose a security risk to the Government of Iraq or Iraq.
That there has been significant progress made in political accommodation among the ethnic and sectarian groups in Iraq.
Disapproval of Certification.-- (1) Disapproval.--Notwithstanding the submittal by the President of a certification under subsection (c), the limitation in subsection (b) shall be and continue in effect if Congress enacts a joint resolution disapproving the certification.
Procedures for consideration of joint resolutions.-- (A) Joint resolution defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``joint resolution'' means only a joint resolution introduced not later than 60 days after the date on which a certification of the President under subsection (c) is received by Congress, the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress disapproves the certification of the President submitted to Congress under section 4(c) of the Iraq Troop Protection and Reduction Act of 2007.''.
Procedures.--A joint resolution described in paragraph (1) shall be considered in a House of Congress in accordance with the procedures applicable to joint resolutions under paragraphs (3) through (8) of section 8066(c) of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 1985 (as enacted by section 101(h) of Public Law 98-473; 98 United States Statutes at Large 1936).
LIMITATION ON FURTHER UNITED STATES MILITARY PRESENCE IN IRAQ ABSENT SATISFACTION OF CERTAIN CONDITIONS BY THE PRESIDENT AND THE GOVERNMENT OF IRAQ AND THE PHASED REDEPLOYMENT OF UNITED STATES FORCES FROM IRAQ.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to require a new authorization for use of United States military forces in Iraq unless both the President and the Government of Iraq meet certain conditions within 90 days, including the phased redeployment of United States forces from Iraq.
Limitation.--Notwithstanding any provision of the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 (Public Law 107-243) or any other provision of law, authority for the use of United States military forces in Iraq shall cease on the date that is 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act unless-- (1) the President submits to Congress by such date the certification described in subsection (c); or (2) the continuing use of United States military forces in Iraq after that date is specifically authorized by Congress in a statute enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Certification.--A certification described in this subsection is a certification by the President with respect to the following: (1) That a phased redeployment of United States military forces from Iraq has begun, in a manner consistent with any limitations on aid for Iraq for security purposes in effect under section 4, including the transition of United States forces in Iraq to the limited presence and mission of-- (A) training Iraqi security forces; (B) providing logistic support of Iraqi security forces; (C) protecting United States personnel and infrastructure; and (D) participating in targeted counter-terrorism activities.
That the United States has convened or is convening an international conference so as to-- (A) more actively involve the international community and Iraq's neighbors; (B) promote a durable political settlement among Iraqis; (C) reduce regional interference in the internal affairs of Iraq; (D) encourage more countries to contribute to the extensive needs in Iraq; and (E) ensure that funds pledged for Iraq are forthcoming.
That the security forces of the Government of Iraq are free of sectarian and militia influences.
That the security forces of the Government of Iraq are assuming greater responsibility for security in Iraq.
That the Government of Iraq provides for an equitable distribution of the oil revenues of Iraq.
That the constitution of Iraq has been modified or amended to ensure civil rights for each ethnic community in Iraq.
That the Iraq Government has reversed the policy of ``de-Baathification'' in a manner that permits former lower- level members of the Baath Party in Iraq to serve in the Government of Iraq if such individuals do not pose a security risk to the Government of Iraq or Iraq.
If the President is unable to make a certification on any matter set forth in paragraphs (1) through (7), that substantial progress is being made toward achieving the objective otherwise covered by such paragraph.
That there has been significant progress made in political accommodation among the ethnic and sectarian groups in Iraq.
Disapproval of Certification.-- (1) Disapproval.--Notwithstanding the submittal by the President of a certification under subsection (c), the limitation in subsection (b) shall be and continue in effect if Congress enacts a joint resolution disapproving the certification.
Procedures for consideration of joint resolutions.-- (A) Joint resolution defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``joint resolution'' means only a joint resolution introduced not later than 60 days after the date on which a certification of the President under subsection (c) is received by Congress, the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress disapproves the certification of the President submitted to Congress under section 5(c) of the Iraq Troop Protection and Reduction Act of 2007.''.
Procedures.--A joint resolution described in paragraph (1) shall be considered in a House of Congress in accordance with the procedures applicable to joint resolutions under paragraphs (3) through (8) of section 8066(c) of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 1985 (as enacted by section 101(h) of Public Law 98-473; 98 United States Statutes at Large 1936).
Withdrawal of United States Military Forces.--The limitation in subsection (b) shall not be construed to prohibit the presence and use of United States military forces in Iraq after the effective date of such limitation for force protection, force security, or similar purposes during the withdrawal of United States military forces from Iraq.
LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR DEPLOYMENT OF ADDITIONAL UNITED STATES MILITARY FORCES IN IRAQ ABSENT AVAILABILITY OF ADEQUATE EQUIPMENT AND TRAINING.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are-- (1) to ensure that our men and women in uniform who are serving courageously in Iraq have the equipment and training they need; and (2) to prohibit the deployment of additional United States military forces in Iraq unless such forces are adequately equipped and trained.
Limitation.--No funds may be obligated or expended for the deployment of United States military forces to Iraq after the date of the enactment of this Act unless the Secretary of Defense certifies to Congress before such deployment that such forces are adequately equipped and trained for the missions to be discharged by such forces in Iraq.