This Act may be cited as the ``State Water Sovereignty Protection Act''.
In this Act, the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the Virgin Islands.
USE OF STATE LAW BY UNITED STATES FOR ACQUIRING AND EXERCISING WATER RIGHTS.
In General.--When the United States seeks to appropriate water or acquire a water right in a State or to exercise any right with respect to a water right in a State, the United States shall be subject to all procedural and substantive laws of the State relating to the allocation, adjudication, appropriation, acquisition, use, and exercise of water rights to the same extent as a private person is subject to those laws.
Consent to Joinder.-- (1) In general.--Consent is given to join the United States in any administrative or judicial proceeding of a State relating to the allocation, adjudication, appropriation, acquisition, use, or exercise of a water right to the same extent as any private person may be joined in such a proceeding.
Waiver.--The United States, when a party to a proceeding described in paragraph (1)-- (A) shall be deemed to have waived any right to plead that the State laws are inapplicable or that the United States is not amenable to the State laws by reason of the sovereignty of the United States; and (B) shall be subject to the judgments, orders, and decrees issued in any such proceeding, and may obtain review of those judgments, orders, and decrees in the same manner and to the same extent as a private person under like circumstances.
No Implied Federal Reserved Water Rights.--The withdrawal, designation, or other reservation of land by the United States for any purpose (whether by statute or administrative action) does not give rise by implication to a Federal reserved right to water relating to that purpose.
MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF WATER IN A STATE.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- (1) management and control over water in a State shall be subject to and in accordance with the laws of the State in which the water is located; (2) Congress delegates to each State the authority to regulate water, including the authority to regulate water in interstate commerce (including regulation of usufructuary rights, trade, and transportation); and (3) the United States, and any agency or officer on behalf of the United States, may exercise management and control over water in a State only in compliance with the laws of the State in which the water is located.
Suit by Private Parties.--The United States waives sovereign immunity with respect to any claim for declaratory, equitable, or injunctive relief brought by a nongovernmental entity against the United States under the laws of a State relating to the management or control of water in the State.
COSTS AND FEES RELATING TO ADMINISTRATIVE OR JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
In any administrative or judicial proceeding in which the United States participates under this Act or section 208 of the Act of July 10, 1952 (commonly known as the ``McCarran Amendment'') (43 United States Code 666), the United States shall be subject to the imposition of costs and fees to the same extent as costs and fees may be imposed on a private person.
SAVINGS PROVISIONS AND DISCLAIMERS.
In General.--Nothing in this Act-- (1) permits an appropriation of water under State law that interferes with any treaty or other international agreement to which the United States is a party; or (2) affects, impairs, diminishes, subordinates, or enlarges-- (A) any right of the United States or any State to water under any treaty or other international agreement to which the United States is a party or under any interstate compact; or (B) any obligation of the United States to any Indian or Indian tribe relating to water, or any claim or right owned or held by or for any Indian or Indian tribe relating to water, including any obligation, claim, or right under any Indian water compact.
No Effect on Other Acts.--Nothing in this Act affects or modifies-- (1) section 208 of the Act of July 10, 1952 (43 United States Code 666); (2) the Submerged Lands Act (43 United States Code 1301 et sequentes); or (3) the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et sequentes).