This Act may be cited as the ``Treat and Reduce Obesity Act of 2012''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, over 78,000,000 adults in the United States are obese.
Over 40 percent of women over age 60 and over 35 percent of men over age 60 are obese.
Obesity increases the risk for chronic diseases and conditions, including high blood pressure, heart disease, and type 2 diabetes.
Forty-nine percent of Americans have at least one chronic disease.
In 2008, in the United States, health care costs associated with obesity reached $147,000,000,000.
Seventy-five percent of Americans will be overweight or obese by 2020.
Forty-two percent of Americans will be obese by 2030, resulting in up to $550,000,000,000 in associated health care costs.
INCLUSION OF INFORMATION ON COVERAGE OF INTENSIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY FOR OBESITY IN THE MEDICARE AND YOU HANDBOOK AND ADDITIONAL NOTIFICATION OF BENEFICIARIES AND PROVIDERS.
Inclusion of Information on Coverage in the Medicare and You Handbook.-- (1) In general.--Section 1804(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395b-2(a)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (3), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, and''; and (C) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) information on the coverage of intensive behavioral therapy for obesity under this title, including information regarding primary care physicians and other providers of services and suppliers who are eligible to furnish such therapy.''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to notices distributed on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
New Notification of Benefit for Medicare Beneficiaries.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide to Medicare beneficiaries distinct, written notification regarding the coverage of intensive behavioral therapy for obesity under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) as an additional preventive service.
Notification of Benefit for Medicare Providers.--Section 1861(ddd) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ddd)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) The Secretary shall provide to primary care physicians and other providers of services and suppliers determined appropriate by the Secretary distinct, written notification regarding the coverage of intensive behavioral therapy for obesity under this title as an additional preventive service.
Such notification shall be provided annually for the first 3 years following the date of enactment of the Treat and Reduce Obesity Act of 2012 and, after such 3-year period, as the Secretary determines appropriate.''.
PLAN FOR COORDINATION OF HHS EFFORTS; PROVIDING THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES WITH AUTHORITY TO COORDINATE PROGRAMS TO PREVENT AND TREAT OBESITY AND EXPAND COVERAGE OPTIONS FOR OBESITY UNDER MEDICARE.
Section 1861(ddd) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ddd)), as amended by section 3, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5)(A) Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Treat and Reduce Obesity Act of 2012, the Secretary shall develop and implement a plan to coordinate the efforts of all offices and agencies of the Department of Health and Human Services (such as the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health, the Health Resources and Services Administration, and other offices and agencies) to treat, reduce, and prevent obesity and overweight in the adult population.
Beginning 2 years after such date of enactment, the Secretary shall annually update such plan.
In developing and implementing the plan under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall work with at least 5 representatives, selected by the Secretary, of expert organizations (such as public health associations, key healthcare provider groups, planning and development organizations, education associations, advocacy groups, patient groups, relevant industries, State and local leadership, and other entities as determined appropriate by the Secretary).
The plan under subparagraph (A) shall include the following: ``(i) Strategies to comprehensively treat and reduce overweight and obesity.
A description of-- ``(I) the coordination of interagency cooperation under the plan; and ``(II) actions under the plan related to the treatment and reduction of overweight and obesity in the United States.
Identification of best practices in States, communities, organizations, businesses, and other entities as appropriate, regarding treatment of overweight and obesity.
A description of collaboration with States, communities, organizations, businesses, and other appropriate entities to evaluate the effectiveness of obesity and overweight interventions under the plan.
Research initiatives, including ongoing surveillance and monitoring using tools such as the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey and the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System and assurances for adequate and consistent funding to support data collection and analysis to inform policy under the plan.
Recommendations for the coordination of budgets, grant and pilot programs, policies, and programs across Federal agencies to cohesively treat overweight and obesity.
Not later than 24 months after the date of enactment of the Treat and Reduce Obesity Act of 2012, and on an annual basis thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the President and to the relevant committees of Congress, a report that-- ``(i) summarizes the plan under subparagraph (A) to coordinate interagency efforts surrounding the treatment, reduction, and prevention of obesity and overweight, including a detailed strategic plan with recommendations for each office and agency involved; ``(ii) in the case of the second report submitted under this subparagraph (and each subsequent report), evaluates the effectiveness of those coordinated interventions and conducts interim assessments and reporting of health outcomes, achievement of milestones, and implementation of strategic plan goals; and ``(iii) makes recommendations for updating the plan for the following year based on data and findings from the previous year.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this paragraph, $5,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2014 through 2023, to remain available until expended.''.
AUTHORITY TO EXPAND HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS QUALIFIED TO FURNISH INTENSIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY.
Section 1861(ddd) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ddd)), as amended by sections 3 and 4, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) The Secretary may, in addition to qualified primary care physicians and other primary care practitioners, allow other appropriate health care providers (such as physicians with other primary specialty designations, licensed professional counselors, and registered dieticians), instructors trained in lifestyle counseling programs such as the Diabetes Prevention Program, and programs recognized by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to provide intensive behavioral therapy for obesity.''.
PROVIDING THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES WITH THE AUTHORITY TO INCLUDE CHRONIC WEIGHT MANAGEMENT DRUGS AS MEDICARE COVERED PART D DRUGS.
In General.--Section 1860D-2(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-102(e)(1)) is amended by adding at the end of the flush matter following subparagraph (B) the following new sentence ``Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, such term also includes a drug described in the second sentence of section 1927(d)(2)(A) (relating to drugs used for weight management) if the Secretary determines that coverage of such a drug under this part is appropriate.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to plan years beginning on or after the date that is 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.