This Act may be cited as the ``National Science Foundation Authorization Act of 1995.''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Director'' means the Director of the Foundation; (2) the term ``Foundation'' means the National Science Foundation; and (3) the term ``United States'' means the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
TITLE I--NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION AUTHORIZATION SEC.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the programs of the Foundation are important for the Nation to strengthen basic research and develop human resources in science and engineering and that those programs should be funded at an adequate level; (2) the primary mission of the Foundation continues to be the support of basic scientific research and science education and the support of research fundamental to the engineering process and engineering education; (3) the Foundation's efforts to contribute to the economic competitiveness of the United States should be in accord with that primary mission; and (4) it is in the national interest that all states and regions of the country, including the Nation's rural and sparsely populated states and regions, be encouraged to contribute and participate in the federal science and technology enterprise.
Authorizations.--For each of fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Foundation the following amounts for the accounts listed: (1) Research and Related Activities, $2,294,000,000 (of which $19,000,000 are authorized to be used for joint activities between the Foundation's research directorates and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research, including the pilot program authorized by section 102 of this Act).
Education and Human Resources Activities, $599,000,000 (of which $37,000,000 are authorized to be used for the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research).
Major Research Equipment, $70,000,000.
Academic Research Facilities Modernization, $100,000,000.
Salaries and Expenses, $127,310,000.
Office of Inspector General, $4,500,000.
PILOT PROGRAM TO ENCOURAGE PARTNERSHIPS FOR RESEARCH.
In General.--For each of fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998, there are authorized $10 million for the initiation of a pilot program at the Foundation to fund grants for science research and outreach proposals submitted by consortia of research institutions led by institutions from states eligible to compete in the Foundation's existing Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).
The program shall be aimed at encouraging EPSCoR institutions to enter into consortia with non-EPSCoR institutions, including private sector institutions, to develop grant proposals to support research, science education, community outreach, technology transfer, and any other activities consistent with the goals and missions of the Foundation.
Grants.--The grants shall be awarded by the Foundation to such consortia on a competitive, peer-reviewed basis.
In its selection process, the Foundation shall give favorable consideration to proposals involving in-kind or financial contributions from non-federal sources, including state and local governments, consortium members, other research institutions, or industry, but cost-sharing shall not be a required feature of a proposal.
In establishing requirements for the grant proposals, the Foundation shall require that the funds granted to a consortium must be administered by a member thereof that is an institution from an EPSCoR State and shall further require that such institution have primary responsibility for the management and oversight of the activities funded by the grant award.
Implementation of Program.--The Foundation shall implement the pilot program in a manner that will complement the Foundation's existing EPSCoR program and advance the common goal of both programs to enhance the capability of quality research groups and institutions in rural and sparsely populated States to contribute to the vast federal research enterprise.
Projects may be funded for up to three years through grants awarded under this program, with the potential for another two-year extension following the review and approval of the Foundation.
At the time of the Foundation's budget submission to Congress for fiscal year 1997, the Foundation shall provide to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Science of the House of Representatives a strategic plan for the implementation of the pilot program authorized in this section.
SUPPORT FOR COMPUTING ACTIVITIES AT TRIBAL COLLEGES.
The Director of the National Science foundation shall design and implement a pilot program to provide financial assistance, through competitive selection processes, to States in which are located 2 or more tribally-controlled community colleges.
The objective of the pilot program shall be to establish interactive telecommunications systems among such tribally-controlled community colleges in such States in order to assist the tribal community in education, job training, and other appropriate activities.
CONSULTATION AND REPRESENTATION EXPENSES.
From appropriations made under authorizations provided in this Act, not more than $10,000 may be used in each fiscal year for official consultation, representation, or other extraordinary expenses at the discretion of the Director.
The determination of the Director shall be final and conclusive upon the accounting officers of the Government.
$500,000 or Less.--In any given fiscal year, the Director may transfer appropriated funds among the subcategories of Research and Related Activities, so long as the net funds transferred to or from any subcategory do not exceed $500,000.
Greater Than $500,000.--The Director may propose transfers to or from any subcategory exceeding $500,000.
An explanation of any proposed transfer under this subsection must be transmitted in writing to the Committee on Science of the House of Representatives, and the Committees on Labor and Human Resources and Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.
The proposed transfer may be made only when 30 calendar days have passed after transmission of such written explanation.
TITLE II--GENERAL PROVISIONS SEC.
Section 3(f) of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42 United States Code 1862(f)) is amended to read as follows: ``(f) The Foundation shall provide an annual report to the President which shall be submitted by the Director to the Congress at the time of the President's annual budget submission.
The report shall-- ``(1) contain a strategic plan, or an update to a previous strategic plan, which-- ``(A) defines for a three-year period the overall goals for the Foundation and specific goals for each major activity of the Foundation, including each scientific directorate, the education directorate, and the polar programs office; and ``(B) describe how the identified goals relate to national needs and will exploit new opportunities in science and technology; ``(2) identify the criteria and describe the procedures which the Foundation will use to assess progress toward achieving the goals identified in accordance with paragraph (1); ``(3) review the activities of the Foundation during the preceding year which have contributed toward achievement of goals identified in accordance with paragraph (1) and summarize planned activities for the coming three years in the context of the identified goals, with particular emphasis on the Foundation's planned contributions to major multi-agency research and education initiatives; ``(4) contain such recommendations as the Foundation considers appropriate; and ``(5) include information on the acquisition and disposition by the Foundation of any patents and patent rights.''.
National Science Foundation Act of 1950 Amendments.--The National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42 United States Code 1861 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the subsection (k) of section 4 (42 United States Code 1863(k)) that was added by section 108 of the National Science Foundation Authorization Act of 1988 as subsection (l); and (2) by striking ``Atomic Energy Commission'' in section 15(a) (42 United States Code 1874(a)) and inserting ``Secretary of Energy''.
National Science Foundation Authorization Act, 1976 Amendments.--Section 6(a) of the National Science Foundation Authorization Act, 1976 (42 United States Code 1881a(a)) is amended by striking ``social,'' the first place it appears.
Technical Amendment.--The second subsection (g) of section 3 of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42 United States Code 1862(g)) is repealed.
Persons temporarily employed by or at the Foundation shall be subject to the same financial disclosure requirements and related sanctions under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 as are permanent employees of the Foundation in equivalent positions.