This Act may be cited as the ``Benefits for Victims of International Terrorism Act of 2003''.
There is established the Benefits for Victims of International Terrorism Program (``Program'') under which monetary awards shall be made in accordance with this Act to eligible individuals who are physically injured, killed, or held hostage as a result of an act of international terrorism.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (a) Act of International Terrorism.--The term ``act of international terrorism'' means an activity that constitutes terrorism within the definition provided in Section 2(15) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 and that was committed by foreign nationals or foreign governments (or the agents thereof) and directed, in whole or in part, at the United States or at an individual because of the individual's status as a national of the United States.
Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means an individual filing a claim for benefits under this Act.
In the case of an individual who died as the direct result of the act of international terrorism, any individual who is eligible to recover under section 107(a) may be a claimant.
In the case of an individual who suffered physical injury or was held hostage as the direct result of an act of international terrorism, the claimant shall be the individual who suffered the physical injury or was held hostage, except that a parent or legal guardian may file a claim on behalf of an individual who is less than 18 years of age, incompetent or incapacitated.
Child.--The term ``child'' shall have the meaning given to it by 42 United States Code 3796b(2).
Department.--The term ``Department'' means the Department of State.
National of the United States.--The term ``national of the United States'' has the meaning given in section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (United States Code 1101(a)).
Physical Injury.--The term ``physical injury'' means an injury to the body, from a source external to the body, that directly results in partial or total physical disability, incapacity, or disfigurement.
United States.--The term ``United States'' means the States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Mariana Islands, the territories and possessions of the United States, the territorial sea of the United States, and the airspace above them.
Threshold Determination.-- (1) Upon the occurrence of a terrorist incident, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Attorney General and the Secretaries of Defense, Homeland Security and the Treasury, shall promptly determine in writing whether an act of international terrorism as defined in section 103(a) of this Act has taken place.
Any such determination shall be published in the Federal Register.
The Secretary of State's determination under this section shall be final and conclusive, and it shall not be subject to review in any judicial, administrative or other proceeding.
Adjudication and Payment.--When a threshold determination set forth in subsection (a) is made, the Department shall have jurisdiction to receive, examine, adjudicate, and render final decisions, and pay awards with respect to claims filed under section 105 in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
In General.--Claims for benefits under the Program shall be filed with the Department on the form developed under subsection (b).
Claim Form.-- (1) The Department shall develop a form that claimants shall use when submitting claims under subsection (a).
The claim form at a minimum shall request-- (A) in the case of a claim filed for a death benefit with respect to a decedent, information demonstrating the decedent's death as a direct result of the act of international terrorism and information demonstrating that the claimant is eligible to recover under the Act.
in the case of a claim not involving a death, information demonstrating the physical harm that the claimant suffered as a direct result of the act of international terrorism or information demonstrating the period the claimant was held hostage as a direct result of the act of international terrorism; and (C) in the case of a claim filed by a parent or legal guardian, information demonstrating the claimant's status as a parent or legal guardian.
The claim form shall state clearly and conspicuously the information contained in section 112(c) of this Act.
In General.--The Department shall review each claim filed under this Program and determine whether the claimant is an eligible individual under subsection (b) of this section or has filed a claim on account of the death of an eligible individual under subsection (b).
Eligible Individuals.--An eligible individual is a victim who, as of the date on which the act of international terrorism occurred-- (1) was a national of the United States; and (2)(A) died as the direct result of the act of international terrorism; (B) suffered physical injury as the direct result of the act of international terrorism; or (C) was held hostage as a direct result of an act of international terrorism and not solely for ransom.
Exclusion for Participants or Conspirators in Acts of Terrorism.--A participant or conspirator in any act of international terrorism, or a representative of such individual, shall not be an eligible individual.
Exclusion for Military Personnel.--This Program does not apply to any claim arising out of injury, death, or period as a hostage sustained by a member of the United States Reports Armed Forces while serving on active duty.
September 11th Victim Compensation Fund.--Notwithstanding any other provision in this Act, no individual who is or was eligible to recover under the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund of 2001 shall be eligible to recover under this Act.
Death Benefit.--In any case in which the Department determines, under regulations issued pursuant to this Act, that an eligible individual has died as the direct and proximate result of an act of international terrorism, the Department shall award a benefit to the survivor or survivors in the same manner and the same amount as death benefits are paid pursuant to the Public Safety Officers' Benefits Program under subpart 1 of part L of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796 et sequentes).
Injury or Hostage Benefit.--In the event the claimant was physically injured or held hostage as a direct result of an act of international terrorism, the Department shall award a benefit to the claimant in an amount determined by the Department up to, but not to exceed, the amount provided for under the preceding subsection.
The Secretary of State may issue regulations regarding the amount of benefits to be provided under this subsection for categories of injuries or for durations of time as a hostage.
No Fault Program.--Awards shall be made without regard to the negligence or any other theory of liability of the claimant or of the individual on whose behalf the claimant is filing a claim.
Reversion of Amounts to the Fund.--If no person is entitled to receive the amount awarded under the above subsections, the amount shall revert to the Fund.
Prohibition on Double Recovery.--No benefit is payable under this Act with respect to a victim having been injured or held hostage if a benefit is payable under this Act with respect to the death of such victim.
In the event that a payment is made under this Act on account of death or period as a hostage and a death benefit subsequently becomes payable for the death of the same victim, such death benefit shall be reduced by amounts previously awarded.
Time Limitation for Filing.--No claim may be filed on the basis of an act of international terrorism after the date that is 2 years after the date of publication in the Federal Register of the relevant determination under section 104(a) of this Act.
INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE.
International Terrorism Before Effective Date.--Benefits may be awarded under this Act, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, to eligible individuals for acts of international terrorism that took place before the effective date of this Act and which occurred on or after November 1, 1979.
Determination.--The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Attorney General and the Secretaries of Defense, Homeland Security and the Treasury, shall issue, promptly upon the request of a claimant potentially covered under subsection (a), a determination whether an incident that occurred on or after November 1, 1979, and before the date of enactment of this Act was an act of international terrorism.
Such requests will be considered only if made within one year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Any such determination shall be published in the Federal Register.
Authorization.--There is established for the purpose of providing benefits under this Act a Victims of International Terrorism Benefits Fund (``Fund'').
In addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated for the Department of State, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of State for deposit into the Fund such sums as may be necessary to pay awards under this Act and to administer this Program.
Amounts in the Fund shall be available until expended.
Contributions.--The Secretary of State is authorized to accept such amounts as may be contributed by individuals, business concerns, foreign governments, or other entities for the payment of awards certified under this Act and such amounts may be deposited directly into the Fund.
Unexpended balances of expired appropriations available to the Department of State may be transferred directly into the Fund for the payment of awards under this Act and, to the extent and in such amounts as provided in appropriations acts, for the costs to administer this Program.
The United States shall be subrogated, to the extent of the payments, to any recovery in litigation or settlement of litigation related to an injury, death, or period of a hostage for which payment was made under the Program.
Any amounts recovered under this subsection shall be deposited into the Fund established by section 110(a).
Rules and Procedures.--The Secretary of State may issue such rules and procedures as may be necessary to carry out this Act, including rules with respect to choice of law principles, admitting agents or other persons to representation before the Department of claimants under this Act, and the nature and maximum amount of fees that such agent or other person may charge for such representation.
Acts Committed to Officer's Discretion.--Any action taken or omitted by an officer of the United States under this Act is committed to the discretion of such officer.
Civil Actions Against Foreign States.-- (1) A person who by a civil action has obtained and received full satisfaction of a judgment against a foreign state or government or its agencies or instrumentalities, or against the United States or its agencies or instrumentalities, for death, injury, or period as a hostage due to an act of international terrorism shall not receive an award under this Act based on the same act of international terrorism.
A person who has accepted benefits pursuant to an award under this Act relating to an act of international terrorism shall not thereafter commence or maintain in a court of the United States a civil action based on the same act of international terrorism against a foreign state or government or its agencies or instrumentalities or against the United States or its agencies or instrumentalities.
Decisions made under this Act shall not be subject to review in any judicial, administrative or other proceeding.
Section 201 of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-297) is amended by adding the following as new subsection (e): ``(e) Subsection (a) shall not apply to any judgment obtained pursuant to a complaint filed after [the date of submission of the Benefits for Victims of International Terrorism Act of 2003].''.
Section 1610(f) of Title 28, United States Code (28 United States Code 1610(f)), is amended by adding the following at the end as new subparagraph (4): ``(4) Subsection (f) shall not apply to any judgment obtained pursuant to a complaint filed after [the date of submission of the Benefits for Victims of International Terrorism Act of 2003].