This Act may be cited as the ``Art-in-Architecture Act of 1993''.
Congress finds that Federal buildings, through the integration of permanent works of art with architecture, should engage and represent the diverse social, cultural, and historic characteristics of the communities in which the Federal buildings are located and serve.
As used in this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the General Services Administration or a designee of the Administrator.
Agency fine arts officer.--The term ``agency fine arts officer'' means the General Services Administration official with technical and professional agencywide oversight responsibility for the fine arts programs of the agency.
Artist.--The term ``artist'' means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity that creates a work of art.
Work of art.--The term ``work of art'' includes a painting, sculpture, work on paper, literary or poetic inscription, large-scale crafts (such as mosaics, ceramics, and tapestries), environmental art, or architectural art integrated into a building.
A work of art is one that exists only in a single copy unless the Federal Government has given the artist written permission to fabricate actual size reproductions.
Federal building.--The term ``Federal building'' means any public building, along with the grounds, approaches, and appurtenances of the building, under the jurisdiction of the Administrator, that attracts, or is expected to attract, significant public use.
Project.--The term ``project'' means an existing or new building and site, including the art project, and all repair and alteration construction relating to a building.
Art project.--The term ``art project'' means the commissioning of works of art by the Administrator.
Art project funding.--The term ``art project funding'' means the total funds allocated to a project for commissioning a work of art.
Community representatives.--The term ``community representatives'' includes art professionals or members of the lay public invited or in attendance at art project meetings held by the Administrator to solicit comments on a proposed art project.
COMMISSION AND CONTRACTS FOR WORKS OF ART.
Art Funding for New Buildings.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (b), not less than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the funds made available for new construction, building purchase, acquisition, or prospectus-level repair and alteration projects shall be made available for art projects for the building.
Increase in amount.--The Administrator may increase the percentage amount specified in paragraph (1) for a project warranting more artwork, such as a building with exceptional public space whose architectural character and scale would accommodate and be significantly enhanced by large-scale, high- quality artwork.
Exception.--The Administrator may decrease the percentage amount specified in paragraph (1), specifying reasons for decreasing the amount, for a project warranting less artwork such as-- (A) a building with little or no public use or access; or (B) a building with sufficient previously acquired artwork.
Planning.--The preliminary planning and design of each new Federal building shall include planning for art commissions.
Commissioning.-- (1) Authority.--The Administrator shall commission works of art by living American artists to be placed in Federal buildings.
Amount of commission.--The commission award shall be based on a fixed price.
Selection.--In commissioning works of art, the Administrator shall select artists based upon-- (A) the artistic merit of the previous work of the artist; (B) the estimated value of the proposed work of art, and the scope, complexity, and professional nature of the work of art; (C) the artistic media; (D) the social, cultural, and aesthetic judgments of the local and regional community; (E) the interest in giving expression to the vitality and diversity of American life; and (F) the professional review of the agency fine arts officer.
Procedures.-- (1) Establishment of procedures.--The Administrator shall establish such procedures as are necessary to commission works of art, with an emphasis on the participation of community representatives.
Failure to negotiate contract.--If the Administrator is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the selected artist, negotiations shall be terminated.
The Administrator should undertake negotiations with alternate artists in order of merit.
Exemption from federal property and administrative services act.--Commissioning of art under this Act shall not be subject to title III of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 251 et sequentes).
Publicity.--The Administrator shall publicize each prospective art project and shall give artists a reasonable period of time to respond for consideration.
Maintenance of Artwork.--The Administrator shall provide for necessary services to maintain and preserve the works of art in a state of high quality.
Registry of Portfolios.--The agency fine arts officer shall maintain a registry of portfolios and statements of qualifications for artists interested in being considered for art projects.