This Act may be cited as the ``Residential Solar Energy Act of 2001''.
CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY BONDS.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY BONDS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a taxpayer who holds a Residential Solar Energy Bond on a credit allowance date of such bond which occurs during the taxable year, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for such taxable year an amount equal to the sum of the credits determined under subsection (b) with respect to credit allowance dates during such year on which the taxpayer holds such bond.
Amount of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of the credit determined under this subsection with respect to any credit allowance date for a Residential Solar Energy Bond is 25 percent of the annual credit determined with respect to such bond.
Annual credit.--The annual credit determined with respect to any Residential Solar Energy Bond is the product of-- ``(A) the applicable credit rate, multiplied by ``(B) the outstanding face amount of the bond.
Applicable credit rate.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the applicable credit rate with respect to an issue is the rate equal to an average market yield (as of the day before the date of issuance of the issue) on outstanding long-term corporate debt obligations (determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary).
Special rule for issuance and redemption.--In the case of a bond which is issued during the 3-month period ending on a credit allowance date, the amount of the credit determined under this subsection with respect to such credit allowance date shall be a ratable portion of the credit otherwise determined based on the portion of the 3-month period during which the bond is outstanding.
A similar rule shall apply when the bond is redeemed.
Residential Solar Energy Bond.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `Residential Solar Energy Bond' means any bond issued as part of an issue if-- ``(A) 95 percent or more of the proceeds of such issue are to be used to make qualified solar energy loans, ``(B) the bond is issued by a qualified utility, ``(C) the issuer designates such bond for purposes of this section, and ``(D) the term of each bond which is part of such issue does not exceed 15 years.
Qualified solar energy loan.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified solar energy loan' means any loan without interest to the owner of any qualified residential property for the purchase and installation of photovoltaic cells on such property but only if-- ``(i) the excess of the electricity produced by such cells over the electricity consumed at the residential property is transmitted from such property for use by others, ``(ii) the net electricity produced or consumed at the residential property is metered, ``(iii) the owner receives a credit against future electricity consumption for the excess described in clause (i), ``(iv) the principal amount of the loan is payable in equal installments over 15 years (or, if shorter, the period specified by the utility), and ``(v) the loan is made under a program of the utility that-- ``(I) specifies an approved list of photovoltaic cell equipment and installers, and ``(II) contains other safeguards to ensure that the loan is used for its intended purpose.
Qualified utility.--The term `qualified utility' means any entity (including a governmental unit) engaged in the sale of electrical energy at retail in the United States ``(C) Qualified residential property.--The term `qualified residential property' means any single- family or multi-family residence.
Limitation on Amount of Bonds Designated.-- ``(1) In general.--The maximum aggregate face amount of bonds which may be designated under subsection (c)(1) by any qualified utility shall not exceed the limitation amount allocated to such utility under paragraph (3).
National limitation on amount of bonds designated.-- There is a national Residential Solar Energy Bond limitation of $24,000,000,000.
Allocation of limitation among utilities.-- ``(A) In general.--The national Residential Solar Energy Bond limitation shall be allocated by the Secretary of Energy during 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005 to qualified utilities.
In making such allocations, such Secretary shall give priorities to qualified utilities which provide subsidies (other than through the use of such Bonds) for the purchase and installation by residential customers of photovoltaic cells on their residences.
Unused allocations.--Any allocation made to a qualified utility which is not used within 6 months after the date of the allocation may be reallocated by the Secretary of Energy.
Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) In general.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess of-- ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by section 55, over ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under part IV of subchapter A (other than subpart C thereof, relating to refundable credits).
Carryover of unused credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by paragraph (1) for such taxable year, such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Credit allowance date.--The term `credit allowance date' means-- ``(A) March 15, ``(B) June 15, ``(C) September 15, and ``(D) December 15.
Such term includes the last day on which the bond is outstanding.
Bond.--The term `bond' includes any obligation.
Credit Included in Gross Income.--Gross income includes the amount of the credit allowed to the taxpayer under this section (determined without regard to subsection (e)) and the amount so included shall be treated as interest income.
Special Rules Relating to Arbitrage.-- ``(1) In general.--A bond shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of subsection (c)(1) solely by reason of the fact that the proceeds of the issue of which such bond is a part are invested for a reasonable temporary period until such proceeds are used in making qualified solar energy loans.
Earnings on proceeds.--Any earnings on proceeds during the temporary period shall be treated as proceeds of the issue for purposes of applying subsection (c)(1) and paragraph (1) of this subsection.
Treatment of loan repayments.--Principal repayments received during any calendar quarter shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of subsection (c)(1) if, before the end of the following calendar quarter, the amount of such repayments is used to make qualified solar energy loans, to redeem residential solar energy bonds, or to acquire zero interest State and local government series bonds.
The term of a loan made from such repayments may extend beyond the last day that any bond issued as part of the issue financing the loan being repaid is outstanding; and, if so, the requirement that a loan be without interest shall not apply to the period after such last day.
Other Special Rules.-- ``(1) Bonds held by regulated investment companies.--If any Residential Solar Energy Bond is held by a regulated investment company, the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be allowed to shareholders of such company under procedures prescribed by the Secretary.
Credits may be stripped.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary-- ``(A) In general.--There may be a separation (including at issuance) of the ownership of a Residential Solar Energy Bond and the entitlement to the credit under this section with respect to such bond.
In case of any such separation, the credit under this section shall be allowed to the person who on the credit allowance date holds the instrument evidencing the entitlement to the credit and not to the holder of the bond.
Certain rules to apply.--In the case of a separation described in subparagraph (A), the rules of section 1286 shall apply to the Residential Solar Energy Bond as if it were a stripped bond and to the credit under this section as if it were a stripped coupon.
Treatment for estimated tax purposes.--Solely for purposes of sections 6654 and 6655, the credit allowed by this section to a taxpayer by reason of holding a Residential Solar Energy Bond on a credit allowance date shall be treated as if it were a payment of estimated tax made by the taxpayer on such date.
Credit may be transferred.--Nothing in any law or rule of law shall be construed to limit the transferability of the credit allowed by this section through sale and repurchase agreements.
Reporting.--Issuers of Residential Solar Energy Bonds shall submit reports similar to the reports required under section 149(e).
Recapture of Portion of Credit Where Cessation of Qualified Use.-- ``(1) In general.--If any bond which when issued purported to be a Residential Solar Energy Bond ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (c), the issuer shall pay to the United States (at the time required by the Secretary) an amount equal to the aggregate of the credits allowable under this section (determined without regard to subsection (e)) for taxable years ending during the calendar year in which such cessation occurs and the 2 preceding calendar years.
Failure to pay.--If the issuer fails to timely pay the amount required by paragraph (1) with respect to any issue, the tax imposed by this chapter on each holder of any bond which is part of such issue shall be increased (for the taxable year of the holder in which such cessation occurs) by the aggregate decrease in the credits allowed under this section to such holder for taxable years beginning in such 3 calendar years which would have resulted solely from denying any credit under this section with respect to such issue for such taxable years.
Special rules.-- ``(A) Tax benefit rule.--The tax for the taxable year shall be increased under paragraph (2) only with respect to credits allowed by reason of this section which were used to reduce tax liability.
In the case of credits not so used to reduce tax liability, the carryforwards and carrybacks under section 39 shall be appropriately adjusted.
No credits against tax.--Any increase in tax under paragraph (2) shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining-- ``(i) the amount of any credit allowable under this part, or ``(ii) the amount of the tax imposed by section 55.''
Reporting.--Subsection (d) of section 6049 of such Code (relating to returns regarding payments of interest) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Reporting of credit on residential solar energy bonds.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `interest' includes amounts includible in gross income under section 30B(g) and such amounts shall be treated as paid on the credit allowance date (as defined in section 30B(f)(1)).
Reporting to corporations, etc.--Except as otherwise provided in regulations, in the case of any interest described in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, subsection (b)(4) of this section shall be applied without regard to subparagraphs (A), (H), (I), (J), (K), and (L)(i).
Regulatory authority.--The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as are necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this paragraph, including regulations which require more frequent or more detailed reporting.''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Credit to holders of Residential Solar Energy Bonds.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to obligations issued after December 31, 2001.
Guidelines for Applications.--Not later than January 1, 2002, guidelines specifying the criteria to be used in approving applications under section 30B(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this Act) shall be developed and published by the Secretary of Energy in the Federal Register.