The Congress finds that-- (1) John Birks ``Dizzy'' Gillespie was one of the most recognized and beloved artists in the world, admired not only for his unique musicianship, but for his ability to reach people on a distinctly personal level; (2) as a musician, pioneer, innovator, composer, arranger, bandleader, raconteur, entertainer, and cultural ambassador, Mr. Gillespie distinguished himself as one of the immortal figures in the history of jazz, ``a national American treasure''; (3) Mr. Gillespie received the Kennedy Center Honors, the most prestigious public recognition of an artist's lifetime contributions in the performing arts in the United States, the Smithsonian Medal from the Smithsonian Institution, and the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers' ``Duke'' award for his lifetime achievements as a musician, composer, and bandleader; (4) Mr. Gillespie received many additional honors, including the National Medal of Arts, presented by President Bush, a Grammy lifetime Achievement Award from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, and the Commandant D'Ordre des Arts et Lettres, the highest honor in the arts in France, presented by the French Minister of Culture, Jack Lang, and was crowned a traditional African chief, with the title ``Bashere of Iperu'', in Nigeria; (5) Mr. Gillespie performed before royalty and countless world leaders, including 4 American Presidents; (6) at the personal invitation of President Sam Nujoma, Mr. Gillespie performed at the State Independence Banquet of Namibia, before the leaders of many countries of the world, kings, presidents, prime ministers, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Nelson Mandela, and a host of other dignitaries; (7) Mr. Gillespie was acclaimed as a visionary risk taker, whose daring integration of ethnic influences added a vibrant and indelible dimension to jazz, and to music in all of its popular forms; (8) Mr. Gillespie and the late Charlie ``Bird'' Parker pioneered ``be-bop'', a new and fresh harmonic and rhythmic vocabulary that created a musical revolution which transformed jazz and dramatically influenced 20th century musical culture; (9) Mr. Gillespie is universally credited as the catalyst who incorporated Afro-Cuban, Brazilian, and Caribbean music and rhythms into the jazz idiom; (10) Mr. Gillespie's third great big band, the United Nations Orchestra, which exemplified the essence of Mr. Gillespie's universal musical philosophy, enthralled audiences in 20 countries on the continents of North America, South America, Europe, and Australia since the band's inception in 1988; (11) in 1956, Mr. Gillespie was the first jazz artist appointed by the Department of State as Cultural Ambassador to tour on behalf of the United States, and his resoundingly successful tours through the Near East, Asia, Eastern Europe, and Latin America were early landmarks in a lifetime of cultural statesmanship by the inimitable jazz master on behalf of his country; and (12) in January 1989, Mr. Gillespie was asked to represent the United States and embarked on a ground breaking, month-long tour in Africa, sponsored by the United States Information Agency Arts America Program.
Presentation Authorized.--The President is authorized to present, on behalf of the Congress, to Mrs. Lorraine Gillespie, in memory of her late husband John Birks ``Dizzy'' Gillespie, a gold medal of appropriate design, in recognition of over half a century of musical genius.
Design and Striking.--For purposes of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions to be selected by the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriation.--There is authorized to be appropriated an amount not to exceed $25,000 to carry out this section.
Striking and Sale.--The Secretary of the Treasury may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck pursuant to section 2 under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, at a price sufficient to cover the cost of such duplicates and the gold medal, including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses.
Reimbursement of Appropriation.--The appropriation used to carry out section 2 shall be reimbursed out of the proceeds of sales under subsection (a).
The medals struck pursuant to this Act are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.