This Act may be cited as the ``Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act of 1996''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The Bureau of Land Management has extensive land ownership in small and large parcels interspersed with or adjacent to private land in the Las Vegas Valley, Nevada, making many of these parcels difficult to manage and more appropriate for disposal.
The ad hoc disposal of Federal land by the Bureau of Land Management has significantly contributed to growth in the Las Vegas Valley, imposing substantial costs on local government.
In order to promote responsible and orderly development in the Las Vagas Valley, certain of those Federal lands should be sold by the Federal Government based on recommendations made by local government and the public.
The value of Federal lands in the Las Vegas Valley is enhanced by local infrastructure improvements which are paid for by local government.
The Las Vegas metropolitan area is the fastest growing urban area in the United States, which is causing significant impacts upon the Lake Mead National Recreation Area, the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area, and the Spring Mountains National Recreation Area, which surround the Las Vegas Valley.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide for the orderly disposal of certain Federal lands in Clark County, Nevada, and to provide for the acquisition of environmentally sensitive lands in the State of Nevada.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Secretaries'' means the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture.
The term ``unit of local government'' means Clark County, the city of Las Vegas, the city of North Las Vegas, or the city of Henderson; all in the State of Nevada.
The term ``Agreement'' means the agreement entitled ``The Interim Cooperative Management Agreement Between The United States Department of the Interior--Bureau of Land Management and Clark County'', dated November 4, 1992.
The term ``special account'' means the account in the Treasury of the United States established under section 4(e)(1)(D).
Disposal.--Notwithstanding the land use planning requirements contained in sections 202 and 203 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1711 and 1712), the Secretary, in accordance with this Act, shall by sale or exchange dispose of lands within the boundary of the area under the jurisdiction of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management in Clark County, Nevada, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Las Vegas Valley, Nevada, Land Disposal Map'', numbered ______, and dated ______.
Such map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Director and the Las Vegas District of the Bureau of Land Management.
Reservation for Local Public Purposes.-- (1) Election and conveyance to local governments.--Not less than 90 days before the issuance of a patent to lands pursuant to subsection (a), the unit of local government in whose jurisdiction the lands are located may elect to obtain, without consideration, up to 12 percent of the lands for local public purposes.
Pursuant to any such election, the Secretary shall convey the elected lands to such unit of the local government.
Reverter.--Except as provided by section 7(a), if lands acquired by a unit of local government under paragraph (1) are disposed of by such unit of local government or otherwise cease to be used for local public purposes, such lands shall revert to the United States.
Lands revested in the United States under this paragraph shall be offered for disposal in accordance with this Act.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal lands identified in subsection (a) for disposal are withdrawn from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws and from operation under the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws.
Selection.-- (1) Joint selection required.--The Secretary and the unit of local government in whose jurisdiction lands referred to in subsection (a) are located shall jointly select lands to be offered for sale or exchange under this section.
If agreement cannot be reached on joint selection with respect to a parcel of land, the parcel may not be offered for sale or exchange under subsection (a).
Offering.--After land has been selected in accordance with this subsection, the Secretary shall make the first offering of land as soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act.
Disposition of Proceeds.-- (1) Land sales.--Of the gross proceeds of sales of land under this subsection in a fiscal year-- (A) 5 percent shall be paid directly to the State of Nevada for use in the general education program of the State.
25 percent shall be paid directly to the Southern Nevada Water Authority for water treatment and transmission facility infrastructure in Clark County, Nevada.
20 percent shall be paid directly to Clark County, Nevada, for development of parks and trails and for public recreation purposes within the Las Vegas Valley after the adoption of an interlocal agreement among Clark County, the city of Las Vegas, the city of North Las Vegas, and the city of Henderson.
The remainder shall be deposited in a special account in the Treasury of the United States for use pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs (2) and (3).
Amounts in the special account shall be available to the Secretaries without further appropriation and shall remain available until expended.
Land exchanges.--In the case of a land exchange under this section (other than a land exchange described in section 7(a)), the Secretary shall provide direct payments pursuant to paragraphs (1) (A), (B), and (C) from any cash equalization payment made to the Secretary pursuant to the exchange agreement and from the special account.
The payments shall be based on the appraised fair market value of the Federal lands to be conveyed in the exchange.
Availability of special account.-- (A) In general.--In addition to payments under paragraph (2), amounts deposited in the special account may be expended by the Secretaries, acting jointly, for-- (i) the acquisition of environmentally sensitive land in the State of Nevada in accordance with section 5, with priority given to lands located within Clark County; and (ii) infrastructure needs associated with recreation and resource protection programs at the Lake Mead National Recreation Area, the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area and other areas administered by the Bureau of Land Management in Clark County, and the Spring Mountains National Recreation Area.
Procedures.--The Secretaries shall jointly develop procedures for the use of the special account that ensure accountability and demonstrated results.
Limitation.--Not more than 50 percent of the amounts available to the Secretaries from the special account in any fiscal year (determined without taking into account amounts deposited under subsection (g)(4)) may be used for the purposes described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
Investment of Special Account.--All funds deposited as principal in the special account shall earn interest in the amount determined by the Secretary of the Treasury on the basis of the current average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of comparable maturities.
Such interest shall be added to the principal of the account and expended according to the provisions of subsection e(3).
Airport Environs Overlay District Land Transfer.--Upon request of Clark County, Nevada, the Secretary shall transfer to Clark County, Nevada, without consideration, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the lands identified in the Agreement, subject to the following: (1) Valid existing rights.
Clark County agrees to manage such lands in accordance with the Agreement and with section 47504 of title 49, United States Code (relating to airport noise compatibility planning), and regulations promulgated pursuant to that section.
Clark County agrees that if any of such lands are sold or leased by Clark County, such sale or lease shall contain a limitation which requires uses compatible with the Agreement and such Airport Noise Compatibility Planning provisions.
Clark County agrees that if any of such lands are sold or leased by Clark County and are identified on the map referenced in section 2(a) of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the orderly disposal of certain Federal lands in Nevada and for the acquisition of certain other lands in the Lake Tahoe Basin, and for other purposes'', approved December 23, 1980 (94 United States Statutes at Large 3381; commonly known as the ``Santini-Burton Act''), Clark County shall contribute 85 percent of all proceeds from the sale or lease of such lands directly to the special account.
Such proceeds shall be used by the Secretary of Agriculture to acquire environmentally sensitive land in the Lake Tahoe Basin pursuant to section 3 of the Santini-Burton Act.
The remaining proceeds shall be available for use by the Clark County Department of Aviation for the benefit of airport development, infrastructure, and the Noise Compatibility Program.
Acquisitions.-- (1) Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``environmentally sensitive land'' means land or an interest in land, the acquisition of which by the United States would, in the judgment of the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture-- (A) promote the preservation of natural, scientific, aesthetic, historical, cultural, watershed, wildlife, and other values contributing to public enjoyment and biological diversity; (B) enhance recreational opportunities and public access; (C) provide the opportunity to achieve better management of public land through consolidation of Federal ownership; or (D) otherwise serve the public interest.
In general.--After the consultation process has been completed in accordance with paragraph (3), the Secretaries may acquire by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange environmentally sensitive land and interests in environmentally sensitive land.
Lands may not be acquired under this section without the consent of the owner thereof.
Consultation.--Before initiating acquisition proceedings for any parcel of land under this subsection, the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture shall consult with the State of Nevada and with local government within whose jurisdiction the lands are located, including appropriate planning and regulatory agencies, and with other interested persons, concerning the necessity of making the acquisition, the potential impacts on State and local government, and other appropriate aspects of the acquisition.
Consultation under this paragraph is in addition to any other consultation required by law.
Administration.--On acceptance of title by the United States, land and interests in land acquired under this section that is within the boundaries of a unit of the National Forest System, National Park System, National Wildlife Refuge System, National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, National Trails System, National Wilderness Preservation System, any other system established by Act of Congress, or any national conservation or national recreation area established by Act of Congress-- (1) shall become part of the unit or area without further action by the Secretary of the Interior or Secretary of Agriculture; and (2) shall be managed in accordance with all laws and regulations and land use plans applicable to the unit or area.
Determination of Fair Market Value.--The fair market value of land or an interest in land to be acquired by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture under this section shall be determined by an appraisal made under section 206 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.
Any such appraisal shall be made without regard to the presence of a species listed as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et seq.).
Payments in Lieu of Taxes.--Section 6901(1) of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (F); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (G) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(H) acquired by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture under section 5 of the Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act.''.
The Secretary of the Interior, in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives an annual report on all transactions under this Act.
RECREATION AND PUBLIC PURPOSES ACT.
Exchanges.-- (1) In general.--Upon request by a person described in paragraph (2), the Secretary may enter into an exchange of lands pursuant to section 206 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716).
Exchanges pursuant to the provisions of such section 206 may only be made for lands of equal value, except that with respect to a unit of local government an amount equal to the excess (if any) of the appraised fair market value of lands received by the unit of local government over the appraised fair market value of lands transferred by the unit of local government shall be paid to the Secretary and shall be treated under section 4(e)(1) of this Act as proceeds from the sale of land.
For purposes of this subsection, the appraised fair market value of lands to be transferred by a unit of local government shall be determined without regard to the reverter provision of the lease or patent to such lands.
Person described.--A person referred to in paragraph (1) is-- (A) a grantee of lands within Clark County, Nevada, that are subject to a lease or patent issued under the Act entitled ``An Act to authorize acquisition or use of public lands by States, counties, or municipalities for recreational purposes'', approved June 14, 1926 (43 United States Code 869 et sequentes; commonly known as the ``Recreation and Public Purposes Act''), or (B) a unit of local government making an election under section 4(b)(1).
Terms and conditions applicable to lands acquired.-- Land acquired under this section by a grantee described in paragraph (2)(A) shall be subject to the terms and conditions, uses, and acreage limitations of the lease or patent to which the lands transferred by the grantee were subject, including the reverter provisions, under the Recreation and Public Purposes Act.
Land acquired under this section by a unit of local government described in paragraph (2)(B) shall be subject to the reversion provisions of section 4(b)(2) of this Act.
Water Treatment Facilities.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall make land available under the Recreation and Public Purposes Act to the Southern Nevada Water Authority, as identified on the map entitled ``Las Vegas Valley, Nevada, Water Treatment Facilities and Delivery System'', numbered ______, and dated ______.
Flood Control.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Army Corps of Engineers and the Clark County Regional Flood Control District, shall make available land in Clark County, Nevada, in accordance with the Recreation and Public Purposes Act for flood control purposes.
Such lands shall be made available to the Clark County Regional Flood Control District.
Affordable Housing.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, shall make available land in the State of Nevada in accordance with the Recreation and Public Purposes Act for affordable housing purposes.
Such lands shall be made available only to State or local governmental entities, including local public housing authorities.
For the purposes of this subsection, housing shall be considered to be affordable housing if the housing is assisted under the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437 et seq.).
BOUNDARY MODIFICATION OF RED ROCK CANYON NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA.
Section 3(a)(2) of the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area Establishment Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 460ccc-1(a)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) The conservation area shall consist of approximately ____ acres as generally depicted on the map entitled `Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area--Proposed Modification', numbered ______, and dated ______.