This Act may be cited as the ``High Plains Aquifer Conservation, Monitoring, and Coordination Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) a reliable source of groundwater is an essential element of the economy of the communities on the High Plains; (2) the High Plains Aquifer consists largely of the Ogallala Aquifer with small components of other geologic units; (3) the High Plains Aquifer experienced a dramatic decline in water table levels in the latter half of the twentieth century; (4) the decline in water table levels is especially pronounced in the Southern Ogallala Aquifer, with areas in the states of Kansas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas experiencing declines of over 100 feet in that from 1950 to 1997; (5) the saturated thickness of the High Plains Aquifer has declined by over 50 percent in some areas, the percentage of the High Plains Aquifer which has a saturated thickness of 100 feet or more declined from 54 percent to 51 percent in the period from 1980 to 1997; (6) the decreased water levels in the High Plains Aquifer coupled with higher pumping lift costs raise concerns about the long-term sustainability of irrigated agriculture in the High Plains; (7) hydrological modeling by the United States Geological Survey indicates that in the context of sustained high groundwater use in the surrounding region, reductions in groundwater pumping at the single farm level or at a local level of up to 100 square miles, have a very time limited impact on conserving the level of the local water table, thus creating a disincentive for individual water users to invest in water conservation measures; (8) incentives must be created for conservation of groundwater on a regional scale, in order to achieve an agricultural economy on the High Plains that is sustainable; (9) Federal, State, tribal, and local water policy makers, and individual groundwater users must have access to reliable information concerning aquifer recharge rates, extraction rates, and water table levels at the local and regional levels on an ongoing basis for water conservation incentives to function; and (10) coordination of Federal, State and local efforts to map, model and monitor the High Plains Aquifer and of programs pertaining to the conservation of the groundwater resources of the Aquifer can play an important role in effectively addressing the issue of the decline of the Aquifer.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide for the enhanced mapping, modeling, and monitoring of the High Plains Aquifer and the improved coordination of efforts to address the conservation of the groundwater resources of the Aquifer.
For purposes of this Act: (a) High Plains Aquifer.--The term ``High Plains Aquifer'' is the groundwater reserve depicted as figure 1 in the United States Geological Survey Professional Paper 1400-B, titled Geohydrology of the High Plains Aquifer in Parts of Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming.
High Plains.--The term ``High Plains'' means the approximately 174,000 square miles of land surface overlying the High Plains Aquifer in the States of Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming.
High Plains Aquifer States.--The term ``High Plains Aquifer States'' means the states of Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
HYDROGEOLOGIC MAPPING, MODELING, AND MONITORING.
Program.--The Secretary, working through the United States Geological Survey, and in cooperation with the State Geologists of the High Plains Aquifer States, shall develop and carry out a comprehensive hydrogeologic mapping, modeling, and monitoring program for the High Plains Aquifer.
The program shall include on a county-by-county basis-- (1) a map of the hydrological configuration of the High Plains Aquifer; and (2) an analysis of: (A) the current and past rate at which groundwater is being withdrawn and recharged, and the net rate of decrease or increase in aquifer storage; (B) the factors controlling the rate of horizontal migration of water within the High Plains Aquifer; and (C) the current and past rate of loss of saturated thickness within the High Plains Aquifer.
Funding.--The Secretary shall make available to the High Plains States no less than 50 percent of the funds made available pursuant to this section to be used by the States, working in cooperation with the Secretary, to implement the program provided for by this section.
The Secretary shall allocate the funds among the High Plains Aquifer States in a manner to best further the objectives of the program provided for in this section.
Annual Report.--One year after the date of enactment of this Act, and every two years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report on the status of the High Plains Aquifer to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives, and the Governors of the High Plains Aquifer States.
HIGH PLAINS AQUIFER COORDINATION COUNCIL.
Establishment and Purpose.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall establish a High Plains Aquifer Coordination Council.
The purpose of the Council shall be to-- (1) ensure that comprehensive and coordinated mapping, modeling, and monitoring efforts relating to the High Plains Aquifer are in place to provide information on the water resources of the High Plains Aquifer, including the sustainability of such resources; (2) facilitate the coordination of Federal, State, and local programs relating to the groundwater resources of the High Plains Aquifer; (3) facilitate coordination of programs and policies among the High Plains Aquifer States with respect to the groundwater resources of the High Plains Aquifer; (4) evaluate the effectiveness of Federal and State programs in addressing the present and anticipated groundwater resources issues relating to the High Plains Aquifer; and (5) provide recommendations to the Secretary, the Secretary of Agriculture, and each Governor of a High Plains Aquifer State, regarding programs and policies and changes in Federal and State law to address the groundwater resources issues of the High Plains Aquifer.
Membership.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall appoint the following members of the High Plains Aquifer Coordination Council: (1) Two representatives of the Secretary of the Interior, one representing the Bureau of Reclamation, and one representing the United States Reports Geological Survey.
Two representatives of the Secretary of Agriculture, to be selected from a list of candidates provided by such Secretary, one representing the Natural Resources Conservation Service and one representing the Rural Development Administration.
A representative of each Governor of a High Plains Aquifer State, who shall be a state employee and shall be selected from a list of candidates provided by the Governor.
The representative of at least one Governor shall be a State Geologist of a High Plains Aquifer State.
A representative of irrigation production agriculture from each High Plains Aquifer State, selected from a list of candidates provided by each Governor.
A representative of the municipal and industrial water user community from each High Plains Aquifer State, selected from a list provided by the Governor.
A representative from the conservation community from each High Plains Aquifer State, selected from a list provided by the Governor.
Two representatives of Indian Tribes from the High Plains Aquifer area of the vicinity thereof.
Terms.--Each member of the High Plains Aquifer Coordination Council shall serve for a term of four years, whereupon the Secretary may reappoint the member or appoint a new member in conformance with the provisions of subsection (b).
Members of the Council who are not employees of Federal Government shall serve without Federal compensation, but shall be reimbursed by the Secretary for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
Administration.--Financial and administrative services shall be provided to High Plains Aquifer Coordination Council by the Secretary.
Report.--The High Plains Aquifer Coordination Council shall submit a report to the Secretary, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Committees Energy and Natural Resources and Agriculture of the Senate and the Committees on Resources and Agriculture of the House of Representatives, two years from the date of enactment of this Act and every two years thereafter.
The report shall contain the Council's finding and recommendations regarding the matters set forth in subsection (a).
HIGH PLAINS AQUIFER EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE.
The Secretary, working in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall provide financial assistance, subject to the availability of appropriations, to each of the eight High Plains Aquifer States to provide educational programs related to this Act.
The States may cooperate with land grant universities and educational institutions or other private organizations in the administration of these programs.
Educational programs shall include the following: (a) Water conservation workshops for producers, crop consultants, and agricultural groups throughout the High Plains Aquifer region.
Training and periodic update workshops for field staff responsible for implementing water conservation cost-share programs.
Public education and information for elementary and secondary students and adult learners, and education for state and local decision makers.
There is authorized to be appropriated not to exceed $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2007 to carry out the purposes of section 4 of this Act.
There is authorized to be appropriated not to exceed $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2007 to carry out the purposes of section 5 of this Act.
There is authorized to be appropriated $3 million annually fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2011 to carry out the program set forth in section 6 of this Act.