This Act may be cited as the ``Nazi Benefits Termination Act of 1999''.
DENIAL OF FEDERAL PUBLIC BENEFITS TO NAZI PERSECUTORS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an individual who is determined under this Act to have been a participant in Nazi persecution is not eligible for any Federal public benefit.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Federal public benefit.--The term ``Federal public benefit'' shall have the meaning given such term by section 401(c)(1) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, but shall not include any benefit described in section 401(b)(1) of such Act (and, for purposes of applying such section 401(b)(1), the term ``alien'' shall be considered to mean ``individual'').
Participant in nazi persecution.--The term ``participant in Nazi persecution'' means an individual who-- (A) if an alien, is shown by a preponderance of the evidence to fall within the class of persons who (if present within the United States) would be deportable under section 237(a)(4)(D) of the Immigration and Nationality Act; or (B) if a citizen, is shown by a preponderance of the evidence-- (i) to have procured citizenship illegally or by concealment of a material fact or willful misrepresentation within the meaning of section 340(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act; and (ii) to have participated in Nazi persecution within the meaning of section 212(a)(3)(E) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Hearing by Immigration Judge.--If the Attorney General has reason to believe that an individual who has applied for or is receiving a Federal public benefit may have been a participant in Nazi persecution (within the meaning of section 2 of this Act), the Attorney General may provide an opportunity for a hearing on the record with respect to the matter.
The Attorney General may delegate the conduct of the hearing to an immigration judge appointed by the Attorney General under section 101(b)(4) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Procedure.-- (1) Right of respondents to appear.-- (A) Citizens, permanent resident aliens, and persons present in the united states.--At a hearing under this section, each respondent may appear in person if the respondent is a United States citizen, a permanent resident alien, or present within the United States when the proceeding under this section is initiated.
Others.--A respondent who is not a citizen, a permanent resident alien, or present within the United States when the proceeding under this section is initiated may appear by video conference.
Rule of interpretation.--This Act shall not be construed to permit the return to the United States of an individual who is inadmissible under section 212(a)(3)(E) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Other rights of respondents.--At a hearing under this section, each respondent may be represented by counsel at no expense to the Federal Government, present evidence, cross- examine witnesses, and obtain the issuance of subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and presentation of evidence.
Rules of evidence.--Unless otherwise provided in this Act, rules regarding the presentation of evidence in the hearing shall apply in the same manner in which such rules would apply in a removal proceeding before a United States immigration judge under section 240 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Hearings, Findings and Conclusions, and Order.-- (1) Findings and conclusions.--Within 60 days after the end of a hearing conducted under this section, the immigration judge shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law with respect to whether the respondent has been a participant in Nazi persecution (within the meaning of section 2 of this Act).
Order.-- (A) Finding that respondent has been a participant in nazi persecution.--If the immigration judge finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the respondent has been a participant in Nazi persecution (within the meaning of section 2 of this Act), the immigration judge shall promptly issue an order declaring the respondent to be ineligible for any Federal public benefit, and prohibiting any person from providing such a benefit, directly or indirectly, to the respondent, and shall transmit a copy of the order to any governmental entity or person known to be so providing such a benefit.
Finding that respondent has not been a participant in nazi persecution.--If the immigration judge finds that there is insufficient evidence for a finding under subparagraph (A) that a respondent has been a participant in Nazi persecution (within the meaning of section 2 of this Act), the immigration judge shall issue an order dismissing the proceeding.
Effective date; limitation of liability.-- (i) Effective date.--An order issued pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be effective on the date of issuance.
Limitation of liability.-- Notwithstanding clause (i), a person or entity shall not be found to have provided a benefit to an individual in violation of this Act until the person or entity has received actual notice of the issuance of an order under subparagraph (A) with respect to the individual and has had a reasonable opportunity to comply with the order.
Review by Attorney General; Service of Final Order.-- (1) Review by attorney general.--The Attorney General may, in her discretion, review any finding or conclusion made, or order issued, under subsection (c), and shall complete the review not later than 30 days after the finding or conclusion is so made, or order is so issued.
Otherwise, the finding, conclusion, or order shall be final.
Service of final order.--The Attorney General shall cause the findings of fact and conclusions of law made with respect to any final order issued under this section, together with a copy of the order, to be served on the respondent involved.
Judicial Review.--Any party aggrieved by a final order issued under this section may obtain a review of the order by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, by filing a petition for such review not later than 30 days after the final order is issued.
Issue and Claim Preclusion.--In any administrative or judicial proceeding under this Act, the ordinary rules of issue preclusion and claim preclusion shall apply.
JURISDICTION OF UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT OVER APPEALS UNDER THIS ACT.
Section 1295(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (13); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (14) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(15) of an appeal from a final order issued under the Nazi Benefits Termination Act of 1999.