This Act may be cited as the ``Marine Aquaculture Enhancement Act of 1994''.
MARINE AQUACULTURE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER PROGRAM.
The National Sea Grant College Program Act (33 United States Code 1121 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 206 the following: ``SEC.
MARINE AQUACULTURE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER PROGRAM.
Marine Aquaculture Research, Development, and Technology Transfer Program.--The national sea grant college program under section 204 shall include a marine aquaculture research, development, and technology transfer program (in this section referred to as the `Program') under which the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall make grants and enter into contracts in accordance with this section, and engage in other activities authorized under this Act, to further research, development, education, and technology transfer in marine aquaculture and accelerate the development, growth, and commercialization of the domestic marine aquaculture industry.
Program Scope.--The Program shall include research, development, technology transfer, education, and marine advisory programs that address at least the following: ``(1) The development of domestic marine aquaculture products that are commercially competitive in the world market.
Fundamental biological knowledge that is needed for domesticating and commercializing marine species that are candidates for aquaculture.
Environmentally safe technologies, methods, and systems for culturing marine species in the coastal environment.
Aquaculture technologies that are compatible with other uses of the sea.
Application of marine biotechnology to aquaculture.
Methods for addressing and resolving conflicts between marine aquaculture and other uses of the coastal environment.
Comparative studies of State practices regarding the regulation and promotion of marine aquaculture, so as to identify interstate conflicts and issues.
Sea Grant Marine Advisory Services.--The Secretary shall maintain within the Marine Advisory Service, the capability to transfer relevant technologies and information to the marine aquaculture industry.
Particular emphasis shall be given to the matters referred to in subsection (b) (1) through (7).
Administration.--In carrying out the Program, the Director shall-- ``(1) coordinate and administer the relevant activities of the sea grant colleges and any advisory committee or review panel established under subsection (f); ``(2) consult with the Joint Subcommittee on Aquaculture and the aquaculture industry to identify program priorities and needs and, to the extent possible, undertake collaborative efforts; and ``(3) provide general oversight to ensure that the Program produces the highest quality research, education, and technology transfer and leads to opportunities for business development, the commercialization of marine aquaculture products, and jobs creation.
Grants and Contracts.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director, subject to the availability of appropriations, shall award grants and contracts in accordance with procedures, requirements, and restrictions under section 205 (c) and (d) for aquaculture education, technology transfer, and advisory projects based on a competitive review of-- ``(A) their respective scientific, technical, and educational merits; and ``(B) their likelihood of producing information and technology which lead to the growth, development, and commercialization of the marine aquaculture industry.
Special requirements.--In addition to requirements applicable under section 205, applications for grants and contracts under this subsection shall be-- ``(A) received, evaluated, and selected by the appropriate directors of sea grant colleges; ``(B) forwarded by those directors to the Director; and ``(C) evaluated by a review panel established in accordance with subsection (f).
Funding.--Grants made and contracts entered into under this section shall be funded with amounts available from appropriations made pursuant to the authorization provided for under section 212(c), except that if the project under a grant or contract was considered and approved, in whole or part, under grant or contract authority provided for under section 205 (a) or (b) or section 3 of the Sea Grant Program Improvement Act of 1976, the grant or contract shall be funded from amounts available to carry out that section.
Marine Aquaculture Review Panels.-- ``(1) Establishment and duties.--The Director, in consultation with the directors of a sea grant college and representatives of the marine aquaculture industry, shall establish such advisory committees and review panels as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Membership.--At least 25 percent of the members of any advisory committee or review panel established under this subsection shall be appointed from among representatives of the marine aquaculture industry.
Access to evaluations of grants and contracts.--The Director shall provide to each advisory committee and review panel established under this subsection copies of appropriate grant and contract application evaluations prepared by directors of sea grant colleges under subsection (e)(2)(A).
Marine Aquaculture Defined.--As used in this section, the term `marine aquaculture' means aquaculture which is conducted in controlled or other tidal fresh, brackish, or coastal environments, including the Great Lakes.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) Grants and contracts.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section (other than for administration)-- ``(A) $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1995 and 1996; and ``(B) $7,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1997 and 1998.
Administration.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the administration of this section the lesser of-- ``(A) for each fiscal year, 2 percent of the total amount appropriated to carry out this section 1995 and 1996; and ``(B)(i) $100,000, for each of fiscal years 1995 and 1996; and ``(ii) $120,000 for each of fiscal years 1997 and 1998.''.
AQUACULTURE IN THE COASTAL ZONE.
The Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 is amended-- (1) in section 306A(b) (16 United States Code 1455a(b)) by adding at the end of the following: ``(4) The development of a coordinated process among State agencies to regulate and issue permits for aquaculture facilities in the coastal zone.
''; and (2) in section 309(a) (16 United States Code 1456b(a)) by adding at the end the following: ``(9) Adoption of procedures and policies to evaluate and facilitate the siting of public and private aquaculture facilities in the coastal zone which will enable States to formulate, administer, and implement strategic plans for marine aquaculture.''.
OFFSHORE MARINE AQUACULTURE PERMITTING.
Ownership, Construction, and Operation of Offshore Marine Aquaculture Facilities.--No person may own, construct, or operate an offshore marine aquaculture facility except as authorized by a permit issued under this section.
Permit Issuance and Term.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may issue, amend, renew, or transfer in accordance with this section permits which authorize the ownership, construction, or operation of an offshore marine aquaculture facility.
Term.--The term of a permit under this section shall be 10 years.
Permit Prerequisites.--The Secretary may not issue, amend, renew, or transfer a permit to a person under this section unless-- (1)(A) each of the officials referred to in subsection (e)(1) has certified to the Secretary that the activities to be conducted under the permit would comply with laws administered by the official; or (B) the permit establishes the conditions transmitted under subsection (e)(3)(A) by each of those officials that does not make that certification, and each of the remainder of those officials makes that certification; (2) the Secretary determines that-- (A) construction and operation of a facility under the permit will be in the national interest and comply with the environmental standards established by the Secretary under subsection (k); (B) the site for the facility will not interfere with facilities previously permitted under this section or any other Federal law; and (C) the person, upon revocation or surrender of the permit, will properly dispose of or remove the facility as directed by the Secretary; and (3) the person provides to the Secretary a bond or other assurances to pay for all costs associated with the removal of the facility.
Public Notice and Comment Period.-- (1) Notice.--The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register-- (A) notice of receipt of each application for a permit under this section; and (B) notice of issuance of each permit issued, amended, renewed, or transferred under this section.
Public comment.--The Secretary shall provide a period of at least 90 days for the submission by the public of comments regarding each application received by the Secretary for the issuance, amendment, renewal, or transfer of a permit under this section.
Agency Notice and Comment.-- (1) Transmission of copies of applications.--Not later than 30 days after receiving of an application for a permit under this section, the Secretary shall forward a copy of the application to-- (A) the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating; (B) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; (C) the Attorney General; (D) the Secretary of State; (E) the Chairman of the Regional Fishery Management Council under the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1801 et sequentes) having authority over waters in which would occur the activities for which the permit is sought; (F) the Secretary of Defense; and (G) the Governor of each State that-- (i) would be affected by activities for which the permit is sought; and (ii) has an approved coastal zone management program under the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1451 et seq.).
Certification of compliance.--Subject to paragraph (4), not later than 120 days after receiving a copy of a permit application transmitted under paragraph (1) of the official shall certify to the Secretary whether or not the activities to be conducted under the permit would comply with laws administered by the official.
Transmittal of reasons for noncompliance and permit conditions.--If an official certifies under paragraph (1) that activities to be conducted under a permit is sought would not comply with a law-- (A) the official shall transmit to the Secretary the reasons for that noncompliance and any permit conditions that would ensure compliance; and (B) the Secretary shall establish those conditions in any permit for the activity issued under this section.
Extension of time for certification.--An official may request, in writing, that the Secretary extend by not more than 60 days the period for making certifications under paragraph (2).
The Secretary may grant the extension for good cause shown.
Permit Revocation or Surrender.-- (1) Revocation.--The Secretary may revoke any permit issued under this section if the permittee is found to be in violation of any term of the permit, this section, or any regulation promulgated pursuant to this section.
Surrender.--A permitee may surrender a permit under this section to the Secretary at any time, subject to any safeguards or conditions established by the Secretary.
Permit Renewal and Transfer.--A permit under this section may be renewed or transferred in accordance with the procedures and requirements applicable to the issuance of a new permit.
The term of a permit, upon renewal, shall not exceed 10 years.
Fees.--The Secretary shall assess permit fees to cover the cost of administering the program authorized by this section.
Civil Penalty.--The Secretary may assess a civil penalty of not more than $100,000 for each violation of a permit under this section.
Promulgation of Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations necessary to carry out this section.
Environmental Standards.-- (1) Establishment.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall issue regulations which establish minimum environmental standards with respect to offshore marine aquaculture facilities.
Such standards shall be designed to minimize the potential for inadvertent impacts on the marine environment from such facilities, and shall include-- (A) safeguards to prevent escape of marine organisms from the facility and the intermingling of those organisms with wild stocks; (B) safeguards to prevent transmission of disease to wild stocks; and (C)--safeguards to minimize degradation of the marine environment where the facility is located and the surrounding vicinity.
Inclusion of permit terms.--The standards established under paragraph (1) shall be treated as part of the terms of each permit issued under this section.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: (1) Offshore marine aquaculture facility.--The term ``offshore marine aquaculture facility'' means any commercial facility which is located in whole or in part in waters beyond State jurisdiction within the territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of the United States, the purpose of which is to raise, breed, grow, harvest, or sell any marine or estuarine organism.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.
Person.--The term ``person'' means a citizen of the United States.
Establishment of Program.--There is established within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration a marine aquaculture development program to be known as the Nantucket Program (in this section referred to as the ``Program'').
The purpose of the Program is to expand coastal economic opportunities through activities that provide job training, technical assistance, and employment opportunities in marine aquaculture, transplant, and relay operations.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary of Commerce (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall provide grants under the Program to eligible coastal communities to develop marine aquaculture training and support activities that contribute to achieving the purpose of the Program set forth in subsection (a).
Grant eligibility.--A coastal community shall be an eligible coastal community under paragraph (1) if the Secretary determines that the community meets the criteria issued under paragraph (3).
Eligibility criteria.--The Secretary shall issue guidelines and criteria for determining whether a coastal community is an eligible coastal community under paragraph (1).
Authorization of Appropriations.--For grants under subsection (b) there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997.
Establishment of Center.--The Secretary of Commerce may establish in southern New Jersey, a Multispecies Aquaculture Center (in this section referred to as the ``Center'').
Functions of Center.--The Center shall promote the development of the aquaculture industry through a variety of activities, including by-- (1) serving as a demonstration facility for technology transfer and the commercialization of aquaculture research; and (2) providing extension services to aquaculture producers, including with respect to production diversification, disease control, water quality maintenance, and product marketing.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce for establishment and operation of the Center $4,500,000 for fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997.