This Act may be cited as the ``International Child Labor Elimination Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Article 32 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child recognizes ``the right of the child to be protected from economic exploitation and from performing any work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with the child's education or to be harmful to the child's health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.''.
Article 2 of Convention 138 of the International Labor Organization, the Minimum Age Convention, states that the minimum age for admission to employment or work ``shall not be less than the age of completion of compulsory schooling and, in any case, shall not be less than 15 years.''.
Convention 29 of International Labor Organization, the Forced Labor Convention, which has been in effect since 1930, prohibits most forms of ``forced or compulsory labor'', including all forced labor by people under the age of 18.
Although it is among the most universally condemned of all human rights abuses, child labor is widely practiced.
The International Labor Organization has estimated the total number of child workers to be between 100,000,000 and 200,000,000.
More than 95 percent of those child workers live in developing countries.
The International Labor Organization has estimated that 13.2 percent of all children 10 to 14 years of age around the world were economically active in 1995.
There are no reliable figures on workers under 10 years of age, though their numbers are known to be significant.
Reliable child labor statistics are not readily available, in part because many governments in the developing world are reluctant to document those activities, which are often illegal under domestic laws, which violate international standards, and which may be perceived as a failure of internal public policy.
Notwithstanding international and domestic prohibitions, many children in developing countries are forced to work as debt-bonded and slave laborers in hazardous and exploitative industries.
According to the United Nations Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery and the International Labor Organization, there are tens of millions of child slaves in the world today.
Large numbers of those slaves are involved in agricultural and domestic labor, the sex industry, the carpet and textile industries, and quarrying and brick making.
In many countries, children lack either the legal standing or the means to protect themselves from cruelty and exploitation in the workplace.
The employment of children often interferes with the opportunities of such children for basic education.
Furthermore, where it coexists with high rates of adult unemployment, the use of child labor likely denies gainful employment to millions of adults.
While child labor is a complex and multifaceted phenomenon that is tied to issues of poverty, educational opportunity, and culture, its most abusive and hazardous forms are repugnant to basic human rights and must be eliminated.
IDENTIFICATION OF FOREIGN COUNTRIES AND INDUSTRIES THAT USE CHILD LABOR IN PRODUCING GOODS.
Identification of Countries and Industries.--The Secretary of Labor shall, not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and not later than the end of each 1-year period thereafter, identify those foreign countries that do not prohibit child labor, or that have laws prohibiting child labor but do not effectively enforce them, and those industries in such countries in which goods are produced or services provided with the use of child labor.
The Secretary may revoke the identification of a country or an industry before the end of the 1-year period during which the identification would otherwise be effective, if revocation is warranted by new information or a change in the laws or practices of a country.
Sanctions.--The sanctions set forth in section 4 shall apply with respect to those countries and industries identified under subsection (a) for so long as the identification is effective under such subsection.
Exemption.--The prohibition under section 4(a)(1)(B) on activities of the Export-Import Bank of the United States, the prohibition under section 4(a)(1)(C) on activities of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and the prohibition on multilateral assistance under section 4(a)(2) shall not apply with respect to a business entity if it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary of Labor that no goods produced by that entity are products of child labor and that the business entity does not otherwise use child labor.
PROHIBITION ON ASSISTANCE FOR FOREIGN COUNTRIES THAT USE CHILD LABOR IN PRODUCING GOODS.
Prohibition on Assistance.-- (1) Bilateral assistance.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (C), the President may not provide to a foreign country identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a)-- (i) any assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, other than-- (I) disaster relief assistance, including any assistance under chapter 9 of part I of such Act; (II) assistance which involves the provision of food (including monetization of food) or medicine; and (III) assistance for refugees; (ii) sales, or financing on any terms, under the Arms Export Control Act; and (iii) the provision of agricultural commodities, other than food, under the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954.
Export-import bank.--The Export-Import Bank of the United States may not give approval to the issuance of any guarantee, insurance, extension of credit, or participation in an extension of credit in connection with the provision of any good or service to-- (i) the government of a foreign country identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a), or an agency of such government; or (ii) a business entity that is in an industry identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a) in such a country.
Overseas private investment corporation.--(i) The Overseas Private Investment Corporation may not issue insurance, reinsurance, or financing, or conduct other activities, in connection with an industry identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a).
Clause (i) does not affect contracts entered into by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Multilateral assistance.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director of each international financial institution to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose any loan or other use of the funds of such institution to or for any industry identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a).
Exception.--A foreign country or an industry identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a) may receive bilateral assistance described in subsection (a)(1) if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that it is in the vital national interest of the United States to provide such bilateral assistance to such country or industry, as the case may be.
The President shall include in any such certification-- (1) a full and complete description of the vital national interest of the United States that is placed at risk if such assistance is not provided to such country or industry; and (2) a statement weighing the risk described in paragraph (1) against the risk posed to the vital national interest of the United States by the failure of such country to adopt or enforce laws prohibiting child labor or by the use of child labor by such industry, as the case may be.
The President shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.
UNITED STATES SUPPORT FOR DEVELOPMENTAL ALTERNATIVES FOR UNDERAGE CHILD WORKERS.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the President the sum of $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1997 through 2001 for a United States contribution to the International Labor Organization for the activities of the International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor.
As used in this Act: (1) Child labor.--The term ``child labor'' means the performance of services in exchange for remuneration (regardless of to whom paid), subsistence, goods, or services, or any combination thereof, or under circumstances tantamount to involuntary servitude-- (A) by persons who have not attained the minimum age, except for-- (i) light work by persons no more than 2 years younger than the minimum age that is not likely to harm their health or development and which does not prejudice their attendance at school, their participation in vocational orientation or training programs approved by the competent authority in the country concerned, or their capacity to benefit from the instruction received, (ii) work on family and small-scale agricultural holdings which produce for local consumption and do not regularly employ hired workers, (iii) work done by persons at least 14 years of age in schools or other training institutions for general, vocational, or technical education, (iv) work done by persons at least 14 years of age as an integral part of a program of education, training, or occupational guidance carried out in accordance with conditions prescribed by the competent authority in the country concerned, and (v) participation in artistic performances pursuant to permits granted in individual cases by the competent authority in the country concerned; and (B) by persons under the age of 18 if such services would likely jeopardize the health, safety, or moral character of a young person, except for the performance of such services by individuals at least 16 years of age where-- (i) the country concerned has expressly authorized such employment by national laws or regulation; (ii) the health, safety, and morals of the individuals involved are fully protected; and (iii) the individuals involved have received adequate specific instruction or vocational training in the relevant branch of activity.
Minimum age.--The term ``minimum age'' means the age at which children complete compulsory schooling under the national laws of the country concerned, or the age of 15, whichever is older, except that when a country whose economy and educational facilities are insufficiently developed has specified, pursuant to an international agreement, a minimum age of 14 years for a period of limited and specifically identified duration, the term ``minimum age'' means the age of 14 years during that period.
Product of child labor.--A good shall be treated as being a product of child labor if the good-- (A) was fabricated, assembled, or processed, in whole or part, (B) contains any part that was fabricated, assembled, or processed, in whole or in part, or (C) was harvested, mined, quarried, pumped, or otherwise extracted, with child labor.
Business entity.--The term ``business entity''-- (A) means any entity that produces (including fabricating, assembling, processing, harvesting, mining, quarrying, pumping, or otherwise extracting), sells, imports, exports, or contracts for the production of, a good in a foreign country; and (B) includes, but is not limited to, entities owned or controlled in whole or in part by the government of a foreign country.
Foreign country.--The term ``foreign country'' means any foreign country and any possession or territory of a foreign country that is administered separately for customs purposes (and includes any designated zone within such country, possession, or territory).
International financial institution.--The term ``international financial institution'' means the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the African Development Bank, the African Development Fund, the International Monetary Fund, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the International Finance Corporation.