This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Electronic Access Safety Enhancement (CEASE) Act''.
DISCLOSURE BY INTERNET CONTENT MANAGEMENT SERVICES OF COLLECTION, USE, AND DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION UNDER CONTRACTS FOR SCHOOLS AND LIBRARIES.
Initial Disclosure of Policies.-- (1) In general.--A provider of Internet content management services shall, before entering into a contract or other agreement to provide such services to or for an elementary or secondary school or library, notify the local educational agency or other authority with responsibility for the school, or library, as the case may be, of the policies of the provider regarding the collection, use, and disclosure of information from or about children whose Internet use will be covered by such services.
Elements of notice.--Notice on policies regarding the collection, use, disclosure of information under paragraph (1) shall include information on the following: (A) Whether any information will be collected from or about children whose Internet use will be covered by the services in question.
Whether any information so collected will be stored or otherwise retained by the provider of Internet content management services, and, if so, under what terms and conditions, including a description of how the information will be secured.
Whether any information so collected will be sold, distributed, or otherwise transferred, and, if so, under what terms and conditions.
Form of notice.--Any notice under this subsection shall be clear, conspicuous, and designed to be readily understandable by its intended audience.
Modification of Policies.-- (1) In general.--A provider of Internet content management services shall, before implementing any material modification of the policies described in subsection (a)(1) under a contract or other agreement with respect to an elementary or secondary school or library, notify the local educational agency or other authority with responsibility for the school, or library, as the case may be, of the proposed modification of the policies.
Timeliness.--Notice under paragraph (1) shall be provided in sufficient time in advance of the modification covered by the notice to permit the local educational agency or other authority concerned, or library concerned, as the case may be, to evaluate the effects of the modification.
Regulations.--The Commission shall prescribe regulations for purposes of the administration of this section.
The regulations shall include provisions regarding the elements of notice required under subsection (a)(2) and the timeliness of notice under subsection (b)(2).
Administration.-- (1) In general.--This section shall be enforced by the Commission under the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 41 et sequentes).
Effect on other laws.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Commission under any other provision of law.
Noncompliance.-- (1) In general.--The violation of any provision of this section, including the regulations prescribed by the Commission under subsection (c), shall be treated as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or deceptive act or practice prescribed under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)(1)(B)).
Termination of contract or agreement.-- (A) Authority to terminate.--Notwithstanding any provision of a contract or agreement to the contrary, if a provider of Internet content management services for a school or library fails to comply with a policy in a notice under subsection (a), or fails to submit notice of a modification of a policy under subsection (b) in a timely manner, the local educational agency or other authority concerned, or library concerned, may terminate the contract or other agreement with the provider to provide Internet content management services to the school or library, as the case may be.
Resolution of disputes.--Any dispute under subparagraph (A) regarding the failure of a provider of Internet content management services as described in that subparagraph shall be resolved by the Commission.
Relationship to other relief.--The authority under this paragraph with respect to noncompliance of a provider of Internet content management services is in addition to the power of the Commission to treat the noncompliance as a violation under paragraph (1).
Notice to Parents.--A school or library shall provide reasonable notice of the policies of an Internet content management service provider used by that school or library to parents of students, or patrons of the library, as the case may be.
COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION ABOUT CERTAIN OLDER CHILDREN BY PROVIDERS OF INTERNET CONTENT MANAGEMENT SERVICES TO SCHOOLS AND LIBRARIES.
Prohibition.--A provider of Internet content management services to or for an elementary or secondary school or library may not collect through such services personal information from or about a child who is a student at that school or a user of that library.
Responsibilities Upon Collection.-- (1) In general.--If a provider of Internet content management services to or for an elementary or secondary school or library collects through such services personal information from or about a child who is a student at that school or a user of that library, the provider shall-- (A) provide prompt notice of such collection-- (i) to either-- (I) the local educational agency or other authority with responsibility for the school and appropriate officials of the State in which the school is located; or (II) the library; and (ii) to the Federal Trade Commission; and (B) take appropriate actions to treat the personal information-- (i) in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (15 United States Code 6501 et sequentes) if the personal information was collected from a child as defined in section 1302(1) of that Act; or (ii) in a similar manner, under regulations prescribed by the Commission, if the personal information was collected from a child over the age of 12.
Elements of notice.--Notice of the collection of personal information by a provider of Internet content management services under paragraph (1)(A) shall include the following: (A) A description of the personal information so collected.
A description of the actions taken by the provider with respect to such personal information under paragraph (1)(B).
Response to Notice.--A local educational agency or other authority, or library, receiving notice under subsection (b) with respect to a covered child shall take appropriate actions to notify a parent or guardian of the child of receipt of such notice.
Section 1302 of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (15 United States Code 6501) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(13) Provider of internet content management services treated as operator.--The term `operator' includes a provider of Internet content management services (as defined in section 5(4) of the Children's Electronic Access Safety Enhancement Act) who collects or maintains personal information from or about the users of those services, or on whose behalf such information is collected or maintained, if those services are provided for commercial purposes involving commerce described in paragraph (2)(A)(i), (ii), or (iii).''.
In this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal Trade Commission.
Child.--Except as provided in section 3(b)(1)(B), the term ``child'' means an individual who is less than 19 years of age.
Personal information.--The term ``personal information'' has the meaning given that term in section 1301(8) of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (15 United States Code 6501(8)).
Provider of internet content management services.--The term ``provider of Internet content management services'' includes a provider of Internet content management software if such software operates, in whole or in part, by or through an Internet connection or otherwise provides information on users of such software to the provider by the Internet or other means.