This Act may be cited as the ``Unemployment Tax Equity Act of 2006''.
DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM FOR STATE ADMINISTRATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 23 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 3301-3311) is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 3311 as section 3312; and (2) by inserting after section 3310 the following new section: ``SEC.
DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM FOR STATE ADMINISTRATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of Labor shall establish a demonstration program under which the primary responsibility for the proper and efficient administration of a State's unemployment compensation law is transferred (by agreement with the Secretary of Labor) to each participating State for the duration of the demonstration project under such program.
Such agreement shall contain such terms and conditions as the Secretary of Labor determines necessary or appropriate to carry out this section.
Limitation on Number of Participating States.--The Secretary of Labor may not enter into agreements under this section for demonstration projects under the demonstration program with more than 5 States.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--The Governor of any State which desires to enter into an agreement under this section may submit an application to the Secretary of Labor at such time, in such manner, and including such information as the Secretary of Labor may require.
Such application shall, at a minimum, include-- ``(A) a description of the demonstration project, including the authorization under State law for conducting the demonstration project and the time period during which such demonstration project would be conducted; ``(B) a description of the goals relating to the demonstration project and the expected programmatic outcomes if the application to participate in the demonstration project is approved, including how the demonstration project will assist in meeting the purposes of the demonstration program described in subsection (a); ``(C) assurances, accompanied by detailed analysis, that the demonstration project will provide the amount of funding necessary for the proper and efficient administration of the State's unemployment compensation law; ``(D) a description of the manner in which the State will conduct an impact evaluation, using a control or comparison group or other methodology, of the demonstration project described in subparagraph (A) and determine whether the goals and outcomes described in subparagraph (B) are achieved; and ``(E) assurances that the State will provide any reports relating to the demonstration project as the Secretary may require.
Notice.-- ``(A) Application procedure.--The Secretary of Labor shall provide notice to each State setting forth the purposes of the demonstration program, the application requirements, and a due date for the receipt of applications.
Approval or denial of application.--The Secretary of Labor shall provide public notice of the decision to approve or deny any application submitted under this section within 30 days after notifying the State of such approval or disapproval.
Notice under this subparagraph may be provided through the Internet or other appropriate means.
Period for Which Demonstration Project Is in Effect.-- ``(1) In general.--A demonstration project for which the Secretary of Labor enters into an agreement with a State under this section shall, except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3)-- ``(A) be for a period of 5 years, ``(B) not begin before January 1, 2008, and ``(C) terminate before January 1, 2014.
Termination of agreement by secretary of labor.--The Secretary of Labor may terminate an agreement entered into under this section if the Secretary determines that the State has not complied with the terms and conditions specified in such agreement.
Termination of agreement by state.--Any State which is a party to an agreement under this section may, upon providing 30 days written notice to the Secretary of Labor, terminate such agreement.
Adjustment of Credit.--In the case of credits allowed to a taxpayer under section 3302 with respect to the unemployment compensation law of a State for which a demonstration project is in effect under this section, section 3302 shall be applied-- ``(1) in subsection (b) thereof by substituting `5.8%' for `5.4%', and ``(2) in subsection (c)(1) thereof by substituting `96.67 percent' for `90 percent'.''.
Ineligibility for Grants for Unemployment Compensation Administration.--Section 302 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 502) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) The Secretary of Labor shall make no certification under subsection (a) for payment to any State with respect to any fiscal year (or portion of a fiscal year) during which such State is participating in a demonstration project established under section 3311 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 23 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 3311 and inserting after the item relating to section 3310 the following: ``Sec.
Demonstration program for State administration of unemployment compensation program.