This Act may be cited as ``Networking and Information Technology Research and Development for Department of Energy Missions Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Department of Energy, especially in its Office of Science research programs, has played a key role in the development of high performance computing, networking and information technology.
Important contributions by the Department include pioneering the concept of remote, interactive access to supercomputers; developing the first interactive operating system for supercomputers; establishing the first national supercomputer center; laying the mathematical foundations for high performance computing with numerical linear algebra libraries now used by thousands of researchers worldwide; leading the transition to massively parallel supercomputing by developing software for parallel virtual machines; and contributing to the development of the Internet with software that is now used in the TCP/IP system responsible for routing information packages to their correct destinations.
The Department of Energy's contributions to networking and information technology have played a key role in the Department's ability to accomplish its statutory mission in the past, in particular through the development of remote access to its facilities.
Continued accomplishments in these areas will be needed to continue to carry out these missions in the future.
The Department of Energy, through its portfolio of unique facilities for scientific research including high energy and nuclear laboratories, neutron source and synchrotron facilities, and computing and communications facilities such as the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center and Energy Sciences Network, has a unique and vital role in advancing the scientific research, networking and information technology infrastructure for the nation.
The challenge of remote creation of, access to, visualization of, and simulation with petabyte-scale (1,000,000 gigabyte) data sets generated by experiments at DOE scientific facilities is common to a number of different scientific disciplines.
Effective treatment of these problems will likely require collaborative efforts between the university, national laboratory and industrial sectors and involve close interactions of the broader scientific community with computational, networking and information scientists.
The solution of contemporary challenges facing the Department of Energy in developing and using high-performance computing, networking, communications, and information technologies will be of immense value to the entire nation.
Potential benefits include: effective earth, climate, and energy systems modeling; understanding aging and fatigue effects in materials crucial to energy systems; promoting energy-efficient chemical production through rational catalyst design; predicting the structure and functions of the proteins coded by DNA and their response to chemical and radiation damage; designing more efficient combustion systems; and understanding turbulent flow in plasmas in energy and advanced materials applications.
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY PROGRAMS.
High-Performance Computing Act Program.--Section 203(a) of the High-Performance Computing Act of 1991 (15 United States Code 5523(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and''; (2) in paragraph (4), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding after paragraph (4) the following: ``(5) conduct an integrated program of research, development, and provision of facilities to develop and deploy to scientific and technical users the high-performance computing and collaboration tools needed to fulfill the statutory missions of the Department of Energy.''.
Computation, Networking and Information Technology Collaborative Program.--Within the funds authorized under this Act, the Secretary shall provide up to $25,000,000 in each fiscal year for a program of collaborative projects involving remote access to high- performance computing assets or remote experimentation over network facilities.
The program shall give priority to cross-disciplinary projects that involve more than one office within the Office of Science of the Department of Energy or that couple the Office of Science with Departmental energy technology offices.
Program Line Authority.--To the extent consistent with their national security mission, laboratories administered by the National Nuclear Security Administration may compete for funding authorized in this Act to the same extent and on the same terms as other Department of Energy offices and laboratories.
Such funding at laboratories administered by the National Nuclear Security Administration shall be under the direct programmatic control of the sponsoring program for the funding in the Department of Energy.
Merit Review.--All grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, or other financial assistance awarded under programs authorized in this Act shall be made only after being subject to independent merit review by the Department of Energy.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Energy for the purposes of carrying out section 203 of the High-Performance Computing Act of 1991 (15 United States Code 5523) and this Act $190,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; $250,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; $285,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; $300,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; and $300,000,000 for fiscal year 2005.