This Act may be cited as the ``Protecting Our Children From Violence Act of 2002''.
In General.--Chapter 7 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Assault against a child ``(a) Whoever, in a circumstance described in subsection (c) commits an assault upon, or maims, an individual who has not attained the age of 18 years shall be punished as provided in subsection (b).
The punishment for an offense under subsection (a) is as follows: ``(A) Assault with the intent to commit murder of a child, by imprisonment not more than 35 years.
Assault that consists of conduct that would be an offense under section 114 if the conduct occurred in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States, by a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than 30 years, or both.
Assault with intent to commit any felony against a child, except murder or a felony under chapter 109A, by a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than 15 years, or both.
Assault with a dangerous weapon against a child, with intent to do bodily harm, and without just cause or excuse, by a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than 15 years, or both.
Assault by striking, beating, or wounding a child, by a fine under this title or imprisonment of not more than 2 years, or both.
Simple assault against a child, by a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than 6 months, or both, or if the perpetrator of the assault is an individual who has not attained the age of 16 years, by fine under this title or imprisonment of not more than 1 year, or both.
Assault resulting in serious bodily injury of a child, by a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than 15, or both.
The circumstances referred to in subsection (a) are any of the following: ``(1) The conduct constituting the offense occurs within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States, or in interstate or foreign commerce.
The person engaging in the conduct constituting the offense-- ``(A) travels in interstate or foreign commerce with the intent to commit the offense; ``(B) transports a child in interstate or foreign commerce; or ``(C) crosses a State line, with the intent to commit the offense.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 7 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``117.
Assault against a child.''.
Custodial Kidnapping.--Section 1201 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Whoever, being a parent of a minor, unlawfully seizes, confines, inveigles, decoys, kidnaps, abducts, or carries away and holds for ransom or reward or otherwise, that minor, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both, but in the case of a second or subsequent offense shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.''.
Additional Bases for Federal Prosecution.--Section 1201(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (4); (2) by inserting ``or'' at the end of paragraph (5); and (3) by inserting after pargraph (5) the following: ``(6) the defendant travelled in interstate or foreign commerce with the intent to commit the offense;''.
In General.--Chapter 51 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Murder of children ``(a) Whoever, in a circumstance described in subsection (c), kills or attempts to kill an individual who has not attained the age of 18 years shall be punished as provided in subsection (b).
The punishment for an offense under subsection (a) is as follows: ``(1) If the killing is murder, the punishment provided for murder in section 1111.
If the killing is voluntary manslaughter, a fine under this title or imprisonment not more than 20 years, or both.
If the killing is involuntary manslaughter, a fine under this title or imprisonment not more than 12 years, or both.
If the offense consists of an attempted murder or manslaughter, a fine under this title or imprisonment not more than 10 years, or both.
The circumstances referred to in subsection (a) are any of the following: ``(1) The offense occurs in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States or in interstate or foreign commerce.
The defendant travels in interstate or foreign commerce with intent to commit the offense.
The child is transported in interstate or foreign commerce in connection with the offense.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 51 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1123.
A victim of an offense under section 117, 1201(i), 1123, 2241(c), or 2243(a) of title 18, United States Code, or a parent on behalf of that victim, may in a civil action against the offender, obtain appropriate relief, including actual and punitive damages, and a reasonable attorney's fee as part of the costs.
STATE AND LOCAL NOTIFICATION IN CHILD PORNOGRAPHY CASES.
Section 227(b)(1) of Public Law 101-647 (42 United States Code 13032(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Center may also forward that report to any State or local law enforcement agency the Center determines appropriate.''.
Coordinator.--The Attorney General shall establish an AMBER Alert Coordinator position (referred to in this section as ``the Coordinator'').
The Coordinator shall-- (1) establish, with the assistance of the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children and the Federal Communications Commission, guidelines for implementing a statewide Amber Alert plan not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act; (2) provide technical assistance to the States, broadcasters, and law enforcement agencies in implementing AMBER Alert plans; (3) certify, not later than 90 days after a certification request is received, to the Secretary of Transportation any State that-- (A) has established or agrees to establish a statewide AMBER Alert plan not later than 1 year after receiving a grant under section 3; (B) agrees to establish a reciprocal arrangement with other States, including sharing of information regarding the initiation of an AMBER Alert; and (C) is in compliance with the guidelines established pursuant to paragraph (1); (4) deny certification, not later than 90 days after a certification request is received and provide notification of such denial to the Secretary of Transportation, to any State that fails to comply with the certification requirements described in paragraph (3); (5) monitor compliance and revoke certification of any State that fails to establish an AMBER Alert plan in accordance with the 1-year period referred to in paragraph (3)(A) and provide notification of such revocation to the State and the Secretary of Transportation; (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $500,000 for fiscal year 2003 and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
Findings.--The Congress finds and declares that-- (1) every year over 725,000 children are reported missing to local, State, and Federal authorities--that is over 2,000 per day; (2) in 2002 there have been countless reports of children being abducted either form their homes or in front of their homes and then later killed; (3) one of the fundamental purposes of government is to protect its people--especially its children; and (4) it is in the best interest of our Nation to ensure that law enforcement officials and prosecutors have the tools they need in order to ensure the safety of our children.
In General.--The Secretary of Transportation shall make grants to States to develop, acquire, install, and construct facilities and equipment along highways to notify the public of missing children (including a description of such children), information regarding any abductor of such children, and other relevant information.
Application.--In order to be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a State shall-- (1) adhere to the requirements of this section; (2) apply to the Coordinator appointed under section 2 for certification-- (A) in 2003, not later than March 1; and (B) in subsequent years, not later than January 1 of the year in which the State expects to receive funds; and (3) include a projection of costs to implement subsection (a).
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of a project for which a grant is made to a State under this section in a fiscal year shall not exceed 50 percent.
Apportionment of Funds.--Amounts appropriated to carry out this section shall be apportioned in equal shares to each State that meets the requirements of this Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $99,500,000 for fiscal year 2003 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
In sections 9 and 10, the following definitions apply: (1) Amber alert.--The term ``AMBER Alert'' (America's Missing: Broadcast Emergency Response Alert) means a voluntary partnership between law enforcement agencies and broadcasters to activate an urgent bulletin in serious child abduction cases.
Broadcasters use the Emergency Alert System (EAS), formerly referred to as the Emergency Broadcast System, to air a description of the missing child and suspected abductor and any other relevant information.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
NATIONAL CRIMES AGAINST CHILDREN RESPONSE CENTER.
In General.--Chapter 33 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
National Crimes Against Children Response Center ``(a) Establishment.--There is established within the Federal Bureau of Investigation a National Crimes Against Children Response Center (referred to in this section as the `Center').
Mission.--The mission of the Center is to develop a national response plan model that-- ``(1) provides a comprehensive, rapid response plan to report crimes involving the victimization of children; and ``(2) protects children from future crimes.
Duties.--To carry out the mission described in subsection (b), the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall-- ``(1) consult with the Deputy Assistant Attorney General for the Crimes Against Children Office and other child crime coordinators within the Department of Justice; ``(2) consolidate units within the Federal Bureau of Investigation that investigate crimes against children, including abductions, abuse, and sexual exploitation offenses; ``(3) develop a comprehensive, rapid response plan for crimes involving children that incorporates resources and expertise from Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies and child services professionals; ``(4) develop a national strategy to prevent crimes against children that shall include a plan to rescue children who are identified in child pornography images as victims of abuse; ``(5) create regional rapid response teams composed of Federal, State, and local prosecutors, investigators, victim witness specialists, mental health professionals, and other child services professionals; ``(6) implement an advanced training program that will enhance the ability of Federal, State, and local entities to respond to reported crimes against children and protect children from future crimes; and ``(7) conduct outreach efforts to raise awareness and educate communities about crimes against children.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the Federal Bureau of Investigation such sums as necessary for fiscal year 2003 to carry out this section.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 33 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``540A.
National Crimes Against Children Response Center.''.
INCREASE OF STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR CHILD ABUSE OFFENSES.
Section 3283 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``25 years'' and inserting ``35 years''.
ADMISSIBILITY OF SIMILAR CRIME EVIDENCE IN CHILD MOLESTATION CASES.
Rule 414 of the Federal Rules of Evidence is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``or possession of sexually explicit materials containing apparent minors'' after ``or offenses of child molestation''; and (2) in subsection (d), by striking ``fourteen'' and inserting ``18''.
MARITAL COMMUNICATION AND ADVERSE SPOUSAL PRIVILEGE.
In General.--Chapter 119 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1826 the following: ``Sec.
Marital communications and adverse spousal privilege ``The confidential marital communication privilege and the adverse spousal privilege shall be inapplicable in any Federal proceeding in which a spouse is charged with a crime against-- ``(1) a child of either spouse; or ``(2) a child under the custody or control of either spouse.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 119 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1826 the following: ``1826A.
Marital communications and adverse spousal privilege.''.
INCREASE OF MAXIMUM PENALTIES FOR SEX OFFENSES.
Title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in section 1591(b)(2), by striking ``20 years'' and inserting ``40 years''; (2) in section 2421, by striking ``10 years'' and inserting ``20 years''; (3) in section 2422-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``10 years'' and inserting ``20 years''; and (B) in subsection (b), by striking ``15 years'' and inserting ``30 years''; (4) in section 2423-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``15 years'' and inserting ``30 years''; and (B) in subsection (b), by striking ``15 years'' and inserting ``30 years''; and (5) in section 2425, by striking ``5 years'' and inserting ``10 years''.
DEPUTY ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR CRIMES AGAINST CHILDREN.
Establishment of Position.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 31 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 507 the following: ``Sec.
Deputy Assistant Attorney General for Crimes Against Children ``(a) The Attorney General shall appoint a Deputy Assistant Attorney General for Crimes Against Children.
The Deputy Assistant Attorney General shall be the head of the Crimes Against Children Section (CACS) of the Department of Justice.
The duties of the Deputy Assistant Attorney General shall include the following: ``(1) To prosecute cases involving crimes against children.
To advise Federal prosecutors and law enforcement personnel regarding crimes against children.
To provide guidance and assistance to Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies and personnel, and appropriate foreign entities, regarding responses to crimes against children.
To propose and comment upon legislation concerning crimes against children.
Such other duties as the Attorney General may require, including duties carried out by the head of the Child Exploitation and Obscenity Section and the Terrorism and Violent Crime Section of the Department of Justice.''.
Technical and conforming amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 31 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 507 the following: ``507A.
Deputy Assistant Attorney General for Crimes Against Children.''.
Authorization of Appropriations for CACS.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Justice for fiscal year 2003, such sums as necessary to carry out this section.