Section 8332 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(o)(1) Upon application to the Office of Personnel Management, any employee or Member shall be allowed credit for service performed, after December 31, 1965, and before January 1, 1987, as an employee described in section 2105(c), but only if that individual has completed or thereafter completes at least 5 years of creditable civilian service under this section (exclusive of service for which credit is allowed under this subsection).
(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (C), credit for a period of service shall not be allowed under this subsection unless the employee or Member deposits to the credit of the Fund an amount equal to the deductions from pay which would have been required under section 8334 with respect to such service if such employee or Member had been subject to this subchapter at the time of performing such service.
An employee or Member who makes the deposit shall be allowed full retirement credit for the period or periods of service involved.
If the employee or Member dies, a survivor as defined by section 8331(10) may make the deposit.
If the deposit is not made in full, retirement credit shall be allowed, but the annuity shall be reduced in a manner similar to that described in section 8418(b).
In no event shall the resulting annuity be less than would be the case if this subsection had not been enacted.
The Office shall accept the certification of the head of the relevant nonappropriated fund instrumentality of the United States concerning the service of, and the amount of compensation received by, an employee or Member with respect to which credit is sought under this subsection.
An individual receiving credit for service for any period under this subsection shall not be granted credit for such service under any retirement system for employees of a nonappropriated fund instrumentality.
The Office shall prescribe regulations for the application of this subsection in the case of an employee or Member (within the meaning of chapter 84) who, upon separation, would otherwise be entitled to an annuity that is partially computed under this subchapter (determined disregarding service for which credit is allowed under this subsection) or a survivor of such an employee or Member.
An application under this subsection may be submitted no later than 2 years after the effective date of regulations which the Office shall prescribe to carry out this subsection.''.
APPLICABILITY TO ANNUITANTS AND DEFERRED ANNUITANTS.
In General.--An annuity or survivor annuity based on the service of an individual who performed service creditable under section 8332(o) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by this Act) shall, upon application to the Office of Personnel Management, be recomputed in accordance with such section 8332(o).
Actuarial Reduction.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no deposit under section 8332(o) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by this Act) shall be permitted or required under this section, and any recomputation under this section shall reflect the appropriate actuarial reduction.
Prospective Effect.--Any recomputation under this section shall apply with respect to benefits for months beginning later than 30 days after the date on which application for such recomputation is received by the Office.
Same Deadline.--An application under this section shall not be accepted after the end of the 2-year period referred to in section 8332(o)(6) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by this Act).
Notification.--The Office of Personnel Management shall take such measures as it considers appropriate to inform individuals entitled to have any service credited under section 8332(o) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by this Act), or to have any amounts recomputed under section 2, of their entitlement to such credit or recomputation.
Assistance From the Office of Personnel Management.--The Office of Personnel Management shall, on request, assist any individual referred to in subsection (a) in obtaining from any department, agency, or other instrumentality of the United States such information possessed by such instrumentality as may be necessary to verify the entitlement of such individual to have any service credited under section 8332(o) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by this Act) or to have any amounts recomputed under section 2.
Assistance From Other Agencies.--Any department, agency, or other instrumentality of the United States which possesses any information with respect to any service of an individual described in section 8332(o) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by this Act) shall-- (1) at the request of such individual (or an appropriate survivor), furnish such information to that individual (or survivor); and (2) at the request of the Office of Personnel Management, furnish such information to the Office.