This Act may be cited as the ``Florida Keys Water Quality Improvements Act of 1998''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The Florida Keys are a chain of islands located adjacent to spectacular, unique, and nationally significant marine environments, including North America's only living coral barrier reef ecosystem.
Recognizing the national significance of the Florida Keys marine environment and the compelling national interest in the protection of these resources, Congress passed the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary and Protection Act (104 United States Statutes at Large 3089-3095) designating the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary.
Section 8(a)(1) of such Act directed the Administrator and the Governor of the State of Florida, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, to develop a comprehensive water quality protection program for the Sanctuary.
Section 8(a)(1)(A) of such Act states that a purpose of such water quality program is to recommend priority corrective actions and compliance schedules addressing point and nonpoint sources of pollution to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Sanctuary, including restoration and maintenance of a balanced, indigenous population of corals, shellfish, fish and wildlife, and recreational activities in and on the water.
Section 8(d)(2)(A) of such Act provided for the establishment of the Water Quality Steering Committee that is co-chaired by the Regional Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and a representative of the State of Florida to set guidance and policy for the development and implementation of water quality improvement projects.
Section 8(d)(2)(C) of such Act provided for the establishment of a Technical Advisory Committee comprised of scientists from Federal agencies, State agencies, academic institutions, private nonprofit organizations, and knowledgeable citizens to advise the Water Quality Steering Committee.
Section 8(a)(1)(B) of such Act states that another purpose of the water quality protection program is to assign responsibilities for the implementation of the program among the Governor of the State of Florida, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Administrator in accordance with applicable Federal and State laws.
Dilapidated and inadequate wastewater treatment systems and inadequate stormwater management systems are the largest manmade sources of pollution to the nearshore waters of the Florida Key's, representing the greatest threat to their nationally significant marine resources.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency, other Federal, State, and local agencies and citizen stakeholders have identified wastewater infrastructure improvements as the single most important investment to improve nearshore water quality around the Florida Keys.
Improvement of stormwater management in the area of the Florida keys is also needed to reduce pollutant loadings from largely uncontrolled stormwater runoff from existing development.
The cost of wastewater improvements necessary to improve nearshore water quality around the Florida Keys is estimated at between $184,000,000 and $418,000,000, depending on the percentage reduction in wastewater nutrient loadings to be achieved and which treatment system or systems are ultimately selected.
The cost of stormwater improvements necessary to reduce such pollutant loadings is estimated at between $370,000,000 and $680,000,000, depending on the percentage reduction in stormwater pollutant loadings to be achieved and which areas are selected to be retrofitted.
The cost of these necessary improvements represent an insurmountable burden to the 85,000 permanent residents of Monroe County, Florida.
It is necessary to change Federal law in order to carry out the Federal responsibilities identified under section 8(a)(1)(B) of the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary and Protection Act.
It is therefore entirely consistent with the goals and policies of such Act that Congress authorize appropriations to supplement State and local initiatives to improve water quality in the Florida Keys marine environment.
The purpose of this Act is to protect the resources of the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary (as designated by section 5 of the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary and Protection Act) by providing the Federal share of funds for projects to replace inadequate wastewater treatment systems and inadequate stormwater management systems in Monroe County, Florida.
Funds authorized by this Act are to supplement funds committed by the State of Florida and Monroe County, Florida, for planning and construction of wastewater and stormwater projects.
To carry out this Act, the Administrator shall make grants to the Florida Keys Aqueduct Authority, or, in the judgment of the Administrator, other appropriate agencies of the State of Florida or Monroe County, Florida.
Project Criteria.--Projects eligible for funding through grants under this Act are those that, in the judgment of the Administrator-- (1)(A) replace inadequate wastewater treatment systems in Monroe County, Florida, including cesspits and other inadequate onsite disposal systems; or (B) establish, replace, or improve stormwater management systems in Monroe County, Florida; (2) will improve water quality in the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary; and (3) are consistent with-- (A) applicable growth management ordinances of Monroe County, Florida; (B) applicable agreements between Monroe County, Florida, and the State of Florida to manage growth in Monroe County, Florida; (C) the guidance, policies, and resolutions of the Water Quality Steering Committee; (D) the South Florida Ecosystem Restoration Task Force established by section 528(f) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1996 (110 United States Statutes at Large 3771- 3773), and the Governors Commission for a Sustainable South Florida established by executive order of the Governor of the State of Florida; and (E) applicable water quality standards established by the Environmental Protection Agency.
Project Designs.-- (1) Wastewater projects.--Wastewater treatment projects eligible for funding under this Act may include centralized treatment facilities, onsite disposal systems, mobile pumpout facilities, and land-based pumpout facilities.
Stormwater projects.--Stormwater projects eligible for funding under this Act may include stormwater systems utilizing the best available technology approved by the appropriate permitting agency.
COST-SHARE REQUIREMENT AND VIABILITY ASSESSMENT.
The Administrator may grant for a project authorized under this Act only if-- (1) no less than 25 percent of the total project cost will be provided by non-Federal interests; (2) the non-Federal sponsor has completed-- (A) adequate project planning and design activities; (B) a financial plan identifying sources of non- Federal funding for the project; and (C) a complete assessment of project compliance with-- (i) the adopted master wastewater or stormwater plans for Monroe County, Florida; (ii) applicable growth management ordinances of Monroe County, Florida; (iii) applicable Florida State laws, regulations, and policies; and (iv) applicable agreements between Monroe County and the State of Florida to manage growth in Monroe County; and (3) the project will have substantial water quality benefits relative to other projects that are under consideration.
In the implementation of this Act, the Administrator shall consult the Water Quality Steering Committee and the appropriate State and local government officials.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator to carry out this Act $32,000,000 for the first fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, $31,000,000 for the second fiscal year beginning after such date of enactment, and $50,000,000 per fiscal year for each of the third, fourth, and fifth fiscal years beginning after such date of enactment of this Act.
Such funds shall remain available until expended.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Water quality steering committee.--The term ``Water Quality Steering Committee'' means the water quality protection program Steering Committee established under section 8(d)(2)(A) of the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary and Protection Act.