VOLUNTARY LIMITS ON CAMPAIGN ADVERTISING.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
VOLUNTARY ADVERTISING LIMITS AND BENEFITS FOR ELIGIBLE CONGRESSIONAL CANDIDATES.
Definitions.--In this section-- ``(1) Campaign advertising.--The term `campaign advertising' means a disbursement for any communication through any broadcasting station.
Eligible congressional candidate.--The term `eligible congressional candidate' means a candidate for nomination to, or election to, the Senate or the House of Representatives that the Commission has certified under subsection (d) as an eligible candidate for a primary or general election.
General election period.--The term `general election period' means the time period beginning on the date that is 60 days before the date of the general election for the office to which the candidate is seeking election and ending on the date of the general election.
Primary election period.--The term `primary election period' means the time period beginning on the date that is 30 days before the date of the primary election for the office to which the candidate is seeking election and ending on the date of the primary election.
Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--A candidate for election, or nomination for election, to the Senate or House of Representatives is an eligible candidate-- ``(A) for purposes of a primary election, if the Commission certifies that the candidate has met the primary election filing requirement of paragraph (2); and ``(B) for purposes of a general election, if the Commission certifies that the candidate has met the general election filing requirement of paragraph (3).
Primary election filing requirement.-- ``(A) In general.--The requirement of this paragraph is met if the candidate files with the Commission a declaration that-- ``(i) the candidate and the candidate's authorized committees will not participate in campaign advertising except during the primary election period; and ``(ii) at least 1 other candidate has qualified for the same primary election ballot under the law of the candidate's State.
Deadline for filing primary election declaration.--The declaration under subparagraph (A) shall be filed not later than the date on which the candidate files, with the appropriate State officer, as a candidate for the primary election.
General election filing requirement.-- ``(A) In general.--The requirement of this paragraph is met if the candidate files with the Commission a declaration that the candidate and the candidate's authorized committees will not participate in campaign advertising except during the general election period.
Deadline for filing general election declaration.--The declaration under subparagraph (A) shall be filed not later than 7 days after the earlier of-- ``(i) the date on which the candidate qualifies for the general election ballot under State law; or ``(ii) if under State law, a primary or runoff election to qualify for the general election ballot occurs after September 1, the date on which the candidate wins the primary or runoff election.
Benefits for Eligible Congressional Candidates.-- ``(1) In general.--If an eligible congressional candidate has an opponent who has qualified for the ballot, the candidate shall be entitled to the broadcast media rates provided under section 315(b)(2) of the Communications Act of 1934.
Use of benefit.--An eligible congressional candidate that uses the broadcast media rates under paragraph (1) for broadcast time shall use the time for a communication that is not less than 60 seconds in length.
Certification.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall determine whether a candidate has met the requirements of this section and, based on the determination, issue a certification stating whether the candidate is an eligible candidate for the applicable election entitled to receive benefits under this section.
Certification.-- ``(A) Primary election.--Not later than 7 business days after a candidate files a declaration under subsection (b)(2), the Commission shall determine whether the candidate meets the eligibility requirements of such subsection and, if so, certify that the candidate is an eligible candidate for the primary election entitled to receive benefits under this section.
General election.--Not later than 7 business days after a candidate files a declaration under subsection (b)(3), the Commission shall determine whether the candidate meets the eligibility requirement of such subsection and, if so, certify that the candidate is an eligible candidate for the general election entitled to receive benefits under this title.
Revocation of Certification.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall revoke a certification under subsection (d), based on information submitted in such form and manner as the Commission may require or on information that comes to the Commission by other means, if the Commission determines that a candidate-- ``(A) violates any requirement of this section; or ``(B) fails to continue to meet the requirements of this section.
No further benefits.--A candidate whose certification has been revoked shall be ineligible for any further benefits made available under this section for the duration of the election cycle.
Determinations by Commission.--A determination (including a certification under subsection (d)) made by the Commission under this title shall be final, except to the extent that the determination is subject to judicial review.
Penalty for Misuse of Benefits.--If the Commission revokes the certification of an eligible congressional candidate, the Commission shall so notify the candidate, and the candidate shall pay to the provider of any benefit received by the candidate under this section an amount equal to the difference between the amount the candidate paid for such benefit and the amount the candidate would have paid for the benefit if the candidate were not an eligible congressional candidate.''.
BROADCAST RATES AND PREEMPTION.
Broadcast Rates.--Section 315(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 315(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(b) The charges'' and inserting the following: ``(b) Broadcast Media Rates.-- ``(1) In general.--The charges''; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, and adjusting the margins accordingly; (3) in paragraph (1)(A) (as redesignated by paragraph (2))-- (A) by striking ``forty-five'' and inserting ``30''; and (B) by striking ``lowest unit charge of the station for the same class and amount of time for the same period'' and inserting ``lowest charge of the station for the same amount of time for the same period on the same date''; and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Eligible congressional candidates.-- ``(A) Eligible congressional candidates.--In the case of an eligible congressional candidate (as defined in section 324 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971) the charges for the use of a television broadcasting station during the 30-day period and 60- day period referred to in paragraph (1)(A) shall not exceed 50 percent of the lowest charge described in paragraph (1)(A).
Noneligible congressional candidates.--In the case of a candidate for Federal office who is not an eligible congressional candidate (as so defined), paragraph (1)(A) shall not apply.''.
Preemption; Access.--Section 315 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 315) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d), as subsections (d) and (e), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) Preemption.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a licensee shall not preempt the use, during any period specified in subsection (b)(1)(A), of a broadcasting station by an eligible congressional candidate (as defined in section 324 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971) that has purchased and paid for such use pursuant to subsection (b)(2).
Circumstances beyond control of licensee.--If a program to be broadcast by a broadcasting station is preempted because of circumstances beyond the control of the broadcasting station, any candidate advertising spot scheduled to be broadcast during that program may also be preempted.''.
Revocation of License for Failure To Permit Access.--Section 312(a)(7) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 312(a)(7)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or repeated''; (2) by inserting ``or cable system'' after ``broadcasting station''; and (3) by striking ``his candidacy'' and inserting ``the candidacy of the candidate, under the same terms, conditions, and business practices as apply to the most favored advertiser of the licensee''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date that is 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.