DEDUCTION ALLOWANCE FOR HOME HEALTH CARE AND ADULT DAY AND RESPITE CARE EXPENSES OF INDIVIDUALS FOR DEPENDENTS WITH ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE OR RELATED ORGANIC BRAIN DISORDERS.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 220 as section 221 and by inserting after section 219 the following new section: ``SEC.
HOME HEALTH CARE AND ADULT DAY AND RESPITE CARE EXPENSES FOR DEPENDENTS WITH ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE OR RELATED ORGANIC BRAIN DISORDERS.
Deduction Allowed.--In the case of an individual who maintains a household which includes a qualified dependent of such individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction the qualified home health care and adult day respite care expenses of such individual with respect to such dependent.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified dependent.--The term `qualified dependent' means any individual (including the spouse of the taxpayer but not including the taxpayer) who-- ``(A) has as his principal place of abode the principal residence of the taxpayer, and is a member of the taxpayer's household, for more than 180 days of the calendar year during which the taxable year of the taxpayer begins, ``(B) is a dependent of the taxpayer (within the meaning given to such term by subsection (a) of section 152 other than paragraph (9) of such subsection) for such calendar year, and ``(C) at the close of such calendar year, suffers from Alzheimer's disease (or a related organic brain disorder) and is physically or mentally incapable of caring for himself, as determined by a physician.
Qualified home health care and adult day and respite care expenses.--The term `qualified home health care and adult day and respite care expenses' means the excess of-- ``(A) the reasonable and necessary expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer for-- ``(i) household services for a qualified dependent, and ``(ii) the care (including respite care) of such dependent in the home or in an adult day care center, over ``(B) the reasonable and necessary expenses such taxpayer would have paid or incurred for household services for, and the care of, such qualified dependent if such dependent had been capable of caring for himself.
Physician.--The term `physician' has the meaning given to such term by section 1861(r) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(r)).
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Maintaining a household.--An individual shall be treated as maintaining a household for any period only if over half the cost of maintaining the household for such period is furnished by such individual (or, if the individual is married, by the individual and his spouse).
Married couple must file joint return.--If the taxpayer is married at the close of the taxable year, the deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) only if the taxpayer and his spouse file a joint return under section 6013 for the taxable year.
Certification of Diagnosis by Physician.--Any determination by a physician that-- ``(1) an individual suffers from Alzheimer's disease or a related organic brain disorder, and ``(2) such individual is mentally or physically incapable of caring for himself, shall be certified by the physician to the Secretary at such time and in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.
Coordination With Sections 21 and 213.--If any amount allowable as a deduction under this section would (but for this subsection) also be taken into account for purposes of determining the amount of any credit allowable under section 21 (relating to expenses for household and dependent care services necessary for gainful employment) or any deduction allowable under section 213 (relating to medical, dental, etc.
, this section shall apply only if the taxpayer elects its application.
If this section is elected with respect to any amount, such amount shall not be taken into account under section 21 or 213.
Such election shall be made at such time and in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.''
Deduction Allowed in Arriving at Adjusted Gross Income.-- Section 62(a) of such Code (defining adjusted gross income) is amended by inserting after paragraph (13) the following new paragraph: ``(14) Qualified home health care and adult day and respite care expenses.--The deduction allowed by section 220.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Home health care and adult day and respite care expenses for dependents with Alzheimer's disease or related organic brain disorders.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.