This Act may be cited as the ``Intermodal Transportation Act of 2003''.
INTERMODAL TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 53 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 5315 the following: ``Sec.
Intermodal transportation facilities program ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish and carry out an intermodal transportation facilities program in accordance with this section.
Grants.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary shall make grants on a competitive basis to public or private entities to finance projects for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, and renovation of facilities, whether publicly or privately owned, designed and operated to promote the intermodal transportation of passengers.
Eligible Grant Recipients.--The Secretary shall make grants for a project under this section directly to the public or private entity that will develop or operate the facility receiving assistance under the project.
Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant for a project under this section, an entity shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such form, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
At a minimum, the application shall contain a plan for the project and such additional information as the Secretary may require to ensure full accountability for the obligation and expenditure of amounts for the project.
Eligible Projects.--Facilities for which assistance may be provided under the program include the following: ``(1) Facilities to connect urban or rural local transit, van, and commuter services with intercity bus and rail services.
Facilities to connect intercity bus, intercity rail, local transit, van, and commuter services with commercial air services.
Facilities to provide park and ride services at suburban locations connecting with local mass transportation, commuter services, and intercity bus and rail facilities.
Such other intermodal facilities as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Priority.--In making grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to projects that integrate all available modes of intercity and local mass transportation in a community.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of a project financed using amounts from a grant under this section shall not exceed 90 percent.
Applicability of Planning and Other Requirements.--The Secretary may make a grant for a project under this section only after finding that the project is part of the approved program of projects required under sections 5303 through 5306.
Section 5333(b) applies to a project receiving assistance under this section.
Contract Authority.--A grant approved by the Secretary that is financed with amounts made available to carry out this section is a contractual obligation of the United States Government to pay the Government's share of the cost of the project.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There shall be available from the Highway Trust Fund to carry out this section $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5315 the following: ``5316.
RURAL CONNECTIONS TO AIRPORTS.
In General.--Chapter 53 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 5316, as inserted by section 2(a) of this Act, the following: ``Sec.
Rural connections to airports ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of Transportation shall carry out a program to promote essential intercity bus and commercial van service by private operators between non-urbanized and small urban areas and primary airports, as defined in section 47102, including intermediate points.
State Programs.--A State shall use amounts apportioned under this section for eligible transportation projects that are included in a State program of projects.
The program shall be submitted annually to the Secretary.
The Secretary may approve the program only if the Secretary finds that the program is consistent with the purposes of this section and provides a fair distribution of amounts in the State.
Apportionment of Amounts.--The Secretary shall apportion amounts made available to carry out this section among the States in the same manner as amounts are apportioned under section 5311(c).
Eligible Projects.--Eligible projects under this section include-- ``(1) planning and marketing for eligible intercity bus and commercial van service; ``(2) capital grants for bus terminals, park and ride facilities, and joint-use facilities, including intermodal terminals located at or near an airport or at any other location, if there is a planned airport connection from the facility; ``(3) operating grants through purchase-of-service agreements, user-side subsidies, and demonstration projects; ``(4) developing and enhancing security procedures for bus and commercial van passengers connecting to commercial air services; and ``(5) enhancing connections between intercity bus or commercial van service and commercial air services at the airport.
Eligible Service Providers.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a State may contract with a duly licensed private operator of intercity bus or commercial van service to provide essential intercity bus or commercial van service under the program.
Limitation.--Funds made available to carry out this section may not be used to provide service that duplicates, in whole or in part, service being provided by an existing private operator without operating subsidy.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of a project financed using amounts made available under this section shall not exceed 90 percent.
Availability of Amounts.--Amounts apportioned to a State under this section shall remain available until expended.
Relationship to Other Laws.--Section 5311(j) applies to this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There shall be available from the Highway Trust Fund to carry out this section-- ``(1) $30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006; and ``(2) $35,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2007, 2008, and 2009.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5316, as inserted by section 2(b) of this Act, the following: ``5317.
Rural connections to airports.''.
FUNDING FOR RURAL TRANSPORTATION ACCESSIBILITY INCENTIVE PROGRAM.
Section 3038(g) of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (49 United States Code 5310 note; 112 United States Statutes at Large 393) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``the following amounts'' and inserting ``$15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009''; and (B) by striking `buses:'' and all that follows before the last sentence and inserting ``buses.
''; and (2) in paragraph (2) by striking ``$6,800,000 shall be available for fiscal years 2000 through 2003'' and inserting ``$5,000,000 shall be available for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009''.
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION SYSTEM.
Chapter 53 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
National transportation information system ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish and carry out, on a priority basis and in coordination with States and private entities, a national public transportation information system in accordance with this section.
Information To Be Included in System.-- ``(1) In general.--The system shall include, to the maximum extent practicable, for all public and private providers of scheduled passenger transportation service over fixed routes, information on-- ``(A) service, fares, and schedules; and ``(B) availability of service accessible to persons with disabilities.
Providers of scheduled passenger transportation service defined.--In paragraph (1), the term `providers of scheduled passenger transportation service' includes providers of intercity bus and intercity rail service, commuter service, local and rural transit service, and demand responsive intercity bus service.
Public Access to System.--Information included in the system shall be made available to the public, on a real-time basis, by telephone and on the Internet.
Such system shall be fully accessible to persons with disabilities.
Deadline.--The system shall be fully operational not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this section.
Private Contractors.--The Secretary may carry out this section by contracting with private entities to plan, construct, operate, and maintain the system.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of a project financed using amounts made available to carry out this section shall not exceed 90 percent.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There shall be available from the Highway Trust Fund to carry out this section-- ``(1) $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 and 2005; and ``(2) $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2009.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``5339.
National transportation information system.''.
Definition of Capital Project.--Section 5302(a)(1)(G)(ii) of title 49, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(ii) excluding construction of a commercial revenue producing facility to the extent that the facility is not intended to be used to provide mass transportation or intercity bus or rail transportation.''.
Capital Investment Grants and Loans.--Section 5309(a)(1)(C) of such title is amended to read as follows: ``(C) the capital costs of coordinating mass transportation with other transportation, including costs associated with the mass transportation, intercity bus, or intercity rail components of facility projects intended to enhance such coordination;''.