ALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION FOR DIVIDENDS PAID BY DOMESTIC CORPORATIONS.
In General.--Section 243 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to dividends received by corporations) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
DIVIDENDS PAID BY DOMESTIC CORPORATIONS.
General Rule.--In the case of a domestic corporation which is subject to taxation under this chapter, there shall be allowed as a deduction for the taxable year an amount equal to the dividends paid by such corporation during the taxable year.
Dividends.--For purposes of this section, the term `dividend' means any dividend (as defined in section 316) to which section 301 applies.
Certain Corporations Not Eligible.--No deduction shall be allowed under this section with respect to dividends paid by any corporation which is-- ``(1) an S corporation (as defined in section 1361(a)(1)); ``(2) a regulated investment company (as defined in section 851(a)); ``(3) a real estate investment trust (as defined in section 856(a)); or ``(4) a personal holding company (as defined in section 542).
Special Rules for Certain Distributions of Mutual Savings Banks, Etc.--For purposes of this section, any amount allowed as a deduction under section 591 (relating to deduction for dividends paid by mutual savings banks, etc.)
shall not be treated as a dividend.''
Repeal of Deductions for Dividends Received From Domestic Corporations and Rules Relating Thereto; Repeal of Deduction for Dividends Paid on Certain Preferred Stock of Public Utilities.-- Sections 244 (relating to dividends received on certain preferred stock), 246 (relating to rules applying to deductions for dividends received), and 247 (relating to dividends paid on certain preferred stock of public utilities) of such Code are hereby repealed.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Dividends received from certain foreign corporations.-- (A) Transfer of provision specifying deductible percentage of dividend received.-- (i) Paragraph (1) of section 245(a) of such Code (relating generally to dividends received from 10-percent owned foreign corporations) is amended by striking ``the percent (specified in section 243 for the taxable year)'' and inserting ``the applicable percentage determined under paragraph (12)''.
Subsection (a) of section 245 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(12) Applicable percentage.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the applicable percentage is-- ``(i) 100 percent in the case of dividends received by a small business investment company operating under the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15 United States Code 661 and following), ``(ii) 80 percent in the case of dividends not described in clause (i) from a 20-percent owned corporation, and ``(iii) 70 percent in the case of any other dividends.
20-percent owned corporation.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `20-percent owned corporation' means any corporation if 20 percent or more of the stock in such corporation (by vote and value) is owned by the taxpayer.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, stock described in section 1504(a) shall not be taken into account.''
Subparagraph (B) of section 245(c)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 243(c)(2)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(12)(B)''.
Transfer of limitation on aggregate amount of dividends received deduction, exclusion of certain dividends, etc.--Section 245 of such Code (relating to dividends received from certain foreign corporations) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(e) Limitation and Special Rules.-- ``(1) Limitation on aggregate amount of deduction.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided by subparagraph (B), the aggregate amount of the deductions allowed by subsections (a) and (b) shall not exceed the percentage determined under subparagraph (C) of the taxable income computed without regard to-- ``(i) the deductions allowed by section 172, ``(ii) any adjustment under section 1059, and ``(iii) any capital loss carryback to the taxable year under section 1212(a)(1).
Effect of net operating loss.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply for any taxable year for which there is a net operating loss (as determined under section 172).
Special rules.--The provisions of subparagraph (A) shall be applied-- ``(i) first separately with respect to dividends from 20-percent owned corporations and the percentage determined under this subparagraph shall be 80 percent, and ``(ii) then separately with respect to dividends not from 20-percent owned corporations and the percentage determined under this subparagraph shall be 70 percent and the taxable income shall be reduced by the aggregate amount of dividends from 20-percent owned corporations.
Exclusion of certain dividends.-- ``(A) In general.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) or (b) in respect of any dividend on any share of stock-- ``(i) which is sold or otherwise disposed of in any case in which the taxpayer has held such share for 45 days or less, or ``(ii) to the extent that the taxpayer is under an obligation (whether pursuant to a short sale or otherwise) to make corresponding payments with respect to positions in substantially similar or related property.
90-day rule in the case of certain preference dividends.--In the case of any stock having preference in dividends, the holding period specified in subparagraph (A)(i) shall be 90 days in lieu of 45 days if the taxpayer receives dividends with respect to such stock which are attributable to a period or periods aggregating in excess of 366 days.
Determination of holding periods.--For purposes of this subsection, in determining the period for which the taxpayer has held any share of stock-- ``(i) the day of disposition, but not the day of acquisition, shall be taken into account, ``(ii) there shall not be taken into account any day which is more than 45 days (or 90 days in the case of stock to which subparagraph (B) applies) after the date on which such share becomes ex-dividend, and ``(iii) paragraph (4) of section 1223 shall not apply.
Holding period reduced for periods where risk of loss diminished.--The holding periods determined under the preceding provisions of this subparagraph shall be appropriately reduced (in the manner provided in regulations prescribed by the Secretary) for any period (during such periods) in which-- ``(i) the taxpayer has an option to sell, is under a contractual obligation to sell, or has made (and not closed) a short sale of, substantially identical stock or securities, ``(ii) the taxpayer is the grantor of an option to buy substantially identical stock or securities, or ``(iii) under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, a taxpayer has diminished his risk of loss by holding 1 or more other positions with respect to substantially similar or related property.
The preceding sentence shall not apply in the case of any qualified covered call (as defined in section 1092(c)(4) but without regard to the requirement that gain or loss with respect to the option not be ordinary income or loss).
Cross Reference.-- ``For special rule relating to mutual savings banks, etc., to which section 593 applies, see section 596.''
Net operating loss deduction.--Paragraph (5) of section 172(d) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(5) Computation of deduction for dividends received from certain foreign corporations.--The deduction allowed by section 245 (relating to dividends received from certain foreign corporations) shall be computed without regard to section 245(e)(1).''
Dividends received deduction reduced where portfolio stock is debt financed.-- (A) Subsections (a) and (e) of section 246A of such Code (relating to dividends received deduction reduced where portfolio stock is debt financed) are each amended by striking ``243, 244, or''.
Subsection (b) of section 246A of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Section Not to Apply to Dividends for Which 100 Percent Dividends Received Deduction Allowable.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to dividends received by a small business investment company operating under the Small Business Investment Act of 1958.''
Limitation on dividends received deduction for mutual savings banks, etc.--Section 596 of such Code (relating to limitation on dividends received deduction) is amended by striking ``sections 243, 244, and 245'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``section 245''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections for part VIII of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by striking the items relating to sections 243, 244, 246, and 247 and inserting after the item relating to section 241 the following: ``Sec.
Dividends paid by domestic corporations.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to distributions made after June 30, 1993 under the following schedule: (1) for the period beginning July 1, 1993, through December 31, 1994, the amount of the deduction for the taxable year shall be no more than 50 percent of the permitted deduction calculated under this section; (2) for the period beginning January 1, 1995, through December 31, 1996, the amount of the deduction for the taxable year shall be no more than 75 percent of the permitted deduction calculated under this section; and (3) for the period beginning January 1, 1997, the amount of the deduction for the taxable year shall be 100% of the permitted deduction calculated under this section.
REDUCTION IN CAPITAL GAINS TAX.
General Rule.--Subsection (h) of section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to maximum capital gains rate is amended to read as follows: ``(j) Maximum Capital Gains Rate.-- ``(1) In general.--If a taxpayer has a qualified net capital gain for any taxable year, then the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed the sum of-- ``(A) a tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this subsection had not been enacted on the taxable income reduced by the qualified net capital gain, plus ``(B) a tax equal to the sum of-- ``(i) 23 percent of the 3-to-6 year net gain, ``(ii) 21 percent of the 6-to-9 year net gain, ``(iii) 19 percent of the 9-to-12 year net gain, ``(iv) 17 percent of the 12-to-15 year net gain, plus ``(v) 15 percent of the over 15-year net gain.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Qualified net capital gain.--The term `qualified net capital gain' means the lesser of-- ``(i) the net capital gain determined by taking into account only gains and losses from dispositions of assets held for more than 3 years, or ``(ii) the net capital gain.
3-to-6 year net gain.--The term `3-to-6 year net gain' means the lesser of-- ``(i) the net capital gain determined by only taking into account gains and losses from dispositions of assets held for more than 3 but not more than 6 years, or ``(ii) the qualified net capital gain.
6-to-9 year net gain.--The term `6-to-9 year net gain' means the lesser of-- ``(i) the net capital gain determined by only taking into account gains and losses from dispositions of assets held for more than 6 but not more than 9 years, or ``(ii) the qualified net capital gain reduced by the 3-to-6 year net gain.
Other definitions.--The 9-to-12 year net gain, 12-to-15 year net gain, and over 15-year net gain shall be determined under principles similar to the principles of subparagraph (C).
Special rule.--If the highest rate of tax set forth in subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) (whichever applies) for any taxable year exceeds 28 percent, the amount of the tax determined under such subsection which is attributable to the excess of the net capital gain over the qualified net capital gain shall not exceed 28 percent of such excess.''.
Qualified Net Capital Gain Not Taken Into Account In Phase- Out.--Subparagraph (A) of section 1(g)(1) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(A) taxable income reduced by the qualified net capital gain (as defined in subsection (j)(2)), over''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
RESTORATION OF INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT FOR PROPERTY WITH LONG USEFUL LIFE.
General Rule.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amount of credit) is amended by striking the period in subparagraph (3) and insert in lieu thereof ``, and'' followed by the following new subparagraph: ``(4) manufacturing equipment credit.''.
Manufacturing Equipment Credit.--Section 48 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--For purposes of section 46, the manufacturing equipment credit for any taxable year is 10 percent of the portion of the amortizable basis of any property if-- ``(1) such property is used as an integral part of manufacturing, production, or extraction, by a domestic manufacturing company, situated within the United States, or its territories, wherein over 50 percent of the total voting stock of such company is owned and controlled by citizens of the United States; ``(2) the class life of such property (as defined in section 168(i)(1)) exceeds 24 months; ``(3) such property is not public utility property (as defined in section 46(f)(5).
Phase Out of Credit.--For periods after December 31, 1993, the applicable manufacturing equipment credit for any taxable year shall be 7.5 percent of the portion of the amortizable basis of the property.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply solely to a period beginning January 1, 1993, through December 31, 1996.