This Act may be cited as the ``Nurse Retention and Quality of Care Act of 2001''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The current nurse workforce is aging, and the average age of practicing registered nurses is 43.3 years, representing an increase of 5.9 years since 1983.
This means that the nursing workforce is aging at twice the rate of other occupations in the United States, and the enrollment in nursing programs has decreased in the past 5 years.
Many hospitals around the country are reporting vacancy rates for nursing positions.
Studies have shown a correlation between higher nurse staffing levels and reduction in adverse patient outcomes, including risk of infection, shock, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, and increased length of stay.
Retention problems are contributing to the nursing shortage problem.
According to a 2001 survey, 50 percent of nurses say they have recently considered leaving the nursing profession for reasons other than retirement.
A majority of those individuals who are considering leaving nursing express a low level of overall job satisfaction, and their lack of participation in decisionmaking is a major factor contributing to dissatisfaction.
Magnet hospitals are hospitals that have reorganized care to be more participatory, collaborative, and patient- centered and as a result are able to attract more nurses.
Even in times of nursing shortages, magnet hospitals enjoy low turnover.
The average length of employment for registered nurses in magnet hospitals is 8.35 years, which is twice the length of employment in hospitals generally, and magnet hospital nurses consistently report greater job satisfaction than other nurses.
Magnet hospitals report lower mortality rates, higher patient satisfaction, and greater cost-efficiency, with patients experiencing shorter stays in hospitals and intensive care units.
Title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART H--INITIATIVES TO IMPROVE NURSE RETENTION, THE NURSING WORKPLACE, AND THE QUALITY OF CARE ``SEC.
DEVELOPING MODELS AND BEST PRACTICES IN NURSING CARE.
Program Authorized.--From amounts appropriated under section 853, the Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to enable the eligible entities to carry out demonstrations of models and best practices in nursing care for the purpose of developing innovative strategies or approaches for retention of professional nurses.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means a health care facility, or any partnership or coalition containing a health care facility and a collegiate, associate degree, or diploma school of nursing.
Health care facility.--The term `health care facility' means a hospital, clinic, skilled nursing facility, long-term care facility, home health care agency, federally qualified health center, rural health clinic, public health clinic, or any other entity as designated by the Secretary.
Distribution of Grants.--Grants awarded under this section shall be distributed among a variety of geographic regions, and among a range of different types and sizes of facilities.
Duration of Grants.-- ``(1) Three-year grants.--Grants awarded under this section shall be awarded for a period of not greater than 3 years.
Grant extensions.--Such grants may be extended if the grantee demonstrates that it-- ``(A) as determined by the Secretary based on the factors in paragraph (3), has significantly improved the quality of its workplace for nurses and has enhanced patient care; or ``(B) has been designated as a magnet hospital by the American Nurses Credentialing Center.
Preference.--In awarding grant extensions under this subsection, the Secretary shall give preference to entities that have-- ``(A) significantly increased retention rates for professional nurses; ``(B) significantly reduced rates of workplace injuries for professional nurses; and ``(C) significantly reduced rates of nursing- sensitive adverse patient outcomes.
Maximum duration of grants.--The total maximum duration of grants under this section shall not be greater than 6 years.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use such grant funds to carry out demonstrations of models and best practices in nursing care for the purpose of-- ``(1) promoting retention and satisfaction of professional nurses; ``(2) promoting collaboration and communication among health care professionals; ``(3) promoting nurse involvement in organizational and clinical decisionmaking processes; ``(4) organizing care to enhance the satisfaction of professional nurses, improve the nursing workplace environment, and promote the quality of nursing care; ``(5) promoting opportunities for professional nurses to pursue education, career advancement, and organizational recognition; ``(6) promoting high quality of patient care-- ``(A) by enhancing institutional measurement of quality outcomes, including identification and measurement of nursing sensitive patient outcomes; ``(B) by basing the development of policies, procedures, guidelines, and organizational systems on research findings and patient outcomes measurement, including nursing-sensitive patient outcomes measurement; and ``(C) by involving professional nurses in developing and implementing ways to measure and improve the quality of care; ``(7) promoting a balanced work-life environment; and ``(8) offering such other activities as may be determined by the Secretary to enhance the workplace environment for professional nurses.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--The application submitted under paragraph (1) shall-- ``(A) include a description of the project proposed to be carried out with grant funds; ``(B) demonstrate the eligible entity's commitment to the project through a statement describing-- ``(i) the involvement of high level executive management, trustees, nurse leadership, and medical staff in designing, implementing, and overseeing the project; ``(ii) the designation of key personnel and management structures to design, implement, and oversee the project; ``(iii) any actions that the eligible entity has already taken that contribute to developing innovative models and approaches for retention of professional nurses; and ``(iv) the eligible entity's funding or any evidence of other contributions and commitment for the project, along with information on overall project budget and funding resources; and ``(C) include information regarding the retention rate and occurrence of workplace injuries to nurses at the entity applying for such grant and any other information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
``The Secretary, in consultation with the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the Health Resources and Services Administration shall-- ``(1) conduct an annual survey of the projects carried out under section 851 and provide to Congress the results of such survey beginning not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Nurse Retention and Quality of Care Act of 2001; and ``(2) develop and provide to Congress, not later than December 30, 2007, a final report that-- ``(A) evaluates the projects funded by grants under section 851; and ``(B) includes findings about best practices and the impact on patients and staff of employing participatory, collaborative, and patient-centered models of nursing care.
Grants.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 851, $40,000,000 for fiscal years 2002 through 2007.
Survey and Evaluation.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 852, $5,000,000 for fiscal years 2002 through 2007.