This Act may be cited as the ``Public Voice Campaign Finance Reform Act of 1997''.
PROMOTING DISCLOSURE OF CAMPAIGN SPENDING.
Requiring Intermediaries and Conduits To Report on Bundled Contributions.--Section 315(a)(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(8)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(8)'' and inserting ``(8)(A)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(B) Any person acting as an intermediary or conduit for the collection or delivery of contributions on behalf of a candidate shall file reports with the Commission (at the same time and in the same manner as a political committee which is not an authorized committee of a candidate is required to file reports under section 304(a)(4)) on the contributions collected or delivered and on related activities conducted on the candidate's behalf.''.
Treatment of Certain Communications as Independent Expenditures for Reporting Purposes.--Section 301(17) of such Act (2 United States Code 431(17)) is amended by striking ``identified candidate'' and inserting the following: ``identified candidate, or any payment for any communication made during the 90-day period ending on the date of an election which includes the name or likeness of a candidate,''.
Mandatory Electronic Filing for Persons Meeting Certain Threshold.--Section 304(a)(11)(A) of such Act (2 United States Code 434(a)(11)(A)) is amended by striking the period at the end and inserting the following: ``, except that in the case of any person reporting an amount of contributions, expenditures, or disbursements in an amount exceeding a threshold established by the Commission, the person shall file all reports required under this Act by such electronic means, format, or method.''.
ENHANCING ENFORCEMENT ABILITIES OF FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION.
Permitting FEC To Impose Filing Fee for Reports.--Section 307 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437d) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f)(1) The Commission shall require each political committee filing a report under this title to include with the report a payment (in an amount established by the Commission) if the amount of contributions, expenditures, or disbursements covered by the report exceeds a threshold established by the Commission.
In establishing the amount of payment required to be included with a report under paragraph (1), the Commission shall take into account the costs to the Commission which are associated with the submission of reports under this title.
The Commission may waive the application of paragraph (1) with respect to a political committee if the Commission determines that the payment required would result in a financial hardship to the committee.
The Commission may charge a nominal fee for the distribution of documents to the public.
The amount appropriated to the Commission for a fiscal year pursuant to the authorization under section 314 may not be adjusted to take into account any amounts anticipated to be received by the Commission during the year pursuant to this subsection.''.
Revised Standard for Referral of Certain Violations to Attorney General.--Section 309(a)(5)(C) of such Act (2 United States Code 437g(a)(5)(C)) is amended by striking ``by an affirmative vote of 4 of its members, determined that there is probable cause to believe'' and inserting ``believes''.
Permitting Random Audits.--Section 311(b) of such Act (2 United States Code 438(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(b)'' and inserting ``(b)(1)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Commission shall conduct random audits of the reports of political committees during the 1-year period which begins on the date of a general election, in accordance with such criteria as the Commission may establish.''.
REDUCED BROADCAST RATES FOR CANDIDATES.
In General.--Section 315(b)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 315(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``the lowest unit charge'' and inserting ``the applicable percentage of the lowest unit charge''.
Applicable Percentage Defined.--Section 315(c) of such Act (47 United States Code 315(c)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) the term `applicable percentage' means-- ``(A) 70 percent, in the case of a small broadcast station (as determined by the Commission in accordance with ratings, market area analysis, and such other criteria as the Commission may establish), or ``(B) 50 percent, in the case of any other candidate and any other broadcast station.''.
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF NON-FEDERAL FUNDS.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``restrictions on use of non-federal funds ``Sec.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no funds which are not subject to the limitations and prohibitions of this Act may be expended or disbursed by any person for any activity which significantly affects an election for Federal office or which promotes or identifies (in whole or in part) any candidate for election for Federal office, including any get-out-the-vote drive which identifies or targets supporters of a candidate for election for Federal office, or any voter registration drive or development or maintenance of voter files which occurs during an even-numbered year.
Exceptions.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to any of the following activities: ``(1) The construction, maintenance, or operation of buildings or broadcast facilities for political parties.
State or local political party conventions.
State or local political party administration.
Generic campaign activity to promote a political party.
Any activity which would be described in clause (i), (iii), or (v) of section 301(9)(B) if payment for the activity were an expenditure under such section.''.
APPOINTMENT AND SERVICE OF MEMBERS OF FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION.
Appointment of Additional, Independent Commissioner.-- (1) In general.--Section 306(a)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437c(a)(1)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``(a)(1)'' and inserting ``(a)(1)(A)''; (B) in the first sentence, by striking ``6 members appointed by the President,'' and inserting the following: ``7 members appointed by the President, of whom one shall be a political independent nominated for appointment by the other members serving on the Commission,''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(B) In subparagraph (A), the term `political independent' means an individual who at no time after January 1992-- ``(i) has held elective office as a member of the Democratic or Republican party; ``(ii) has received any wages or salary from the Democratic or Republican party or from a Democratic or Republican party office-holder or candidate; or ``(iii) has provided substantial volunteer services or made any substantial contribution to the Democratic or Republican party or to a Democratic or Republican party office-holder or candidate.''.
Deadline for initial appointment.--The members of the Federal Election Commission shall provide the President with a nominee for appointment to the Commission under section 306(a)(1)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (as amended by paragraph (1)) not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Limiting Commissioners to Single Term.--Section 306(a)(2)(A) of such Act (2 United States Code 437c(a)(2)(A)) is amended by striking ``terms'' and inserting ``a single term''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to elections occurring after January 1999.