This Act may be cited as the ``Bridge Ice and Snow Prevention Pilot Program Act of 2009''.
In General.--The Secretary of Transportation shall establish and implement a pilot program to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the use of technologies to prevent ice, snow, and other adverse weather effects associated with freezing temperatures on bridges on the National Highway System.
Grant.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants to not more than 5 States to conduct projects under the pilot program.
Applications.--A State seeking a grant under the pilot program shall submit an application to the Secretary in such form, and containing such information, as the Secretary may require.
Eligibility.-- (1) Selection of highway bridges.-- (A) In general.--In awarding grants under the pilot program, the Secretary shall select not more than 20 highway bridges for participation in the program.
Bridge requirements.--The Secretary may select a highway bridge under subparagraph (A) only if the bridge is-- (i) not greater than 500 feet in length; and (ii) on the National Highway System.
Selection of technologies.--The Secretary shall select technologies to be tested under the pilot program that are likely to improve bridge safety, extend the life of a bridge, and promote energy efficiency.
Federal Share.--The Federal share payable on account of a project carried out under the pilot program shall not exceed 80 percent of the cost of the project.
Duration of Pilot Program.--The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program for a period of no more than 5 fiscal years.
Final Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the last day of the pilot program, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate a report that describes the effectiveness and benefits of the technologies tested under the pilot program.
Contents.--The report shall describe, at a minimum, the following: (A) The cost effectiveness of each technology used.
The safety impacts of each technology tested and of the pilot program as a whole.
Any change in the expected life span of each bridge participating in the pilot program due to the technologies used.
The net effect of the pilot program on job creation or job loss.
Recommendations for-- (i) an improved or expanded program, if appropriate; and (ii) the use of advanced bridge technology to prevent ice, snow, and other adverse weather effects associated with freezing temperatures on bridges on the National Highway System.
Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2011.
Availability of Amounts.-- (1) In general.--Amounts made available to carry out this section shall be available for obligation in the same manner as funds apportioned under chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, except that the Federal share payable on account of a project carried out under the pilot program shall be determined in accordance with this section and such funds shall not be transferable and shall remain available for the duration of the pilot program.
Limitation.--A State may not receive a total of more than $2,000,000 in grants under the pilot program.
Prohibition of earmarks.--None of the funds appropriated to carry out this section may be used for a congressional earmark, as defined in clause 9(e) of Rule XXI of the Rules of the House of Representatives of the 111th Congress.
Report to Congress Relating to Competitive Procedures.--If grants are awarded under this section using procedures other than competitive procedures, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report explaining why competitive procedures were not used.
In this Act, the term ``State'' has the meaning given that term in section 101(a) of title 23, United States Code.