This Act may be cited as the ``Joining Forces for Military Mental Health Act''.
PILOT PROGRAM ON ENHANCEMENTS OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE EFFORTS ON MENTAL HEALTH IN THE NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVES THROUGH COMMUNITY PARTNERSHIPS.
Pilot Program Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense may carry out a pilot program to assess the feasibility and advisability of enhancing the efforts of the Department of Defense in research, treatment, education, and outreach on mental health and substance use disorders and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) in members of the National Guard and Reserves, their family members, and their caregivers through community partners described in subsection (c).
Duration.--The duration of the pilot program may not exceed three years.
Grants.--In carrying out the pilot program, the Secretary may award not more than five grants to community partners described in subsection (c).
Any grant so awarded shall be awarded using a competitive and merit-based award process.
Community Partners.--A community partner described in this subsection is a private non-profit organization or institution (or multiple organizations and institutions) that-- (1) engages in each of the research, treatment, education, and outreach activities described in subsection (d); and (2) meets such qualifications for treatment as a community partner as the Secretary shall establish for purposes of the pilot program.
Activities.--Amounts awarded under a grant under the pilot program shall be utilized by the community partner awarded the grant for one or more of the following: (1) To engage in research on the causes, development, and innovative treatment of mental health and substance use disorders and Traumatic Brain Injury in members of the National Guard and Reserves, their family members, and their caregivers.
To provide treatment to such members and their families for such mental health and substance use disorders and Traumatic Brain Injury.
To identify and disseminate evidence-based treatments of mental health and substance use disorders and Traumatic Brain Injury described in paragraph (1).
To provide outreach and education to such members, their families and caregivers, and the public about mental health and substance use disorders and Traumatic Brain Injury described in paragraph (1).
Requirement for Matching Funds.-- (1) Requirement.--The Secretary may award a grant under this section to an organization or institution (or organizations and institutions) only if the awardee agrees to make contributions toward the costs of activities carried out with the grant, from non-Federal sources (whether public or private), an amount equal to not less than $3 for each $1 of funds provided under the grant.
Nature of non-federal contributions.--Contributions from non-Federal sources for purposes of paragraph (1) may be in cash or in-kind, fairly evaluated.
Amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal Government, may not be included in determining the amount of contributions from non- Federal sources for such purposes.
Application.--An organization or institution (or organizations and institutions) seeking a grant under this section shall submit to the Secretary an application therefore in such a form and containing such information as the Secretary considers appropriate, including the following: (1) A description how the activities proposed to be carried out with the grant will help improve collaboration and coordination on research initiatives, treatment, and education and outreach on mental health and substance use disorders and Traumatic Brain Injury among the Armed Forces.
A description of existing efforts by the applicant to put the research described in (c)(1) into practice.
If the application comes from multiple organizations and institutions, how the activities proposed to be carried out with the grant would improve coordination and collaboration among such organizations and institutions.
If the applicant proposes to provide services or treatment to members of the Armed Forces or family members using grant amounts, reasonable assurances that such services or treatment will be provided by a qualified provider.
Plans to comply with subsection (g).
Exchange of Medical and Clinical Information.--A community partner awarded a grant under the pilot program shall agree to any requirements for the sharing of medical or clinical information obtained pursuant to the grant that the Secretary shall establish for purposes of the pilot program.
The exchange of medical or clinical information pursuant to this subsection shall comply with applicable privacy and confidentiality laws.
Dissemination of Information.--The Secretary of Defense shall share with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs information on best practices in research, treatment, education, and outreach on mental health and substance use disorders and Traumatic Brain Injury identified by the Secretary of Defense as a result of the pilot program.
Report.--Not later than 180 days before the completion of the pilot program, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and to Congress, a report on the pilot program.
The report shall include the following: (1) A description of the pilot program, including the community partners awarded grants under the pilot program, the amount of grants so awarded, and the activities carried out using such grant amounts.
A description of any research efforts advanced using such grant amounts.
The number of members of the National Guard and Reserves provided treatment or services by community partners using such grant amounts, and a summary of the types of treatment and services so provided.
A description of the education and outreach activities undertaken using such grant amounts.
A description of efforts to exchange clinical information under subsection (g).
A description and assessment of the effectiveness and achievements of the pilot program with respect to research, treatment, education, and outreach on mental health and substance use disorders and Traumatic Brain Injury.
Such recommendations as the Secretary of Defense considers appropriate in light of the pilot program on the utilization of organizations and institutions such as community partners under the pilot program in efforts of the Department described in subsection (a).
A description of the metrics used by the Secretary in making recommendations under paragraph (7).
Available Funds.--Funds for the pilot program shall be derived from amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for Defense Health Program and otherwise available for obligation and expenditure.
Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``family member'' and ``caregiver'', in the case of a member of the National Guard or Reserves, have the meaning given such terms in section 1720G(d) of title 38, United States Code, with respect to a veteran.