This Act may be cited as the ``Supplemental Social Security Income Flexibility Act of 1995''.
BLOCK GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME FOR THE DISABLED AND BLIND.
In General.--Title XVI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1381-1383d) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``Part C--Block Grants to States for Supplemental Security Income for the Disabled and Blind ``purpose; implementation ``Sec.
Purpose.--The purpose of this part is to consolidate Federal assistance to the States for supplemental income for individuals who are disabled or blind (other than individuals who have attained age 65) into a single grant for such purpose, thereby giving States maximum flexibility to-- ``(1) require beneficiaries who are parents to ensure that their school-age children attend school; ``(2) require minors who are beneficiaries to attend school; ``(3) require parent beneficiaries to ensure that their children receive the full complement of childhood immunizations; ``(4) require beneficiaries not to use illegal drugs or abuse other drugs; ``(5) deny assistance to children solely on the basis that a child is unable to perform age-appropriate activities; ``(6) deny assistance to individiuals whose disabilities are primarily the result of their abuse of illegal or legal drugs, or alcohol; ``(7) deny assistance to illegal aliens; ``(8) require individuals who sponsor the residency of legal aliens to support those they sponsor; ``(9) involve religious and charitable organizations, voluntary associations, civic groups, community organizations, nonprofit entities, benevolent and fraternal orders, philanthropic entities, and other groups in the private sector, as appropriate, in the provision of assistance to needy disabled and blind individuals which the funding States receive under this part.
Implementation.--This purpose shall be implemented in accordance with conditions in each State and as determined by State law.
``payments to states ``Sec.
Amount.-- ``(1) In general.--Each State shall, subject to the requirements of this part, be entitled to receive quarterly payments for fiscal years 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000 in an amount equal to 25 percent of the annual amount determined under paragraph (2) for such fiscal year for carrying out the purpose described in section 1651.
Annual amount.--The annual amount determined under this paragraph is equal to-- ``(A) in fiscal year 1997, 100 percent of the amounts received by the State in fiscal year 1994, or 100 percent of the average of amounts received by the State in fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994, whichever is greater, under part A of this title with respect to persons who are disabled or blind indivudals, other than individuals who have attained age 65 (as in effect in fiscal year 1994, or if applicable, in fiscal years 1992, 1993, 1994), and ``(B) in each fiscal year thereafter, 100 percent of the amount received by the State in the preceding fiscal year under this part (as in effect in such preceding fiscal year).
Funding Requirements.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall make quarterly payments described in subsection (a)(1) directly to each State in accordance with section 6503 of title 31, United States Code.
Expenditure of Funds; Rainy Day Fund.--Amounts received by a State under this part for any fiscal year shall be expended by the State in such fiscal year or in the succeeding fiscal year; except for such amounts as the State deems necessary to set aside in a separate account to provide, without fiscal limitation, for unexpected levels of assistance as a result of events which cause an unexpected increase in the need for providing supplemental income for individuals who are disabled or blind (other than individuals who have attained the age 65).
Any amounts remaining in such segregated account after fiscal year 2000 shall be expended by a State for the purpose described in section 1651 of this part as in effect in fiscal year 2000.
Prohibition on Use of Funds.--Except as provided in subsection (e), a State to which a payment is made under this part may not use any part of such payment to provide medical services.
Authority To Use Portion of Grant for Other Purposes.-- ``(1) In general.--A State may use not more than 30 percent of the annual amount paid to the State under this part for a fiscal year to carry out a State program pursuant to any or all of the following provisions of law: ``(A) Part A of title IV of this Act.
Title XIX of this Act.
The Food Stamp Act.
Applicable rules.--Any amount paid to the State under this part that is used to carry out a State program pursuant to a provision of law specified in paragraph (1) shall not be subject to the requirements of this part, but shall be subject to the requirements that apply to Federal funds provided directly under the provision of law to carry out the program.
``administrative and fiscal accountability ``Sec.
Audits; Reimbursements.-- ``(1) Audits.-- ``(A) In general.--A State shall, not less than annually, audit the State expenditures from amounts received under this part.
Such audit shall-- ``(i) determine the extent to which such expenditures were or were not expended in accordance with this part; and ``(ii) be conducted by an approved entity (as defined in subparagraph (B)) in accordance with generally accepted auditing principles.
Approved entity.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `approved entity' means an entity that is-- ``(i) approved by the Secretary of the Treasury; ``(ii) approved by the chief executive officer of the State; and ``(iii) independent of any agency administering activities funded under this part.
Reimbursement.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 30 days following the completion of an audit under this subsection, a State shall submit a copy of the audit to the State legislature and to the Secretary of the Treasury.
Repayment.--Each State shall pay to the United States amounts ultimately found by the approved entity under paragraph (1)(A) not to have been expended in accordance with this part plus 10 percent of such amount as a penalty, or the Secretary of the Treasury may offset such amounts plus the 10 percent penalty against any other amount in any other year that the State may be entitled to receive under this part.
Additional Accounting Requirements.--The provisions of chapter 75 of title 31, United States Code, shall apply to the audit requirements of this section.
Reporting Requirements; Form, Contents.-- ``(1) Annual reports.--A State shall prepare comprehensive annual reports on the activities carried out with amounts received by a State under this part.
Content.--Reports prepared under this section-- ``(A) shall be for the most recently completed fiscal year; ``(B) shall be in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, including the provisions of chapter 75 of title 31, United States Code; ``(C) shall include the results of the most recent audit conducted in accordance with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section; and ``(D) shall be in such form and contain such other information as the State deems necessary-- ``(i) to provide an accurate description of such activities; and ``(ii) to secure a complete record of the purposes for which amounts were expended in accordance with this part.
Copies.--A State shall make copies of the reports required under this section available for public inspection within the State.
Copies also shall be provided upon request to any interested public agency, and each such agency may provide its views on such reports to the Congress.
Administrative Supervision-- ``(1) Role of the secretary of the treasury.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall supervise the amounts received under this part in accordance with subparagraph (B).
Limited supervision--The supervision by the Secretary of the Treasury shall be limited to-- ``(i) making quarterly payments to the States in accordance with section 1652(b); ``(ii) approving the entities referred to in subsection (a)(1)(B); and ``(iii) withholding payment to a State based on the findings of such an entity in accordance with subsection (a)(2)(B).
Other federal supervision.--No administrative officer or agency of the United States, other than the Secretary of the Treasury and, as provided for in section 1654, the Attorney General, shall supervise the amounts received by the States under this part or the use of such amounts by the States.
Limited Federal Oversight.--With the exception of the Department of the Treasury as provided for in this section and section 1654 of this part, no Federal department or agency may promulgate regulations or issue rules regarding the purpose of this part.
No Discrimination Against Individuals.--No individual shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with amounts received under this part on the basis of such individual's-- ``(1) disability under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794); ``(2) sex under title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 United States Code 1681 et sequentes); or ``(3) race, color, or national origin under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000d et sequentes).
Compliance.--If the Secretary of the Treasury determines that a State, or an entity that has received funds from amounts received by the State under this part, has failed to comply with a provision of law referred to in subsection (a), except as provided for in section 1655 of this part, the Secretary of the Treasury shall notify the chief executive officer of the State and shall request the officer to secure compliance with such provision of law.
If, not later than 60 days after receiving such notification, the chief executive officer fails or refuses to secure compliance, the Secretary of the Treasury may-- ``(1) refer the matter to the Attorney General with a recommendation that an appropriate civil action be instituted; ``(2) exercise the powers and functions provided under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000d et seq.
), title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 United States Code 1681 et sequentes); or section 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794a), (as applicable); or ``(3) take such other action as may be provided by law.
Authority of Attorney General; Civil Actions.--When a matter is referred to the Attorney General pursuant to subsection (b)(1), or if the Attorney General has reason to believe that an entity is engaged in a pattern or practice in violation of a provision of law referred to in subsection (a), the Attorney General may bring a civil action in an appropriate district court of the United States for such relief as may be appropriate, including injunctive relief.
``nondiscrimination and institutional protections for religious providers ``Sec.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to allow the participation of religious organizations as providers of assistance to disabled or blind individuals funded under this part without impairing or diminishing the religious character or freedom of such organizations.
Nondiscrimination.--Religious organizations shall be eligible as providers of assistance to disabled or blind individuals as provided for under this part.
Neither the Federal Government nor a State receiving funds under this part shall discriminate against an organization which is or applies to be a provider of assistance on the basis that the organization has a religious mission or purpose.
Religious Character and Freedom.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any religious organization participating as a provider of assistance funded under this part shall retain its independence from Federal, State, and local governments, including such organization's control over the definition, development, practice, and expression of its religious beliefs.
Such an organization may select, employ, promote, discipline, and dismiss its clerics and other ecclesiastics, directors, officers, employees, and volunteers on the basis of religion, a religious belief, or a religious practice.
However, a religious organization shall not deny disabled or blind individuals the benefits of any assistance funded under this part on the basis of religion, a religious belief, or refusal to participate in a religious practice.
Additional safeguards.--Neither the Federal Government nor a State shall require a religious provider of assistance to-- ``(A) alter its form of internal governance, or form a separate, nonprofit corporation to receive and administer assistance funded under this part; or ``(B) alter real estate or facilities used to provide such assistance, including but not limited to the removal of religious art, icons, scripture, or other symbols; in order to be eligible to be a provider of assistance under this part.
Fiscal accountability.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any religious organization providing assistance funded under this part shall be subject to the same regulations as other providers to account in accord with generally accepted auditing principles for the use of such funds provided under this part.
Limited audit.--Religious organizations may segregate Federal funds provided under this part into separate accounts, and then only the financial assistance provided with those funds shall be subject to audit.
Compliance.--A religious organization which has its rights under this section violated may enforce its claim by asserting a civil action for such relief as may be appropriate, including injunctive relief or damages, in an appropriate district court of the United States against the entity or agency that commits such violation.
Rights of Beneficiaries of Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--If a beneficiary has a bona fide objection to the religious character of the organization or institution from which the beneficiary is receiving assistance funded under this part, each State shall provide such beneficiary a certificate, redeemable with any other provider of assistance funded under this part, for services the value of which is no less than the value of the funding received by the religious provider from a State to provide assistance funded under this part for such individual.
Prohibition on providing cash in exchange for certificates.--No provider of assistance funded under this part shall provide a beneficiary a cash amount in exchange for a certificate provided for under paragraph (1).''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1602 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1381a) is amended by striking ``Every'' and inserting ``(a) Every'' and by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) No person who is a disabled or blind individual (other than a person who has attained age 65) shall be an eligible individual or eligible spouse for purposes of this part with respect to any month beginning after September 30, 1996, but shall be eligible for services to the disabled or blind funded under part C of this title.''.
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE BUDGET ACT.
The Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 900 et sequentes) is amended in section 255(h) (2 United States Code 905(h), by striking ``Supplemental Security Income Program (75-0406-0-1-609); and'' and inserting ``Supplemental Security Income Program and block grants to States for supplemental security income for disabled individuals; and''.
The amendments and repeals made by this Act shall take effect on October 1, 1996.