That this Act may be cited as the ``Reform of Federal Intervention in State Proceedings Act of 1993''.
Section 2244 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections: ``(d) When a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of a State court fails to raise a claim in State proceedings at the time or in the manner required by State rules of procedure, the claim shall not be entertained in an application for a writ of habeas corpus unless actual prejudice resulted to the applicant from the alleged denial of the Federal right asserted and-- ``(1) the failure to raise the claim properly or to have it heard in State proceedings was the result of State action in violation of the Constitution or laws of the Unites States; ``(2) the Federal right asserted was newly recognized by the Supreme Court subsequent to the procedural default and is retroactively applicable; or ``(3) the factual predicate of the claim could not have been discovered through the exercise of reasonable diligence prior to the procedural default.
A one-year period of limitation shall apply to an application for a writ of habeas corpus by a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of a State court.
The limitation period shall run from the latest of the following times: ``(1) the time at which State remedies are exhausted; ``(2) the time at which the impediment to filing an application created by State action in violation of the Constitution or laws of the Untied States is removed, where the applicant was prevented from filing by such State action; ``(3) the time at which the Federal right asserted was initially recognized by the Supreme Court, where the right has been newly recognized by the Court and is retroactively applicable; or ``(4) the time at which the factual predicate of the claim or claims presented could have been discovered through the exercise of reasonable diligence.''.
Section 2253 of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Appeal ``In a habeas corpus proceeding or a proceeding under section 2255 of this title before a circuit or district judge, the final order shall be subject to review, on appeal, by the court of appeals for the circuit where the proceeding is had.
``There shall be no right of appeal from such an order in a proceeding to test the validity of a warrant to remove, to another district or place for commitment or trial, a person charged with a criminal offense against the United States, or to test the validity of his detention pending removal proceedings.
``An appeal may not be taken to the court of appeals from the final order in a habeas corpus proceeding where the detention complained of arises out of process issued by a State court, or from the final order in a proceeding under section 2255 of this title, unless a circuit justice or judge issues a certificate of probable cause.''.
Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 22 is amended to read as follows: Rule 22 ``habeas corpus and Sec.
2255 proceedings ``(a) Application for an Original Writ of Habeas Corpus.
An application for a writ of habeas corpus shall be made to the appropriate district court.
If application is made to a circuit judge, the application will ordinarily be transferred to the appropriate district court.
If an application is made to or transferred to the district court and denied, renewal of the application before a circuit judge is not favored; the proper remedy is by appeal to the court of appeals from the order of the district court denying the writ.
Necessity of Certificate of Probable Cause for Appeal.
In a habeas corpus proceeding in which the detention complained of arises out of process issued by a State court, and in a motion proceeding pursuant to section 2255 of title 28, United States Code, an appeal by the applicant or movant may not proceed unless a circuit judge issues a certificate or probable cause.
If a request for a certificate of probable cause is addressed to the court of appeals, it shall be deemed addressed to the judges thereof and shall be considered by a circuit judge or judges as the court deems appropriate.
If no express request for a certificate is filed, the notice of appeal shall be deemed to constitute a request addressed to the judges of the court of appeals.
If an appeal is taken by a State or the government or its representative, a certificate of probable cause is not required.''.
Section 2254 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by redesignating subsections ``(e)'' and ``(f)'' as subsections ``(f)'' and ``(g)'', respectively, and is further amended-- (a) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows: ``(b) An application for a writ of habeas corpus in behalf of a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of a State court shall not be granted unless it appears that the applicant has exhausted the remedies available in the courts of the State, or that there is either an absence of available State corrective process or the existence of circumstances rendering such process ineffective to protect the rights of the applicant.
An application may be denied on the merits notwithstanding the failure of the applicant to exhaust the remedies available in the courts of the States.
''; (b) by redesignating subsection ``(d)'' as subsection ``(e)'', and amending it to read as follows: ``(e) In a proceeding instituted by an application for a writ of habeas corpus by a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of a State court, a full and fair determination of a factual issue made in the case by a State court shall be presumed to be correct.
The applicant shall have the burden of rebutting this presumption by clear and convincing evidence.
''; and (c) by adding a new subsection (d) reading as follows: ``(d) An application for a writ of habeas corpus in behalf of a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of a State court shall not be granted with respect to any claim that has been fully and fairly adjudicated in State proceedings.''.
Section 2255 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by deleting the second paragraph and the penultimate paragraph thereof, and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs: ``When a person fails to raise a claim at the time or in the manner required by Federal rules of procedure, the claim shall not be entertained in a motion under this section unless actual prejudice resulted to the movant from the alleged denial of the right asserted and-- ``(1) the failure to raise the claim properly, or to have it heard, was the result of governmental action in violation of the Constitution or laws of the Unites States; ``(2) the right asserted was newly recognized by the Supreme Court subsequent to the procedural default and is retroactively applicable; or ``(3) the factual predicate of the claim could not have been discovered through the exercise of reasonable diligence prior to the procedural default.
``A two-year period of limitation shall apply to a motion under this section.
The limitation period shall run from the latest of the following times; ``(1) the time at which the judgment of conviction becomes final; ``(2) the time at which the impediment to making a motion created by governmental action in violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States is removed, where the movant was prevented from making a motion by such governmental action; ``(3) the time at which the right asserted was initially recognized by the Supreme Court, where the right has been newly recognized by the Court and is retroactively applicable; or ``(4) the time at which the factual predicate of the claim or claims presented could have been discovered through the exercise of reasonable diligence.