This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Crop Insurance Fairness Act''.
LEVELS OF COVERAGE IN EXCESS OF 75 PERCENT OF RECORDED OR APPRAISED AVERAGE YIELD.
Subsection (a) of section 508 of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1508(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Authority to Offer Insurance.-- ``(1) In general.--If sufficient actuarial data are available, as determined by the Board, the Corporation may insure producers of agricultural commodities grown in the United States under any plan or plans of insurance determined by the Board to be adapted to the agricultural commodity involved.
Causes.--The insurance shall be against loss of the insured commodity due to unavoidable causes, including drought, flood, hail, wind, frost, winterkill, lightning, fire, excessive rain, snow, wildlife, hurricane, tornado, insect infestation, plant disease, and such other unavoidable causes as may be determined by the Board.
Period.-- ``(A) In general.--Except in the case of tobacco, insurance shall not extend beyond the period the insured commodity is in the field.
Definition of field.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), in the case of aquacultural species, the term `field' means the environment in which the commodity is produced.
Standard yield coverage.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), any insurance offered against loss in yield shall make available to producers protection against loss in yield that covers 75 percent of the recorded or appraised average yield of the commodity on the insured farm for a representative period.
Adjustments.--Average yields established under subparagraph (A) shall be subject to such adjustments as the Board may prescribe to the end that the average yields fixed for farms in the same area, that are subject to the same conditions, may be fair and just.
Lesser yield coverage.--In addition, the Corporation shall make available to producers lesser levels of yield coverage, including a level of coverage at 50 percent of the recorded or appraised average yield, as adjusted.
Adjusted yields.--In the case of any commodity for which the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service has established for the farming unit involved an adjusted yield for the purposes of programs administered by the Service (or a yield for crop insurance purposes under this title), if the yield is greater than the recorded or the appraised yield, as established by the Corporation, of a commodity on the farming unit, insurance coverage may be provided to cover against the loss in yield of the commodity on the basis of the adjusted yield for the commodity established by the Service rather than the recorded or appraised yield as established by the Corporation.
Additional premiums.--Additional insurance under this subsection shall be provided for an additional premium (for which no premium subsidy or administrative subsidy may be provided) set at such rate as the Board determines-- ``(A) appropriate to reflect accurately the increased risk involved; and ``(B) actuarially sufficient to-- ``(i) cover claims for losses on the insurance; and ``(ii) establish a reasonable reserve against unforeseen losses.
Levels of coverage in excess of 75 percent of recorded or appraised average yield.--The Corporation may make available to producers on a farm located in a growing area a level of coverage in excess of 75 percent of the recorded or appraised average yield, as adjusted, if the Corporation determines that normal variations in yield in the growing area have not resulted in the payment of claims for losses while the level of coverage is limited to 75 percent.
Maximum level of coverage.--Except as provided in paragraphs (6) through (8), the Corporation may not make available to producers any level of coverage in excess of 75 percent of the recorded or appraised average yield, as adjusted.
Projected market price option.--One of the price elections offered shall approximate (but be not less than 90 percent of) the projected market price for the commodity involved, as determined by the Board.
Uninsured losses.--Insurance provided under this subsection shall not cover losses due to-- ``(A) the neglect or malfeasance of the producer; ``(B) the failure of the producer to reseed to the same crop in areas and under circumstances where it is customary to so reseed; or ``(C) the failure of the producer to follow established good farming practices.
Insurance risks.--The Board may limit or refuse insurance in any county or area, or on any farm, on the basis of the insurance risk involved.
Agricultural income in counties.--Insurance shall not be provided on any agricultural commodity in any county in which the Board determines that the income from the commodity constitutes an unimportant part of the total agricultural income of the county, except that insurance may be provided for producers on farms situated in a local producing area bordering on a county with a crop-insurance program.
Annual reports.--The Corporation shall report annually to Congress the results of the operations of the Corporation as to each commodity insured.
Project market price level.--Beginning with the 1992 crop year, the Corporation shall establish a price level for each commodity on which insurance is offered that shall not be less than the projected market price for the commodity, as determined by the Board.
Price election.--Insurance coverage shall be made available to a producer on the basis of any price election that equals or is less than that established by the Board.
The coverage shall be quoted in terms of dollars per acre.''.
Section 508 of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1508) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(n) Late Planting Coverage.-- ``(1) In general.--Producers on a farm entering into a crop insurance contract under this Act shall be offered late planting coverage that would permit planting after the final planting date for a commodity by up to 25 days for coverage under the contract.
Reduction of coverage.--If the producers on a farm purchase late planting coverage under paragraph (1), the yield guarantee shall be reduced by-- ``(A) 1 percent per day for each of the 1st through 10th days planting is delayed beyond the normal final planting date; ``(B) 2 percent per day for each of the 11th through 25th days planting is delayed beyond the normal final planting date; and ``(C) such other amounts as can be demonstrated to offset the additional insurer risk of providing the coverage.
Presumption of coverage.--The producers on a farm shall have late planting coverage as part of a basic policy of insurance under this Act unless the producers notify the Corporation that the producers waive late planting coverage.
Raises in premiums.--If the Corporation determines that late planting coverage would raise premiums to such an extent as to discourage participation in the program established by this Act, the Corporation shall offer late planting as a separate endorsement.''.
Section 508 of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1508) (as amended by section 3 of this Act) is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(o) Prevented Planting Coverage.-- ``(1) In general.--Producers on a farm entering into a crop insurance contract under this Act shall have prevented planting coverage as part of the basic policy of insurance under this Act.
Coverage.--If the producers on a farm are prevented from planting a crop of a covered commodity as the result of excess moisture, drought, or other natural disaster, the producers shall be eligible for coverage equal to 50 percent of the guaranteed level of coverage for the crop.
Substitute crop.--The producers on a farm shall have the option of planting a substitute crop, in lieu of an insured crop, as part of the basic policy of insurance under this Act.
The value of the substitute crop shall offset the remaining guaranteed level of coverage for the insured crop.
Presumption of coverage.--The producers on a farm shall have prevented planting coverage as part of a basic policy of insurance made available under this Act unless the producers notify the Corporation that the producers waive prevented planting coverage.
Raises in premiums.--If the Corporation determines that prevented planting coverage would raise premiums to such an extent as to discourage participation in the program established by this Act, the Corporation shall offer prevented planting as a separate endorsement.''.
ELIMINATION OF PENALTY FOR DE MINIMIS YIELDS.
Section 508 of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1508) (as amended by section 4 of this Act) is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(p) De Minimis Yields.--The Corporation shall, to the extent practicable, establish a procedure under which a producer of an insured crop that has suffered a disaster loss shall not have deducted from the indemnity payment attributable to the loss any amount for actual production of the crop if the estimated market value of the actual production is less than the cost to the producer of harvesting the production.''.
Section 508A(b) of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1508a(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Yield averages.-- ``(A) In general.--Yield coverage under this section shall be based on the average of a producer's actual proven crop yields for a commodity over no less than 4 crop years and no more than 10 crop years, as determined under this paragraph.
Establishing a minimum level of insurance protection.--The Corporation shall establish a minimum level of insurance protection for those covered producers who have had reduced yields due to natural disasters.
Use of transitional or actual yields.-- Transitional yield data may only be used to establish a yield for the producers on a farm to the extent the producers have not established actual production history for the first 4 crop years the producers operate the farm.
After producers establish actual production history for the first 4 crop years the producers operate the farm, yield coverage under this section shall be based only on the actual production history for the commodity for the farm.
Use of yields for previous crop years.--In the case of producers on a farm who operate a new parcel of land, for crop insurance purposes, the producers may elect to apply-- ``(i) the previous yield history for the land, if the Corporation determines the yield data to be actuarially sound; or ``(ii) transitional yield data to the parcel of land.
Nonstandard classification procedures.--The Corporation shall make adjustments in the Nonstandard Classification procedures established under subpart O of part 400 of chapter IV of subtitle B of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations, to account for producer yield declines due to recurrent natural disasters.
Definition of transitional yield.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `transitional yield' means the countywide average used by the Corporation to establish a yield for the producers on a farm if there are no actual production records available for the producers.