This Act may be cited as the ``Campaign Finance Reform Commission Act of 1996''.
Establishment.--There is established a Commission to be known as the ``Federal Election Law Reform Commission'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Appointments.--The Commission shall be comprised of 8 qualified members, who shall be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act as follows: (A) Appointments by majority leader and speaker.-- The Majority Leader of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall jointly appoint to the Commission-- (i) 1 member who is a retired Federal judge as of the date on which the appointment is made; (ii) 1 member who is a former Member of Congress as of the date on which the appointment is made; and (iii) 1 member who is from the academic community.
Appointments by minority leaders.--The Minority Leader of the Senate and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives shall jointly appoint to the Commission-- (i) 1 member who is a retired Federal judge as of the date on which the appointment is made; and (ii) 1 member who is a former Member of Congress as of the date on which the appointment is made.
Appointment by president.--The President shall appoint to the Commission 1 member who is from the academic community.
Appointments by commission members.--The members appointed under subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) shall jointly appoint 2 members to the Commission, neither of whom shall have held any elected or appointed public or political party office, including any position with an election campaign for Federal office, during the 10 years preceding the date on which the appointment is made.
Qualifications.-- (A) In general.--A person shall not be qualified for an appointment under this subsection if that person, during the 10-year period preceding the date on which the appointment is made-- (i) held a position under schedule C of subpart C of part 213 of title 5 of the Code of Federal Regulations; (ii) was an employee of the legislative branch of the Federal Government, not including any service as a Member of Congress; or (iii) was required to register under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 (2 United States Code 1601 et sequentes) or derived a significant income from influencing, or attempting to influence, members or employees of the executive or legislative branches of the Federal Government.
Party affiliations.--Not more than 3 members of the Commission shall be members of, or associated with, the same political party (as that term is defined in section 301(16) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(16)).
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The members of the Commission shall designate a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the membership of the Commission.
The chairperson shall be from a political party other than the political party of the vice chairperson.
Financial disclosure.--Not later than 60 days after appointment to the Commission, each member of the Commission shall file with the Secretary of the Senate, the Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives, and the Federal Election Commission a report containing the information contained in section 102 of title 5, United States Code.
Period of appointment; vacancies.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Termination of commission.--The Commission shall terminate 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Powers.-- (1) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Information from federal agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Pay and Travel Expenses.-- (1) Members.--Each member of the Commission, other than the Chairperson, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson shall be paid for each day referred to in paragraph (1) at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.-- (1) Executive director.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director of the Commission, who shall be paid at the rate of basic payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Other personnel.--(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the executive director may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and fix the pay of such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The pay of any individual appointed under this paragraph shall be not more than the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Detail of federal employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) identify the appropriate goals and values for Federal campaign finance laws; (2) evaluate the extent to which the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) has promoted or hindered the attainment of the goals identified under paragraph (1); and (3) make recommendations to the Congress for the achievement of those goals, taking into consideration the impact of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
Considerations.--In making recommendations under subsection (a)(3), the Commission shall consider with respect to Federal election campaigns-- (1) whether campaign spending levels should be limited, and, if so, to what extent; (2) the role of interest groups and whether that role should be limited or regulated; (3) the role of other funding sources, including political parties, candidates, individuals from inside and outside the State in which the contribution is made; (4) public financing and benefits; and (5) problems in existing campaign finance law, such as soft money, bundling, and independent expenditures.
Report and Recommendations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the Congress-- (1) a report on the activities of the Commission; and (2) a draft of legislation (including technical and conforming provisions) recommended by the Commission to amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et seq.)
and any other law relating to elections for Federal office.
Rules of House of Representatives and Senate.--This section is enacted by the Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such it shall be considered as part of the rules of each House, respectively, or of that House to which it specifically applies, and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to such House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Definitions.--As used in this section, the term ``Federal election bill'' means only a bill of either House of the Congress which is introduced as provided in subsection (c) to carry out the recommendations of the Commission as set forth in the draft legislation referred to in section 5.
Introduction and Referral.--Not later than 3 days after the Commission submits its draft legislation under section 5, a Federal election bill shall be introduced (by request) in the House of Representatives by the Majority Leader of the House and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
Such bills shall be referred to the appropriate committees.
Amendments Prohibited.--No amendment to a Federal election bill shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate; and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in order in either House; nor shall it be in order in either House to entertain a request to suspend the application of this subsection by unanimous consent.
Period for Committee and Floor Consideration.--(1) If the committee of either House to which a Federal election bill has been referred has not reported it at the close of the 30th day after its introduction, such committee shall be automatically discharged from further consideration of the bill and it shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
If prior to the passage by one House of a Federal election bill of that House, that House receives the same Federal election bill from the other House, then-- (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no Federal election bill had been received from the other House; but (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the Federal election bill of the other House.
For purposes of paragraph (1), in computing a number of days in either House, there shall be excluded the days on which that House is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain or an adjournment of the Congress sine die.
Floor Consideration in the House.--(1) A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of a Federal election bill shall be highly privileged except that a motion to proceed to consider may only be made on the second legislative day after the calendar day on which the Member making the motion announces to the House his intention to do so.
The motion to proceed to consider is not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Consideration of a Federal election bill in the House of Representatives shall be in the House with debate limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill.
The previous question on the Federal election bill shall be considered as ordered to final passage without intervening motion.
It shall not be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which a Federal election bill is agreed to or disagreed to.
All appeals from the decisions of the Chairperson relating to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to a Federal election bill shall be decided without debate.
Floor Consideration in the Senate.--(1) A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of a Federal election bill shall be privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the Senate on a Federal election bill, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader or their designees.
Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection with a Federal election bill shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or a designee of the Minority Leader.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of a Federal election bill, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
A motion in the Senate to further limit debate is not debatable.
A motion to recommit a Federal election bill is not in order.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums as are necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission under this Act.