MORTGAGE INTEREST DEDUCTION FOR QUALIFIED NON-REDEEMABLE GROUND RENTS.
In General.--Section 163(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Ground Rents.--For purposes of this subtitle, any annual or periodic rental under a redeemable ground rent (excluding amounts in redemption thereof) or a qualified non-redeemable ground rent shall be treated as interest on an indebtedness secured by a mortgage.''
Treatment of Qualified Non-Redeemable Ground Rents.-- (1) In general.--Subsections (a), (b), and (d) of section 1055 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to redeemable ground rents) are amended by inserting ``or qualified non-redeemable'' after ``redeemable'' each place it appears.
Definition.--Section 1055 of such Code is amended by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e) and by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) Qualified Non-Redeemable Ground Rent.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term `qualified non-redeemable ground rent' means a ground rent with respect to which-- ``(1) there is a lease of land which is for a term in excess of 15 years, ``(2) no portion of any payment is allocable to the use of any property other than the land surface, ``(3) the lessor's interest in the land is primarily a security interest to protect the rental payments to which the lessor is entitled under the lease, and ``(4) the leased property must be used as the taxpayer's principal residence (within the meaning of section 1034).''
Conforming amendments.-- (A) The heading for section 1055 of such Code is amended by striking ``redeemable''.
The item relating to section 1055 in the table of sections for part IV of subchapter O of chapter 1 of subtitle A of such Code is amended by striking ``Redeemable ground'' and inserting ``Ground''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, with respect to taxable years ending after such date.
CREDIT FOR TRANSACTION COSTS ON THE TRANSFER OF LAND SUBJECT TO CERTAIN GROUND RENTS.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.)
is amended by inserting after section 30 the following new section: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR TRANSACTION COSTS.
Allowance of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--At the election of the taxpayer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the transaction costs relating to any sale or exchange of land subject to ground rents with respect to which immediately after and for at least 1 year prior to such sale or exchange-- ``(A) the transferee is the lessee who owns a dwelling unit on the land being transferred, and ``(B) the transferor is the lessor.
Credit allowed to both transferor and transferee.-- The credit allowed under paragraph (1) shall be allowed to both the transferor and the transferee.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Limitation per dwelling unit.--The amount of the credit allowed to a taxpayer under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the lesser of-- ``(A) $5,000 per dwelling unit, or ``(B) 10 percent of the sale price of the land.
Limitation based on taxable income.--The amount of the credit allowed to a taxpayer under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the sum of-- ``(A) 20 percent of the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and sections 27, 28, 29, and 30, plus ``(B) the alternative minimum tax imposed by section 55.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Transaction costs.-- ``(A) In General.--The term `transaction costs' means any expenditure directly associated with a transaction, the purpose of which is to convey to the lessee, by the lessor, land subject to ground rents.
Specific expenditures.--Such term includes closing costs, attorney fees, surveys and appraisals, and telephone, office, and travel expenses incurred in negotiations with respect to such transaction.
Lost rents not included.--Such term does not include lost rents due to the premature termination of an existing lease.
Dwelling unit.--A dwelling unit shall include any structure or portion of any structure which serves as the principal residence (within the meaning of section 1034) for the lessee.
Reduction in basis.--The basis of property acquired in a transaction to which this section applies shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowed under subsection (a).
Election.--This section shall apply to any taxpayer for the taxable year only if such taxpayer elects to have this section so apply.
Carryover of Credit.-- ``(1) Carryover period.--If the credit allowed to the taxpayer under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds the amount of the limitation imposed by subsection (b)(2) for such taxable year (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the `unused credit year'), such excess shall be a carryover to each of the 5 succeeding taxable years.
Amount carried to each year.-- ``(A) Entire amount carried to first year.--The entire amount of the unused credit for an unused credit year shall be carried to the earliest of the 5 taxable years to which (by reason of paragraph (1)) such credit may be carried.
Amount carried to other 4 years.--The amount of unused credit for the unused credit year shall be carried to each of the remaining 4 taxable years to the extent that such unused credit may not be taken into account for a prior taxable year because of the limitation imposed by subsection (b)(2).
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any transaction cost paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subpart B is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 30 the following new item: ``Sec.
Credit for transaction costs on the transfer of land subject to certain ground rents.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to expenditures paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.