AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH AND OPERATE MANAGED HEALTH-CARE PLANS.
In General.--Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1704 the following new section: ``Sec.
Establishment of managed health-care plans ``(a) In carrying out responsibilities under this title with respect to the delivery of health care, the Secretary may establish and operate managed health-care plans.
Any such plan shall be operated by or through a Department health-care facility or group of facilities and may include the provision of health services through other public or private entities under arrangements made between that Department facility or group of facilities and the other public or private entity concerned.
Any such managed health care plan under this section shall be established and operated in conformance with standards prescribed by the Secretary after consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The Secretary, as part of the standards prescribed under subsection (a), shall prescribe the minimum health care benefits to be provided under the plan to veterans enrolled in the plan.
Those benefits shall include at least those health benefits covered under parts A and B of the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
The Secretary may establish an enrollment system to enroll veterans (other than veterans described in section 1710(a)(1) of this title) in any plan established under subsection (a).
The Secretary, notwithstanding sections 1710(f) and 1712(f) of this title, may establish such cost-sharing requirements for veterans enrolled in a plan under this section as the Secretary considers appropriate to cover costs of providing benefits under the plan that are not paid by the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
Such cost-sharing requirements may include an enrollment premium, copayment charges, and deductibles.
Payments received under subsection (d) and under section 1729A of this title with respect to care or services provided to a veteran enrolled in a health-care plan under this section shall be credited to the applicable Department medical appropriation and shall be used to pay for the costs of furnishing care and services under subsection (a).
The Secretary may not in any fiscal year operate a plan under subsection (a) at a Department facility unless the director of that facility has certified to the Under Secretary for Health that sufficient medical care funds have been allotted to that facility for that fiscal year to enable the director to provide needed hospital care and medical services authorized under this chapter to veterans described in section 1710(a)(1) of this title in the number that, in the judgment of the director, are likely to require that care and services from that facility during that fiscal year.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1704 the following new item: ``1705.
Establishment of managed health-care plans.''.
REQUIREMENT FOR PAYMENT FOR CERTAIN SERVICES PROVIDED BY DEPARTMENT FACILITIES.
In General.--Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1729 the following new section: ``Sec.
Medicare payment for certain veterans ``(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make payments during a year to a Department managed health care plan on behalf of veterans (other than veterans described in section 1710(a)(1) of this title) who are Medicare-eligible individuals and are enrolled in such plan during the year under similar terms as the Secretary makes payments under title XVIII of the Social Security Act to other eligible managed care health plans.
(1) For purposes of subsection (a), a managed health care plan organized and operated under section 1705 of this title-- ``(A) which provides care to Medicare-eligible veterans (other than veterans described in section 1710(a)(1) of this title); and ``(B) for which there is a certification in effect under paragraph (2), shall be deemed to be a certified Medicare Choice organization under section 1857 of the Social Security Act.
The Secretary shall certify to the Secretary of Health and Human Services each year a list of all Department managed health care plans established under section 1705 of this title which the Secretary finds conform to the standards prescribed under such section.
For purposes of this section-- ``(1) the term `Medicare program' means the health insurance program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act; ``(2) the term `Medicare-eligible veteran' means a veteran who is entitled to benefits under the Medicare program; and ``(3) the term `Medicare Choice organization' means a managed health care organization under part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1729 the following new item: ``1729A.
Medicare payment for certain veterans.''.
Effective Date.--Section 1729A of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (b), shall apply with respect to care provided after the date of the enactment of this Act.