ESTABLISHMENT OF WORKFORCE SKILLS AND DEVELOPMENT LOAN PROGRAM.
In General.--Part B of title III of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1662 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
WORKFORCE SKILLS AND DEVELOPMENT LOAN PROGRAM.
Findings and Purposes.-- ``(1) Findings.--The Congress finds that-- ``(A) the changing nature of the workforce in the United States is forcing more and more workers to obtain skills upgrading to keep pace; ``(B) employees who receive formal skills upgrading enjoy earning advantages of 25 percent or more over those with no such upgrading; ``(C) the return on investment from formal training through increased productivity is equivalent to 3 times the cost of such training; ``(D) approximately 40 percent of business executives say they cannot modernize their equipment due to worker skill deficiencies; ``(E) companies cite the lack of funds as a major reason for failure to establish and carry out workforce skills upgrading programs; ``(F) although the training of the workforce in the United States is a national concern of utmost importance, limited resources at the Federal level make it infeasible to effectively and efficiently address this concern alone; and ``(G) States, employers, and representatives of employees need to share the responsibility in providing skills upgrading for employees.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are-- ``(A) to encourage industry-based investment in human resource development that promotes the competitiveness of the Nation's industries through productivity and product quality enhancement; ``(B) to ensure secure jobs for those who successfully complete skills upgrading; and ``(C) to supplement, and not supplant, funds available through existing skills upgrading programs conducted by employers, employee representatives, and the government; and ``(D) to establish programs which will not replace, parallel, supplant, compete with, or duplicate in any way existing skills upgrading programs.
Authorization.-- ``(1) In general.--From amounts reserved under section 302(a)(2) for any fiscal year, the Secretary may use not less than 5 percent, but not more than 10 percent, of such amounts to provide grants to States to provide loans to eligible entities described in paragraph (2) to assist such entities in providing skills upgrading for non-managerial employees.
Eligible entities.--An eligible entity described in this paragraph is-- ``(A) an employer; ``(B) a representative of employees; ``(C) a business association; ``(D) a trade organization; or ``(E) a consortium consisting of-- ``(i) more than 1 of the entities described in subparagraphs (A) through (D); or ``(ii) an institution of higher education (as such term is defined in section 481 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1088) which continues to meet the eligibility and certification requirements under section 498 of such Act) and 1 or more of the entities described in subparagraphs (A) through (D).
Application.--The Secretary may provide a grant to a State under subsection (b) only if such State submits to the Secretary an application which contains such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Priority.--In providing grants under subsection (b), the Secretary shall give priority to States that have demonstrated the ability to expeditiously establish and carry out loan guarantee programs described in subsection (f).
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum annual grant amount.--The amount of a grant provided to a State under subsection (b) for any fiscal year shall not exceed $2,000,000.
Maximum total grant amount.--The total amount of grants provided to a State under subsection (b) shall not exceed $5,000,000.
Use of Amounts.--A State shall use amounts received from a grant under subsection (b) to establish a loan guarantee program to assist eligible entities described in subsection (b)(2) to provide skills upgrading for non-managerial employees.
In carrying out such program, the State shall meet the following requirements: ``(1) Establishment of reserve fund for loan guarantees.-- The State shall establish a reserve fund from amounts received from such grant for the purpose of making commitments to guarantee the payment of principal and interest on loans made by financial institutions to such eligible entities to provide skills upgrading for non-managerial employees.
Criteria for loan guarantees.--The State, in conjunction with appropriate financial institutions, shall establish and publish criteria for providing loan guarantees to eligible entities under the program, including criteria that provides for the following: ``(A) A loan guarantee may be issued under the program only if, at the time such guarantee is issued the eligible entity agrees to pay as an insurance premium an amount equal to 1 percent of the principal received by such entity under the loan to the State's reserve fund.
(i) Subject to clause (ii), the eligible entity will use amounts received from the loan to provide skills upgrading for mid- and lower- level employees, which may include (but is not limited to)-- ``(I) training in total quality management, statistical process control, production techniques, office automation, materials resource planning; and ``(II) training to improve basic skills, including reading, writing, and arithmatic.
In providing such skills upgrading, the eligible entity shall give priority to non-managerial employees who-- ``(I) directly produce or deliver goods or services; or ``(II) are in danger of being terminated or laid off as a result of modernization in the workplace, corporate downsizing, foreign or domestic competition, or Federal policies adversely affecting 1 or more industries.
Amounts from a loan shall not be used to pay the wages or other benefits of any employee receiving assistance under the program.
Payment by state to financial institutions in cases of default.-- ``(A) In general.--In accordance with criteria developed by the Secretary, the State shall make payments from the State's reserve fund to financial institutions that have provided loans to eligible entities that have defaulted on such loans for the purpose of reimbursing such institutions for the amount of principal and interest remaining unpaid to the institutions by reason of such default.
No full faith and credit of the united states.--Loans provided by financial institutions to eligible entities under loan guarantee programs under this section shall not be obligations of, or guaranteed in any respect by, the United States.
Limitations on loan guarantees.--The authority of a State to extend loan guarantees under this section shall not at any time exceed an amount equal to 1,000 percent of the aggregate principal amount in the State's reserve fund.
Interest from amounts in reserve fund.--Any interest earned from amounts in the State's reserve fund shall be credited to such fund.
Additional Amounts.--In addition to amounts received from a grant under subsection (b), the Governor of a State may use not more than 5 percent of the amount reserved under section 302(c) for a fiscal year to establish and carry out the loan guarantee program under subsection (f).
Federal and State Share.-- ``(1) Federal share.--The Federal share under this section may not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the program established under subsection (f) for any fiscal year.
State share.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the State share shall be provided from non-Federal sources and may be in cash or in-kind, fairly evaluated.
Exception.--The State share may include amounts reserved in accordance with subsection (g).''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Reservation of amounts.--Paragraph (1) of section 302(c) of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1652(c)(1)) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``program system; and'' and inserting ``program system;''; (B) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (E) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(F) establishing and carrying out the loan guarantee program under section 327(f).''.
Table of contents.--The table of contents of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 326 the following new item: ``Sec.
Workforce skills and development loan program.''.
INFORMATION RELATING TO SKILLS UPGRADING ACTIVITIES FOR CAPACITY BUILDING AND INFORMATION AND DISSEMINATION NETWORK.
Section 453(b)(2) of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1733(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (C)(ii)(V), by striking the period at the end of such subparagraph and inserting ``; and''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D)(i) collect and disseminate information-- ``(I) on successful programs to upgrade the skills of workers carried out pursuant to section 327; ``(II) on research and evaluation conducted concerning such programs; and ``(III) that will assist employers, representatives of employees, business associations, trade organizations, and consortia consisting of more than 1 of the preceding entities in designing and implementing the most effective skills upgrading methods available today; and ``(ii) facilitate communication and the exchange of information and ideas among States and the entities described in clause (i)(III) carrying out such skills upgrading pursuant to section 327.''.
AMENDMENT TO HIGHER EDUCATION ACT OF 1965.
Section 439(d)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For purposes of this section, loans made pursuant to section 327 of the Job Training Partnership Act may be considered to be student loans which are not insured or guaranteed as provided for in this subsection.