SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``All-Terrain Vehicle Standards and Compliance Act of 2007''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Adoption of ANSI ATV standard as a consumer product safety standard.
All-terrain vehicles to which standard applies.
ADOPTION OF ANSI ATV STANDARD AS A CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY STANDARD.
In General.--Within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Consumer Product Safety Commission shall promulgate a consumer product safety standard for all-terrain vehicles and publish the standard in the Federal Register.
The consumer product safety standard shall be the same as the American National Standards Institute/ Specialty Vehicle Institute of America's publication entitled ``Four Wheel All-Terrain Vehicles--Equipment, Configuration and Performance Requirements ANSI/SVIA 1-2001'', except that-- (1) the Commission shall modify the definition of an all- terrain vehicle in that standard by deleting any reference to a single rider and no passenger; (2) the standard shall clearly indicate that it is a consumer product safety standard promulgated by the Commission; and (3) the Commission may make any other necessary changes in format or style necessary to conform the standard to the format and style of other consumer product safety standards promulgated by the Commission.
Certain Provisions of Law Not Applicable to Initial Standard.-- Sections 7, 9, 11, and 30(d) of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2056, 2058, 2060, and 2079(d)) and section 553 of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to promulgation of the consumer product safety standard required by subsection (a).
ANSI Revisions.--If the American National Standards Institute modifies its all-terrain vehicle standard after the date on which the ATV standard is published in the Federal Register under section 2(a), it shall notify the Commission of the modification.
Commission Action.-- (1) In general.--Within 120 days after it receives notice of such a modification by the American National Standards Institute, the Commission shall-- (A) issue a notice of proposed rulemaking in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code, to amend the ATV standard to include any such modification that the Commission determines is reasonably related to the safe performance of all- terrain vehicles; and (B) notify the Institute of any provision it has determined not to be so related.
Deadline.--The Commission shall promulgate an amendment to the ATV standard under paragraph (1)(A) within 180 days after the date on which the notice of proposed rulemaking for the amendment is published in the Federal Register.
Unreasonable Risks of Injury.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Commission may amend the ATV standard to include any additional provision that the Commission determines is reasonably necessary to reduce unreasonable risks of injury associated with the performance of all-terrain vehicles.
Certain Provisions of CPSA Not Applicable.--Sections 7, 9, 11, and 30(d) of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2056, 2058, 2060, and 2079(d)) shall not apply to promulgation of any amendment of the ATV standard under subsection (b)(1)(A).
Judicial review of any amendment of the ATV standard under subsection (b)(1)(A) shall be in accordance with chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES TO WHICH STANDARD APPLIES.
In General.--The ATV standard shall apply to all-terrain vehicles manufactured in the United States, or imported for use in the United States, more than 150 days after the date on which the ATV standard is published in the Federal Register.
Compliant Models With Additional Features.--The ATV standard shall not be construed to prohibit a manufacturer or importer of an all-terrain vehicle that complies with the requirements of the consumer product safety standard from manufacturing or distributing any such all-terrain vehicle that incorporates characteristics or components that are not covered by the consumer product safety standard.
Any such characteristics or components shall be subject to the requirements of section 15 of the Act (15 United States Code 2064).
Action Plan Required.-- (1) In general.--Each manufacturer or importer of an all- terrain vehicle to which the ATV standard applies shall submit an action plan to the Commission for its approval.
Commission approval required.--If the Commission approves an action plan, it shall indicate its approval in writing.
The Commission may not unreasonably withhold approval of an action plan.
Existing action plans.--An action plan submitted to the Commission by a manufacturer or importer before the date of enactment of this Act is deemed to have been approved in writing by the Commission.
Compliance With Action Plan Required.-- (1) In general.--A manufacturer or importer of all-terrain vehicles may not distribute an all-terrain vehicle in commerce unless the manufacturer or importer has complied with its obligations under its action plan that has been approved by the Commission.
Requirements for 3-wheeled atvs.--Until a mandatory consumer product safety standard applicable to 3-wheeled all- terrain vehicles promulgated pursuant to this Act is in effect, new 3-wheeled all-terrain vehicles may not be imported into or distributed in commerce in the United States.
Enforcement.--Violation of paragraph (1) or (2) shall be considered to be a violation of section 19(a)(1) of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2068(a)(1)) and may also be enforced under section 17 of that Act (15 United States Code 2066).
Amendment of Action Plan.-- (1) In general.--A manufacturer or importer may amend an action plan approved by the Commission by notifying the Commission in writing of the proposed amendment not less than 60 days before the date on which the proposed amendment is to take effect.
Commission review.--Within 60 days after receiving notice of a proposed amendment, the Commission shall approve or disapprove the proposed amendment and notify the manufacturer or importer in writing of its action.
If the Commission does not notify the manufacturer or importer of its action within that 60-day period, the Commission is deemed to have approved the proposed amendment.
If the Commission disapproves the proposed amendment, the Commission shall include an explanation in writing of the reasons for the disapproval in the notification to the manufacturer or importer.
The approval or disapproval by the Commission of a proposed amendment shall constitute final agency action for purposes of judicial review under chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code.
Revocation of Approval; Release of Obligation.-- (1) Revocation.--If the Commission determines, after notice and the opportunity for a hearing, that a manufacturer or importer has failed to comply substantially with its obligations under its action plan, the Commission may revoke its approval of the action plan.
The revocation shall constitute final agency action for purposes of judicial review pursuant to chapter 7 of title 5, the United States Code.
Upon receipt of notice of a revocation of the action plan, the manufacturer or importer shall cease further distribution in commerce of any all-terrain vehicle subject to the ATV standard.
The revocation by the Commission of its approval of a manufacturer's or importer's action plan shall not preclude the manufacturer or importer from submitting another action plan under subsection (a)(1).
Release.--If the Commission determines that compliance by a manufacturer or importer with a specific requirement of its approved action plan is not necessary to promote all- terrain vehicle safety, it shall notify the manufacturer or importer in writing of its determination and release the manufacturer or importer from any obligation under this Act to comply with that requirement.
Pursuant to section 14 of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2063) each all-terrain vehicle to which the ATV standard applies shall bear a label that-- (1) is permanent and allows viewing without removing any part of the all-terrain vehicle; (2) certifies that the all-terrain vehicle complies with the consumer product safety standard and is subject to an action plan accepted by the Commission; (3) identifies the manufacturer, importer, or private labeler issuing the certification; and (4) contains sufficient information to enable the Commission to identify the particular action plan or letter of undertaking that applies to that all-terrain vehicle.
The Comptroller General shall conduct a study of the utility, recreational, and other benefits of all-terrain vehicles, and the costs associated with all-terrain vehicle related fatalities and injuries.
In this Act: (1) Action plan.-- (A) In general.--The term ``action plan'' means a written document submitted to the Commission by the manufacturer or importer of all-terrain vehicles that-- (i) describes actions the manufacturer or importer agrees to take to promote all-terrain vehicle safety, including rider training, dissemination of safety information, age recommendations, other policies governing marketing and sale of the vehicles, the monitoring of such sales, and other safety- related measures; and (ii) is substantially similar to the plans described under the heading The Undertakings of the Companies in the Consumer Product Safety Commission Notice published in the Federal Register on September 9, 1998 (63 FR 48199- 48204).
Letter of undertaking.--The term ``action plan'' includes a letter of undertaking that meets the requirements of subparagraph (A).
All-terrain vehicle.-- (A) In general.--The term ``all-terrain vehicle'' means a motorized off-highway vehicle designed to travel on 3 or 4 wheels that has-- (i) a seat designed to be straddled by the operator; and (ii) handlebars for steering control.
Exceptions.--The term does not include-- (i) a prototype of an all-terrain vehicle not available for sale; or (ii) an all-terrain vehicle designed and manufactured exclusively for research and development purposes and not available for sale.
ATV standard.--The term ``ATV standard'' means the consumer product safety standard promulgated under section 2(a) of this Act.
Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Consumer Product Safety Commission.