ADJUSTMENT OF STATUS FOR CERTAIN PERSIAN GULF EVACUEES.
In General.--The Attorney General shall adjust the status of each alien referred to in subsection (b) to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence if the alien-- (1) applies for such adjustment; (2) has been physically present in the United States for at least 1 year and is physically present in the United States on the date the application for such adjustment is filed; (3) is admissible to the United States as an immigrant, except as provided in subsection (c); and (4) pays a fee (determined by the Attorney General) for the processing of such application.
Aliens Eligible for Adjustment of Status.--The benefits provided in subsection (a) shall apply to the following aliens: (1) Waddah Al-Zireeni, Enas Al-Zireeni, and Anwaar Al- Zireeni.
Salah Abu-El-Jibat, Ghada Salameh, and Tareq Abu-El- Jibat.
Jehad Mustafa, Amal Mustafa, and Raed Mustafa.
Shaher M. Abed and Laila Abed.
Zaid Khan and Nadira Khan.
Rawhi Abu Tabanja, Basima Abu Tabanja, and Mohammed Abu Tabanja.
Reuben D'Silva, Anne D'Silva, Natasha D'Silva, and Agned D'Silva.
Ali H. Alkhaleel and Fatin A. Alkhaleel.
Abbas I. Bhikhapurwala, Nafisa Bhikhapurwala, and Tasnim Bhikhapurwala.
Fayez Ezzir, Abeer Ezzir, Sharif Ezzir, and Mohammed Ezzir.
Issam Musleh, Nadia Khader, and Duaa Musleh.
Ahmad Khalil, Mona Khalil, and Sally Khalil.
Husam Al-Khadrah and Kathleen Al-Khadrah.
Isam S. Naser and Samar I. Naser.
Feras Taha, Bernardina Lopez-Taha, and Yousef Taha.
Mahmoud M. El-Essa and Nadia El-Essa.
Mohammed Alawamleh, Zainab Abueljebain, and Nizar Alawamleh.
Yacoub Ibrahim and Wisam Ibrahim.
Tareq Shehadah and Inas Shehadah.
Basim Al-Ali and Nawal Al-Ali.
Hael Basheer Atari and Hana'a Al Mughrabi.
Fahim N. Mahmoud, Firnal A. Rizeq, Alla Mahmoud, and Ahmed Mahmoud.
Ahmad M. Mobaslat, Abeer Shehadeh, and Alaa Mobaslat.
Mohammed A. Shayib, Zahra M. Ajaoui, Najat El-Shayib, Rime El-Shayib, and Ramzi El-Shayib.
Awwad Al-Habli, Saosan Y. Dardas, Sara Al-Habli, Yasmin Al-Habli, Hala Al-Habli, and Ibraheem Al-Habli.
Maamoun Ahmad and Sanaa Hakkani.
Azmi A. Mukahal, Wafa Mukahal, Yasmin A. Mukahal, and Ahmad A. Mukahal.
Nabil El-Hawwash, Amal M. Shawish, and Ishaq El- Hawwash.
Sameeh Elsharif, Sahar Elsharif, and Sarah Elsharif.
Samir Ghalayini, Ismat Federal Reporter Abujaber, and Wasef Ghalayini.
Iman Mallah, Rana Mallah, and Muhanad Mallah.
Mohssen Mahmoud and Alia Al Rafie.
Nijad Abdelrahman, Najwa Abdalla, and Faisal Abdelrahman.
Nezam Mahdawi, Sohad Mahdawi, and Bassam Mahdawi.
Khalid S. Mahmoud and Fawzieh Mahmoud.
Wael Saymeh, Zatelhimma Al Sahafie, Duaa Saymeh, and Ahmad Saymeh.
Sesinando P. Suaverdez, Cynthia Suaverdez, Maria Cristina Suaverdez, and Sesinando Suaverdez II.
Thabet Said, Hanan Said, and Yasmin Said.
Hani Salem, Manal Salem, Tasnim Salem, and Suleiman Salem.
Ihsan Adwan, Hanan Adwan, Maha Adwan, Nada Adwan, Reem Adwan, and Lina Adwan.
Ziyad Al Ajjouri and Dima Al Ajjouri.
Mohamed Suleiman and Salam Suleiman.
Salwa S. Beshay, Alexan L. Basta, Rehan Lamai, and Sherif Lamai.
Latifeh Hussin, Sameer Hussin, Anas Hussin, Ahmed Hussin, Ayman Hussin, and Assma Hussin.
Fadia Shaat, Bader Shaat, Dalia Shaat, Abdul Azim Shaat, Farah Shaat, and Rawan Shaat.
Bassam Barqawi and Amal Barqawi.
Nizam I. Wattar and Mohamad El Wattar.
Wael Federal Reporter Shbib and Ektimal Shbib.
Reem Salman and Rasha Salman.
Khalil A. Awadalla and Eman K. Awadalla.
Nabil Alyadak, Majeda Sheta, Iman Alyadak, and Wafa Alyadak.
Mohammed Ariqat, Hitaf Ariqat, Ruba Ariqat, Rania Ariqat, and Reham Ariqat.
Hazem A. Al-Masri and Maha H. Al-Masri.
Tawfiq M. Al-taher and Rola T. Al-Taher.
Waiver of Certain Grounds for Inadmissibility.--The provisions of subsection (e) and paragraphs (4), (5), and (7)(A) of subsection (a) of section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act shall not apply to adjustment of status under this Act and the Attorney General may waive any other provision of section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (other than paragraph (2)(C) and subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), or (E) of paragraph (3)) with respect to such an adjustment for humanitarian purposes, to assure family unity, or when it is otherwise in the public interest.
Date of Approval.--Upon the approval of an application for adjustment of status under this section, the Attorney General shall create a record of the alien's admission as an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence as of the date of the alien's parole or other admission into the United States.
Offset in Number of Visas Available.--Upon each granting to an alien of the status of having been lawfully admitted for permanent residence under this section, the Secretary of State shall instruct the proper officer to reduce by 1, during the current or next following fiscal year, the total number of immigrant visas that are made available to natives of the country of the alien's birth under section 203(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act or, if applicable, the total number of immigrant visas that are made available to natives of the country of the alien's birth under section 202(e) of such Act.
Temporary Stay of Removal and Work Authorization.--The Attorney General-- (1) shall refrain from deporting or removing from the United States an alien who is eligible for adjustment of status under this section, but who is not yet lawfully admitted for permanent residence; and (2) shall authorize such an alien to engage in employment in the United States.