MEDICARE MEDICAL ADULT DAY CARE SERVICES DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 1895 the following new section: ``medical adult day care services demonstration program ``Sec.
Establishment.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section, the Secretary shall establish a demonstration program under which the Secretary shall reimburse a qualified provider of services for medical adult day care services furnished as part of a plan of care for home health services established for a medicare beneficiary if elected by the beneficiary.
Requirements applicable to eligibility for receipt of home health services shall apply for medical adult day care services, including requirements for the beneficiary to be homebound.
Demonstration Project Sites.--The program established under this section shall be conducted in States selected by the Secretary that license or certify providers of services that furnish medical adult day care services, and shall be conducted in no more than 5 such States.
Of the States selected by the Secretary, one shall include a State that has, as a percentage of its resident population, the 1 of the 5 highest percentages of medicare beneficiaries residing in the State.
Duration.--The Secretary shall conduct the demonstration program for a period of 4 and one half years.
Voluntary Participation.--Participation of medicare beneficiaries in the demonstration program shall be voluntary.
The total number of such beneficiaries that may participate in the project at any given time may not exceed 15,000.
Medicare beneficiaries with a secondary diagnosis or comorbidity of Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease shall be given preference in determining who may participate in the demonstration project.
Payment.--Payment to qualified providers of services for medical adult day care services furnished under the demonstration project shall be equal to 95 percent of the rate that would otherwise apply under section 1895 for home health services furnished.
Provisions Relating to Providers.-- ``(1) Limitation on number of providers and service areas.--Not more than 25 qualified providers of services may furnish medical adult day care services under the demonstration project, and not more than 17 such providers may have as its primary service area an urban area.
Qualified providers of services that are under common ownership or control of an organization that furnish medical adult day care services under the project shall all be treated, for purposes of the limitation of this paragraph, as a single qualified provider of services.
Preference to certain classes of providers.--In selecting qualified providers of services to furnish medical adult day care services under the demonstration program, the Secretary shall give preference to those providers that are home health agencies, as defined in section 1861(o), under common ownership or control of an organization that proposes to furnish medical adult day care services in a service area that encompasses more than one State.
Evaluation and Report.--The Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the clinical and cost effectiveness of the demonstration program under this section.
Not later 3 years after the commencement of the program, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the evaluation, and shall include in the report the following: ``(1) An analysis of the patient outcomes and costs of furnishing care to the medicare beneficiaries participating in the program as compared to such outcomes and costs to beneficiaries receiving only home health services for the same health conditions.
Such recommendations regarding the extension, expansion, or termination of the program as the Secretary determines appropriate.
In conducting the evaluation and analysis under this subsection, the Secretary shall utilize data collected through the OASIS system referred to in subsection (e), and may collect such supplemental data from qualified providers of services participating in the demonstration program as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Qualified provider of services.--The term `qualified provider of services' means, with respect to the furnishing of medical adult day care services-- ``(A) a public agency or private organization, or a subdivision of such an agency or organization, that-- ``(i) is engaged in providing skilled nursing services and other therapeutic services directly or under arrangement with a home health agency; ``(ii) meets such standards established by the Secretary to assure quality of care and such other requirements as the Secretary finds necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals who are furnished services in the facility; ``(iii) provides the medical adult day care services described in paragraph (2)(B); ``(iv) meets the requirements of paragraphs (2) through (8) of section 1861(o), but the Secretary may waive the requirement for a surety bond under paragraph (7) of such section in the same manner as is provided under such section; and ``(v) has been licensed or certified by a State to furnish medical adult day care services in the State for a continuous period of not less than 24 months; or ``(B) a home health agency (as defined in section 1861(o)), either directly or under arrangements with an agency or organization described in subparagraph (A) that has been licensed or certified by a State to furnish home health services in the State for a continuous period of not less than 24 months.
Medical adult day care services.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `medical adult day care services' means the items and services described in subparagraph (B) that are furnished to a medicare beneficiary by a qualified provider of services as a part of a plan under section 1861(m) that describes the home health service items and services that are to be furnished in the individual's residence and the medical adult day care items and services described in subparagraph (B) that are furnished by the qualified provider of services in a medical adult day care setting, as determined by the physician establishing the plan pursuant to a comprehensive patient assessment conducted by the qualified provider of services and approved by the physician.
Items described.--The items and services described in this subparagraph are the following: ``(i) Home health service items and services described in paragraphs (1) through (7) of section 1861(m).
Transportation of the individual to and from the qualified provider of services in connection with any such item or service.
A program of supervised activities (that meets such criteria as the Secretary determines appropriate) designed to promote physical and mental health that are furnished to the individual by the qualified provider of services in a group setting.
Medicare beneficiary.--The term `medicare beneficiary' means an individual entitled to benefits under part A of this title, enrolled under part B of this title, or both.