ESTABLISHMENT OF ETHICAL ADVISORY BOARD.
Part G of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 289 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 492 the following new section: ``certain provisions regarding review and approval of proposals for research ``Sec.
Review as Precondition to Research.-- ``(1) Protection of human research subjects.-- ``(A) In the case of any application submitted to the Secretary for financial assistance to conduct research, the Secretary may not approve or fund any application that is subject to review under section 491(a) by an Institutional Review Board unless the application has undergone review in accordance with such section and has been recommended for approval by a majority of the members of the Board conducting such review.
In the case of research that is subject to review under procedures established by the Secretary for the protection of human subjects in clinical research conducted by the National Institutes of Health, the Secretary may not authorize the conduct of the research unless the research has, pursuant to such procedures, been recommended for approval.
Peer review.--In the case of any application submitted to the Secretary for financial assistance to conduct research, the Secretary may not approve or fund any application that is subject to technical and scientific peer review under section 492(a) unless the application has undergone peer review in accordance with such section and has been recommended for approval by a majority of the members of the entity conducting such review.
Ethical Review of Research.-- ``(1) Establishment of a standing ethical advisory board.-- ``(A) Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in accordance with subpart B of part 46 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations, and with the recommendations of the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, shall establish a standing Ethical Advisory Board (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Board').
The Board shall advise, report on, and make recommendations to the Secretary and the Congress regarding the ethical, legal, and social acceptability of supporting specific biomedical and behavioral research designs, applications, or proposals submitted to it by the Secretary or any Agency Head within the Department, and shall prepare reports and make recommendations concerning ethical policies relating to biomedical and behavioral research referred to it by the Secretary, Agency Heads, or Congressional Committees.
With the approval of the Secretary, the Board may develop reports and make recommendations concerning other matters that it considers of major importance to the general public.
(i) The Board shall be composed of 15 individuals who are not officers or employees of the United States to be appointed as follows: ``(I) Five individuals shall be appointed by the President.
Five individuals shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives in consultation with the Minority Leader.
Five individuals shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate in consultation with the Minority Leader.
In appointing individuals under clause (i), the appointing authority shall ensure that such individuals possess special qualifications and competence to provide advice and recommendations regarding ethical matters in biomedical and behavioral research.
Of the members of the Board-- ``(I) at least one shall be an attorney; ``(II) at least one shall be a professional ethicist; ``(III) at least one shall be a practicing physician; ``(IV) at least one shall be a theologian; and ``(V) at least one-third, and no more than one-half, of all such members shall be scientists who have made significant contributions to the advancement of biomedical or behavioral science.
The terms of service of members of the Board shall be for 3 years.
The initial members of the Board shall be appointed to serve staggered terms of 1, 2 or 3 years.
If a member does not complete a full term of service, the individual appointed to fill the resulting vacancy shall be appointed for the remainder of the term of the predecessor of the individual.
A member may be reappointed to serve no more than two consecutive full terms.
A member of the Board shall be subject to removal from the Board by the Secretary for neglect of duty, malfeasance, or for other good cause as demonstrated by the Secretary.
The members of the Board shall select one member to serve as the chairperson of the Board.
The chairperson shall serve not more than one consecutive 3-year term.
In carrying out its responsibilities as described in subparagraph (B), the Board shall hold such inquiries, hold public hearings, enter into contracts the aggregate of which shall not exceed $300,000 per year, and report to the Secretary and to the Congress the results and recommendations that result from its deliberations.
With respect to information relevant to the duties described in subparagraph (B), the Board shall have access to all such information possessed by the Department of Health and Human Services, or available to the Secretary from other sources.
With respect to the duties described in subparagraph (B), the members of the Board shall receive compensation for each day they are engaged in carrying out the purposes of the Board, including time engaged in traveling for such purposes.
Such compensation may not be provided in an amount in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay accorded for individuals GS-18 of the General Schedule.
The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall provide the Board with staff and such other assistance necessary to carrying out the duties of the Board.
Prior to reconstituting the Board, the Secretary shall, through a statement published in the Federal Register, announce the intention of the Secretary to constitute the Board.
A statement issued under subparagraph (K) shall include a request that interested parties submit to the Secretary recommendations specifying the particular individuals who should be appointed to the Board.
The Secretary shall consider such recommendations in making appointments to the Board.
The appointments to the Board under subparagraph (C) shall not take effect until the expiration of the 30-day period beginning with the date on which the statement required in subparagraph (K) is made with respect to the Board.
Procedures regarding the withholding of funds.-- ``(A) If research has been recommended for approval for purposes of subsection (a), the Secretary may not withhold funding for the research on ethical grounds unless-- ``(i) the Secretary refers the proposal within 30 days to the Board in accordance with paragraph (1) to study the ethical implications of the research; and ``(ii)(I) the majority of the Board recommends that, on ethical grounds, the Secretary withhold funds for the research; or ``(II) the majority of the Board recommends that the Secretary not withhold funds for the research on ethical grounds, but the Secretary determines, on the basis of the report submitted under subparagraph (D) that there is a reasonable basis for overruling the Board's recommendations.
The limitation established in subparagraph (A) regarding the authority to withhold funds on ethical grounds shall apply without regard to whether the withholding such funds is characterized as a disapproval, a moratorium, a prohibition, or other description.
Not later than 180 days after the date on which the matter is referred under subparagraph (A) to the Board, the Board shall submit to the Secretary, and to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate, a report describing the findings of the Board regarding the project of research involved and making a recommendation under subparagraph (A)(ii) of whether the Secretary should or should not withhold funds for the project.
The report shall include the information considered in making the findings.