This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Performance Accountability Act''.
Submission of Report.--Not later than March 1, 1995, and not later than March 1 of each year thereafter, the District of Columbia shall develop and submit to the Committee on the District of Columbia of the House of Representatives, the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, the House Appropriations Subcommittee on the District of Columbia, and the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on the District of Columbia, a Performance Accountability Plan covering all departments, agencies, and programs of the government of the District of Columbia.
Contents of Plan.--Such plan shall state measurable, objective performance goals for all significant activities of the government of the District of Columbia, including activities funded in whole or in part by the District but performed in whole or in part by some other public or private entity.
Performance Measures.--For each activity covered by such plan, there shall be one or more measures of performance, covering both quantity and quality.
The performance measures may relate to program outputs and activity levels, but should also include measures of program outcomes and results.
Goals.--For each measure of performance there shall be stated two goals, one shall be designated as an acceptable level of performance, and the other shall be designated as a superior level of performance.
The plan shall also state the name, position, and immediate supervisor or superior of the District of Columbia management employee most directly responsible for the achievement of each performance measure goal.
Submission of Report.--Not later than March 1, 1996, and not later than March 1 of each year thereafter, the District of Columbia shall develop and submit to the House Committee on the District of Columbia, the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, the House Appropriations Subcommittee on the District of Columbia, and the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on the District of Columbia, a Performance Accountability Report covering all departments, agencies, and programs of the government of the District of Columbia.
Contents of Report.--Such report shall, for each performance measure stated in the previous fiscal year's Performance Accountability Plan, indicate the actual level of performance achieved compared to the stated goal for an acceptable level of performance and the goal for a superior level of performance.
The report shall also state the name, position, and the immediate supervisor or superior of the District of Columbia management employee most directly responsible for the achievement of each performance measure goal.
Personal Accountability.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any District of Columbia management employee who is designated in a Performance Accountability Report as being directly responsible for the achievement of one or more performance measurement goals-- (1) the majority of whose goals in such report do not achieve a designation of at least an acceptable level of performance, shall be either removed from employment by the District of Columbia or demoted to a nonmanagerial position; (2) all of whose goals in such report do not achieve a designation of at least an acceptable level of performance, shall not receive any increase in pay for the subsequent year, including but not limited to merit increases, cost-of-living adjustments, and promotions; and (3) the majority of whose goals in such report do not achieve a designation of at least a superior level of performance, shall not receive a promotion or performance bonus during the subsequent year.
Additional Performance Standards.--Notwithstanding the minimum performance standards specified in subsection (a), additional limitations and regulations may be applied to such promotions, performance bonuses, and increases in pay.
DEVELOPMENT OF PLANS AND REPORTS.
Consultation With GAO.--The District of Columbia shall develop, the Performance Accountability Plans that are submitted by March 1, 1995, and March 1, 1996, in consultation with the General Accounting Office and the Office of Management and Budget.
Conforming Regulations.--The District of Columbia shall, in consultation with the Office of Personnel Management and the General Accounting Office, and subject to the approval of the Office of Management and Budget, amend its management and personnel laws and regulations to be in conformance with the provisions of this Act.
Audit.--The General Accounting Office shall conduct a thorough audit of the Performance Accountability Reports of the District of Columbia that are submitted by March 1, 1996, and March 1, 1997, including an audit of the District's compliance with section 4 of this Act.