This Act may be cited as the ``Chemical Safety Information and Site Security Act of 1999''.
PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF ANALYSIS.
Definitions.-- (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Risk management plan.--The term ``risk management plan'' means a risk management plan submitted by an owner or operator of a stationary source pursuant to section 112(r)(7)(B) of the Clean Air Act.
Off-site consequence analysis information.--The term ``off-site consequence analysis information'' means those portions of a risk management plan, excluding the executive summary of such plan, consisting of an evaluation of one or more worst-case scenario or alternative scenario accidental releases of extremely hazardous substances listed pursuant to section 112(r)(3) of the Clean Air Act.
State.--The term ``State'' means a State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and Indian tribes as defined in section 102(2) of the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 United States Code 479a(2)).
Exemption From Freedom of Information Act.--Off-site consequence analysis information or information derived therefrom, shall not be made available under section 552 of title 5, United States Code.
Nothing in this section shall affect the obligation of the Administrator under section 112(r)(7)(B)(iii) of the Clean Air Act to make available off-site consequence analysis information, or information derived therefrom, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section.
Distribution of Off-Site Consequence Analysis Information.-- (1) No officer or employee of the United States shall make available in an electronic form off-site consequence analysis information except as provided in paragraphs (2), (6), and (7) of this subsection and subsection (e) of this section.
The Administrator may make available in an electronic form off-site consequence analysis information to a State or local government officer or employee only for official use.
(A) In response to any request for off-site consequence analysis information, including a request for risk management plans, the Administrator shall provide a copy of off-site consequence analysis information, but only in paper form.
The conditions under which it shall be made available, including, but not limited to, the maximum number of requests any single requester can make, and the maximum number of stationary sources for which off-site consequence analysis information may be made available in response to any single request, shall be determined by the Administrator in implementing guidance, pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section.
An officer or employee of the United States may not otherwise distribute off- site consequence analysis information in paper form, except as provided in paragraphs (4) and (6) of this subsection, and subsection (e) of this section.
Consistent with this paragraph, the Administrator shall promptly respond to off-site consequence analysis information requests.
The Administrator may levy a fee applicable to processing requests that recovers the Administrator's cost of processing such requests and reproducing such information in paper form.
At the request of a State or local government officer acting in his or her official capacity, the Administrator may provide to such officer in paper form, only for official use, the off-site consequence analysis information submitted for the stationary sources located in the State in which the State or local government officer serves.
Notwithstanding any provision of State or local law, and except as provided in subsection (e)(2) of this section, an officer or employee of a State or local government may make off-site consequence analysis information available only to the extent officers or employees of the United States would be permitted to make such information available, consistent with the guidance and any regulations issued pursuant to this section, except that a State or local government officer or employee may only make available such information that concerns stationary sources located in the State in which the officer or employee serves.
The Administrator shall ensure that every risk management plan submitted to the Environmental Protection Agency is available in paper or electronic form for public inspection, but not copying, during normal business hours, including in Government Printing Office depository libraries.
For purposes of this paragraph, the Administrator may make risk management plans available in electronic form only if the electronic form does not provide an electronic means of ranking stationary sources based on off-site consequence analysis information.
The Government Printing Office shall assist the Administrator in implementing this paragraph.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator and to the Government Printing Office such sums as may be necessary, to be available until expended, to carry out this paragraph.
After consulting with other appropriate Federal agencies, the Administrator may make off-site consequence analysis information available to the public in an electronic form that does not include information concerning the identity or the location of the stationary sources for which the information was submitted.
No other officer or employee of the United States, nor any officer or employee of a State or local government, may make off-site consequence analysis information available to the public in such form except as authorized by the Administrator.
Any officer or employee of the United States, or any officer or employee of a State or local government, who knowingly violates a restriction or prohibition established by this subsection shall be fined under section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.
The Administrator may collect and maintain records that reflect the identity of individuals and persons seeking access to information under this section only to the extent that such collection and maintenance is relevant and necessary to accomplish a legal purpose of the Environmental Protection Agency that is required to be accomplished by statute or by executive order of the President.
Any such records shall be subject to section 552a of title 5, United States Code.
An officer or employee of a State or local government may collect and maintain records identifying individuals and persons seeking access to information under this section only to the extent that such collection and maintenance is relevant and necessary to accomplish a legal purpose of their employing agency that is required to be accomplished by State statute.
Implementing Guidance and Additional Authorities.-- (1) Within 60 days of the enactment of this provision, the Administrator shall issue guidance setting forth procedures and methods for making off-site consequence analysis information available to the public consistent with the provisions of this section.
The Administrator shall consult with other appropriate Federal agencies in developing the guidance.
The Administrator may revise such guidance, as circumstances warrant, in consultation with the appropriate Federal agencies.
Guidance issued pursuant to this subsection, and any revision thereof, shall not be subject to judicial review.
The Administrator may issue regulations in place of such guidance to the extent the Administrator deems appropriate.
The Administrator is authorized to prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out the Administrator's functions under this section.
The Administrator may delegate to any officer or employee of the Environmental Protection Agency such of the Administrator's powers or duties under this section as the Administrator may deem necessary or expedient.
Regulations issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to judicial review to the same extent and in the same manner as regulations issued pursuant to section 112(r)(7) of the Clean Air Act.
Agents and Contractors.-- (1) An officer or employee of the United States may make off-site consequence analysis information available in any form to officers and employees of agents and contractors of a Federal Government office only for official use.
For purposes of this section, such officers and employees of agents and contractors shall be treated as officers and employees of the United States and shall be subject to the same restrictions and sanctions as apply to officers and employees of the United States under this section.
An officer or employee of a State or local government may make off-site consequence analysis information available in any form to officers and employees of agents and contractors of the State or local government only for official use.
For purposes of this section, such officers and employees of agents and contractors shall be treated as officers and employees of the State or local government and shall be subject to the same restrictions and sanctions as apply to officers and employees of the State or local government under this section.
Order Authority.--The Administrator may exercise the authority provided under section 112(r)(9) of the Clean Air Act to withhold, or prevent the release of, off-site consequence analysis information when the Administrator determines that release of such information may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to human health or welfare or the environment.
Separability of Provisions.--If any provision of this section is held invalid, the remainder of this section shall not be affected thereby.
SITE SECURITY STUDY AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Attorney General, utilizing available data to the extent possible and in consultation with appropriate governmental agencies, affected industry, and the public, may review current industry practices regarding site security and the effectiveness of this Act.
The Attorney General may periodically report to Congress regarding recommendations related to enhancing site security practices and the need for continued implementation or modification of this Act.