The Congress finds the following: (1) In 1978, the Judicial Conference of the United States established a procedure for creating new Federal judicial districts, which is still in force.
According to the ``Proceedings of the Judicial Conference, September 21-22, 1978'', this procedure requires that 4 principal criteria be taken into consideration in evaluating the establishment of a new Federal judicial district: caseload, judicial administration, geography, and community convenience.
The criterion of ``caseload'' is found to include the total number of Federal court cases and the number of cases per Federal judge, for both criminal and civil Federal cases.
The criterion of ``judicial administration'' is found to include the backlog of pending cases in a Federal judicial district, which hinders the effective resolution of pending business before the court.
The criterion of ``geography'' is found to mean the accessibility of the central administration of the Federal judicial district to officers of the court, parties with business before the court, and other citizens living within the Federal judicial district.
The criterion of ``community convenience'' is found to mean the extent to which creating a new Federal judicial district will allow the court to better serve the population and diverse communities of the area.
(A) The 13 southern counties of New Jersey, consisting of Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Hunterdon, Mercer, Monmouth, Ocean, Salem, Somerset, and Warren Counties, have a substantial criminal caseload which requires the creation of a separate judicial district.
352 Federal criminal cases originated in the 13 southern New Jersey counties in fiscal year 2002 and were handled principally by the 4 judges of the Camden vicinage and the 3 judges of the Trenton vicinage.
In fiscal year 2002, the criminal cases originating in the 13 southern New Jersey counties exceeded that of 32 of the current 93 Federal judicial districts other than the District of New Jersey.
Only 61 of the other current Federal judicial districts had more criminal cases than the southern region of New Jersey.
For example, in the Eastern District of Louisiana (12 judges), 304 criminal cases were filed in fiscal year 2002.
In the District of Connecticut (8 judges), only 251 criminal cases were filed in fiscal year 2002.
(A) The substantial civil caseload concentrated in the southern counties of New Jersey requires the creation of a separate judicial district.
Approximately 2,744 Federal civil cases originated in the 13 southern New Jersey counties in fiscal year 2002 and were handled principally by the 4 judges of the Camden vicinage and the 3 judges of the Trenton vicinage.
In the fiscal year 2002, the civil cases originating in the 13 southern New Jersey counties exceeded that of 61 of the current Federal judicial districts other than the District of New Jersey.
Only 32 of the other Federal judicial districts had more civil cases than the southern region of New Jersey.
For example, in the Western District of Tennessee (5 judges), 1,410 civil cases were filed in fiscal year 2002.
In the Southern District of West Virginia (5 judges), only 1,778 civil cases were filed in fiscal year 2002.
(A) The size of the backlog of pending cases concentrated in the 13 southern counties of New Jersey requires the creation of a separate judicial district.
In fiscal year 2002, the pending criminal cases attributed to the 13 southern New Jersey counties exceeded that of 58 of the current 93 Federal judicial districts other than the District of New Jersey.
Only 35 of the other current Federal judicial districts had more pending criminal cases than the southern region of New Jersey.
In fiscal year 2002, the pending civil cases attributed to the 13 southern New Jersey counties exceeded that of 72 of the current 93 Federal judicial districts other than the District of New Jersey.
Only 21 of the other current Federal judicial districts had more pending civil cases than the southern region of New Jersey.
The number of pending cases in the Camden vicinage of New Jersey exceeds the number of cases pending before entire judicial districts with similar numbers of judges, clearly indicating that southern New Jersey merits a separate Federal judicial district.
For example, as of October 1, 2002, there were 1,846 civil cases pending before the Camden vicinage.
The Western District of Tennessee, with 5 judges, had only 991 civil cases pending in fiscal year 2002.
The Western District of Oklahoma, with 6 judges, had only 1,400 civil cases pending during the same period.
Finally, there were 250 criminal cases pending before the Camden vicinage at the end of fiscal year 2002, while the entire Eastern District of Louisiana, with 12 judges, had only 191 criminal cases pending.
Also, the Western District of Pennsylvania, with 10 judges, had only 275 criminal cases pending at the end of fiscal year 2002.
(A) The distance between the northern and southern regions of New Jersey and the density of New Jersey's population create a substantial barrier to the efficient administration of justice.
The distance from Newark, New Jersey to Camden, New Jersey is more than 85 miles.
When a new Federal court district was created in Louisiana in 1971, the distance between New Orleans and Baton Rouge (nearly 80 miles) was cited as a major factor in creating a new district court, as travel difficulties were impeding the timely administration of justice.
(A) New Jersey's culturally and regionally diverse population of over 8,000,000 citizens, widely distributed across a densely populated State, is inconvenienced by having only 1 judicial district.
The District of New Jersey is the fourth most populous Federal judicial district in the United States.
The population of the 13 southern New Jersey counties exceeds the population of 69 of the current 93 Federal judicial districts other than the District of New Jersey.
The population of the 8 northern New Jersey counties (consisting of Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Middlesex, Morris, Passaic, Sussex, and Union) exceeds the population of 73 of the current 93 Federal judicial districts other than the District of New Jersey.
Of the 27 States and territories that have only a single Federal judicial district (including Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia), New Jersey has the highest population.
More than a dozen States have smaller populations than New Jersey, yet they have multiple Federal judicial districts, including Washington, Oklahoma, Iowa, West Virginia, and Missouri.
In evaluating the creation of a new Southern District of New Jersey, the Judicial Conference should seek the views of the chief judge of the affected district, the judicial council for the affected circuit court, and the affected United States Attorney as representative of the views of the Department of Justice, as required in the procedure established by the ``Proceedings of the Judicial Conference, September 21-22, 1978''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF 2 DISTRICTS IN NEW JERSEY.
Establishment.-- (1) Creation.--Section 110 of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
New Jersey ``New Jersey is divided into 2 judicial districts to be known as the Northern and Southern Districts of New Jersey.
``Northern District ``(a) The Northern District comprises the counties of Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Middlesex, Morris, Passaic, Sussex, and Union.
``Court for the Northern District shall be held at Newark.
``Southern District ``(b) The Southern District comprises the counties of Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Hunterdon, Mercer, Monmouth, Ocean, Salem, Somerset, and Warren.
``Court for the Southern District shall be held at Camden and Trenton.''.
Judgeships.--The item relating to New Jersey in the table set forth in section 133(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``New Jersey: ``Northern............................................. 10 ``Southern............................................. 7''.
Bankruptcy judgeships.--The item relating to New Jersey in the table set forth in section 152(a)(1) of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``New Jersey: ``Northern............................................. 4 ``Southern............................................. 4''.
District Judges, Bankruptcy Judges, Magistrate Judges, United States Attorney, United States Marshal, and Federal Public Defender.-- (1) Transfer of district judges.--(A) Any district judge of the District Court of New Jersey who is holding office on the day before the effective date of this Act and whose official duty station is in Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Middlesex, Morris, Passaic, Sussex, or Union County shall, on and after such effective date, be a district judge for the Northern District of New Jersey.
Any district judge of the District Court of New Jersey who is holding office on the day before the effective date of this Act and whose official duty station is in Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Hunterdon, Mercer, Monmouth, Ocean, Salem, Somerset, or Warren County shall, on and after such effective date, be a district judge of the Southern District of New Jersey.
Whenever a vacancy occurs in a judgeship in either judicial district of New Jersey, the vacancy shall first be offered to those judges appointed before the enactment of this Act and in active service in the other judicial district of New Jersey at the time of the vacancy, and of those judges wishing to fill the vacancy, the judge most senior in service shall fill that vacancy.
In such a case, the President shall appoint a judge to fill the vacancy resulting in the district of New Jersey from which such judge left office.
Transfer of bankruptcy and magistrate judges.--Any bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge of the District Court of New Jersey who is holding office on the day before the effective date of this Act and whose official duty station is in Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Middlesex, Morris, Passaic, Sussex, or Union County shall, on and after such effective date, be a bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge, as the case may be, for the Northern District of New Jersey.
Any bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge of the District Court of New Jersey who is holding office on the day before the effective date of this Act and whose official duty station is in Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Hunterdon, Mercer, Monmouth, Ocean, Salem, Somerset, or Warren County shall, on and after such effective date, be a bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge, as the case may be, of the Southern District of New Jersey.
United states attorney, united states marshal, and federal public defender.-- (A) Those in office.--This section and the amendments made by this section shall not affect the tenure of office of the United States attorney, the United States marshal, and the Federal Public Defender, for the District of New Jersey who are in office on the effective date of this Act, except that such individuals shall be the United States attorney, the United States marshal, and the Federal Public Defender, respectively, for the Northern District of New Jersey as of such effective date.
Appointments.--The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, a United States attorney and a United States marshal for the Southern District of New Jersey.
The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit shall appoint a Federal Public Defender for the Southern District of New Jersey.
Pending cases not affected.--This section and the amendments made by this section shall not affect any action commenced before the effective date of this Act and pending in the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey on such date.
Juries not affected.--This section and the amendments made by this section shall not affect the composition, or preclude the service, of any grand or petit jury summoned, empaneled, or actually serving in the Judicial District of New Jersey on the effective date of this Act.
In General.--This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Appointments.--Notwithstanding subsection (a)-- (1) the President may make the appointments under section 2(b)(3)(B), and (2) the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit may make the appointment under section 2(b)(3)(B), at any time after the date of the enactment of this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act, including such sums as may be necessary for facilities for the District Court for the Southern District of New Jersey.