This Act may be cited as the ``Checkoff for Charity Act of 1999''.
TITLE I--CHECKOFF FOR CHARITY SEC.
DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CHARITY.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CHARITY ``Sec.
In General.--In the case of an individual, with respect to each taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the tax imposed by chapter 1, such taxpayer may designate that-- ``(1) a specified portion (but not less than $1) of any overpayment of tax for such taxable year, and ``(2) any cash contribution which the taxpayer includes with such return, shall be paid to an eligible organization, or for such use as is otherwise provided, under title II of the Checkoff for Charity Act of 1999.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year only at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Overpayments Treated as Refunded.--For purposes of this title, any portion of an overpayment of tax designated under subsection (a) shall be treated as being refunded to the taxpayer as of the last date prescribed for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 (determined without regard to extensions) or, if later, the date the return is filed.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of overpayments and contributions for charity.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.
CHECKOFF FOR CHARITIES TRUST FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CHECKOFF FOR CHARITIES TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Checkoff for Charities Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the Checkoff for Charities Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfer to Checkoff for Charities Trust Fund of Amounts Designated.--There is hereby appropriated to the Checkoff for Charities Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6097 and received in the Treasury.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall pay, not less often than quarterly, to the Checkoff for Charities Commission from the Checkoff for Charities Trust Fund an amount equal to the amount in such Fund as of the time of such payment less any administrative expenses of the Secretary which may be paid under paragraph (2).
Amounts paid under this subsection shall be available only as provided in section 202 of the Checkoff for Charity Act of 1998.
Administrative expenses.--Amounts in the Checkoff for Charities Trust Fund shall be available to pay the administrative expenses of the Secretary of the Treasury directly allocable to-- ``(A) modifying the individual income tax return forms to carry out section 6097, ``(B) carrying out this chapter with respect to such Fund, and ``(C) processing amounts received under section 6097 and transferring such amounts to such Fund.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Checkoff for Charities Trust Fund.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--CHECKOFF FOR CHARITY COMMISSION SEC.
There is established in the Department of Commerce a commission to be known as the ``Checkoff for Charity Commission'' (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall make arrangements for voluntary charitable, health, and welfare agencies that provide or support direct health and welfare services to individuals or their families to solicit contributions through designations made on returns of individual income tax.
Such arrangements shall-- (1) to the extent practicable, be similar to arrangements made by the Office of Personnel Management with respect to the annual Combined Federal Campaign; and (2) be limited to the types of organizations specified in Executive Order 12353 (March 23, 1982), as amended by Executive Order 12404 (February 10, 1983).
Amounts Designated for Specific Organizations.--The Commission shall ensure that amounts designated on a return of tax for a specific organization are paid to that organization not later than 90 days after the date on which the Commission receives such designation.
Amounts Not Designated for Specific Organizations.-- (1) In general.--In the case of amounts designated as a contribution on a return of tax but not designated for a specific organization the Commission-- (A) may retain and use not more than one percent of such amounts to carry out this Act, and (B) from the excess of the aggregate of such amounts for a year over the amount retained under paragraph (1), shall determine which of the organizations eligible to receive designations for a year under subsection (a) will receive all or a portion of such contribution.
Criteria for selecting organizations.--In carrying out paragraph (1)(B), the Commission shall use the criteria set forth in Executive Order 12353 (March 23, 1982), as amended by Executive Order 12404 (February 10, 1983).
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members appointed by the President from individuals who are not officers or employees of any organization that receives funding pursuant to this Act.
Members on the Commission shall be broadly representative of the ethnic, religious, majority, and minority groups comprising the United States.
Waiver of Limitation on Executive Schedule Positions.-- Appointments may be made under this section without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than 8 members appointed may be of the same political party.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for a term of six years, except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3).
Terms of initial appointees.--As designated by the President at the time of appointment, of the members first appointed-- (A) five shall be appointed for terms of two years; (B) five shall be appointed for terms of four years; and (C) five shall be appointed for terms of six years.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members shall serve without pay.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--Eight members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairman; Vice Chairman.--The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be designated by the President at the time of the appointment.
The term of office of the Chairman shall be three years.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman or a majority of its members.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, have a Director who shall be appointed by Commission.
The Director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, and without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, the Director may appoint additional personnel as the Director considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and Consultants.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Director, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Chairman.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relating to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within the United States at any designated place of hearing within the United States.
Failure to obey a subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), the Commission may apply to a United States district court for an order requiring that person to appear before the Commission to give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the matter under investigation.
The application may be made within the judicial district where the hearing is conducted or where that person is found, resides, or transacts business.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as civil contempt.
Service of subpoenas.--The subpoenas of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Service of process.--All process of any court to which application is be made under paragraph (2) may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
Immunity.--Except as provided in this subsection, a person may not be excused from testifying or from producing evidence pursuant to a subpoena on the ground that the testimony or evidence required by the subpoena may tend to incriminate or subject that person to criminal prosecution.
A person, after having claimed the privilege against self- incrimination, may not be criminally prosecuted by reason of any transaction, matter, or thing about which that person is compelled to testify or relating to which that person is compelled to produce evidence, except that the person may be prosecuted for perjury committed during the testimony or made in the evidence.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for property and services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
The Commission shall transmit an annual report to the Secretary of Commerce and the Congress not later than December 31 of each year.
Each such report shall contain a detailed statement of activities of the Commission during the fiscal year ending in the year in which such report is required to be submitted.
There are authorized to be appropriated for each of the first two fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act such sums as may be necessary for startup costs for the Commission to carry out this Act.