This Act may be cited as the ``Sons and Daughters of Pearl Harbor Survivors Charter Act''.
CHARTER FOR SONS AND DAUGHTERS OF PEARL HARBOR SURVIVORS.
In General.--Part B of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 1703 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 1704--SONS AND DAUGHTERS OF PEARL HARBOR SURVIVORS ``170401.
Exclusive Right to Name, Seals, Emblems, and Badges.
Duty to Maintain Corporate and Tax-Exempt Status.
Liability for acts of officers and agents.
Organization ``(a) Federal Charter.--The Sons and Daughters of Pearl Harbor Survivors, a nonprofit corporation organized under the laws of the State of Florida, is a federally chartered corporation.
Expiration of Charter.--If the corporation does not comply with any provision of this chapter, the charter granted by subsection (a) expires.
Purposes ``The purposes of the corporation are fraternal, patriotic, historical, and educational as provided in its bylaws and articles of incorporation and shall include the following: ``(1) To preserve, teach, and promote true patriotism and loyalty to the United States of America.
To perpetuate the memory of the servicemen and servicewomen and the events pertaining to that Day of Infamy, 7 December 1941.
To assist in the preservation and encourage the study of documents and chronicles of service performed by the Pearl Harbor survivors and nonsurvivors.
To celebrate the anniversary of the bombing of Pearl Harbor, the island of Oahu, on 7 December 1941.
To unite and promote comradeship among descendants.
To encourage in all people an understanding of 7 December 1941, which will guard against future attacks on American soil.
Membership ``Eligibility for membership in the corporation, and the rights and privileges of the members of the corporation, are as provided in the bylaws of the corporation.
Governing body ``(a) Board of Directors.--The board of directors of the corporation and the responsibilities of the board are as provided in the bylaws and articles of incorporation of the corporation.
Officers.--The officers and the election of officers of the corporation are as provided in the bylaws and articles of incorporation of the corporation.
Powers ``The corporation has only the powers provided in its bylaws and articles of incorporation filed in each State in which it is incorporated.
Exclusive right to name, seals, emblems, and badges ``The corporation shall have the exclusive right to use the name `Sons and Daughters of Pearl Harbor Survivors' and any seals, emblems, and badges the corporation adopts.
Restrictions ``(a) Stock and Dividends.--The corporation may not issue stock or declare or pay a dividend.
Political Activities.--The corporation, or any director or officer of the corporation, acting as such director or officer, may not contribute to, support, or otherwise participate in any political activity or in any manner attempt to influence legislation.
Distribution of Income or Assets.--No part of the income or assets of the corporation may inure to the benefit of, or be distributed to, any director, officer, or employee of the corporation during the life of the charter granted by this chapter.
Nothing in this subsection may be construed to prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to the officers and employees of the corporation or the reimbursement of actual necessary expenses in the amounts approved by the board of directors of the corporation.
Loan.--The corporation may not make a loan to any director, officer, or employee of the corporation.
Claim of Government Approval or Authority.--The corporation may not claim the approval of Congress or the authorization of the United States Government for any of its activities.
Duty to maintain corporate and tax-exempt status ``(a) Corporate Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida.
Tax-Exempt Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Records and inspection ``(a) Records.--The corporation shall keep-- ``(1) correct and complete records of account; ``(2) minutes of the proceedings of its members, board of directors, and committees having any of the authority of its board of directors; and ``(3) at its principal office, a record of the names and addresses of its members entitled to vote, if any.
Inspection.--A member entitled to vote on matters relating to the corporation, or an agent or attorney of the member, may inspect the records of the corporation for any proper purpose, at any reasonable time.
Service of process ``The corporation shall comply with the law on service of process of the State of Florida and in each State in which it carries on activities.
Liability for acts of officers and agents ``The corporation is liable for the acts of its officers and agents acting within the scope of their authority.
Annual report ``The corporation shall submit to Congress an annual report on the activities of the corporation during the preceding fiscal year.
The report shall be submitted at the same time as the report of the audit required by section 10101 of this title.
The report may not be printed as a public document.
Definitions ``For the purposes of this chapter: ``(1) The term `corporation' means the Sons and Daughters of Pearl Harbor Survivors.
The term `State' includes the District of Columbia and the territories and possessions of the United States.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters at the beginning of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 1703 the following new item: ``1704.
Sons and Daughters of Pearl Harbor Survivors................................... ........................................1704 01.