PROGRAMS OF CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 317F the following section: ``prevention of traumatic brain injury ``Sec.
The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may carry out projects to reduce the incidence of traumatic brain injury.
Such projects may be carried out by the Secretary directly or through awards of grants or contracts to public or nonprofit private entities.
The Secretary may directly or through such awards provide technical assistance with respect to the planning, development, and operation of such projects.
Certain Activities.--Activities under subsection (a) may include-- ``(1) the conduct of research into identifying effective strategies for the prevention of traumatic brain injury; and ``(2) the implementation of public information and education programs for the prevention of such injury and for broadening the awareness of the public concerning the public health consequences of such injury.
Coordination of Activities.--The Secretary shall ensure that activities under this section are coordinated as appropriate with other agencies of the Public Health Service that carry out activities regarding traumatic brain injury.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `traumatic brain injury' means an acquired injury to the brain.
Such term does not include brain dysfunction caused by congenital or degenerative disorders, nor birth trauma, but may include brain injuries caused by anoxia due to near drowning.
The Secretary may revise the definition of such term as the Secretary determines necessary.''.
PROGRAMS OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.
Section 1261 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300d-61) is amended-- (1) in subsection (d)-- (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end; (B) in paragraph (3), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following paragraph: ``(4) the authority to make awards of grants or contracts to public or nonprofit private entities for the conduct of basic and applied research regarding traumatic brain injury, which research may include-- ``(A) the development of new methods and modalities for the more effective diagnosis, measurement of degree of injury, post-injury monitoring and prognostic assessment of head injury for acute, subacute and later phases of care; ``(B) the development, modification and evaluation of therapies that retard, prevent or reverse brain damage after acute head injury, that arrest further deterioration following injury and that provide the restitution of function for individuals with long-term injuries; ``(C) the development of research on a continuum of care from acute care through rehabilitation, designed, to the extent practicable, to integrate rehabilitation and long-term outcome evaluation with acute care research; and ``(D) the development of programs that increase the participation of academic centers of excellence in head injury treatment and rehabilitation research and training.
''; and (2) in subsection (h), by adding at the end the following paragraph: ``(4) The term `traumatic brain injury' means an acquired injury to the brain.
Such term does not include brain dysfunction caused by congenital or degenerative disorders, nor birth trauma, but may include brain injuries caused by anoxia due to near drowning.
The Secretary may revise the definition of such term as the Secretary determines necessary.''.
PROGRAMS OF HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION.
Part E of title XII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300d-51 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
STATE GRANTS FOR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS REGARDING TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, may make grants to States for the purpose of carrying out demonstration projects to improve access to health and other services regarding traumatic brain injury.
State Advisory Board.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the State involved agrees to establish an advisory board within the appropriate health department of the State or within another department as designated by the chief executive officer of the State.
Functions.--An advisory board established under paragraph (1) shall advise and make recommendations to the State on ways to improve services coordination regarding traumatic brain injury.
Such advisory boards shall encourage citizen participation through the establishment of public hearings and other types of community outreach programs.
Composition.--An advisory board established under paragraph (1) shall be composed of-- ``(A) representatives of-- ``(i) the corresponding State agencies involved; ``(ii) public and nonprofit private health related organizations; ``(iii) other disability advisory or planning groups within the State; ``(iv) members of an organization or foundation representing traumatic brain injury survivors in that State; and ``(v) injury control programs at the State or local level if such programs exist; and ``(B) a substantial number of individuals who are survivors of traumatic brain injury, or the family members of such individuals.
Matching Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--With respect to the costs to be incurred by a State in carrying out the purpose described in subsection (a), the Secretary may make a grant under such subsection only if the State agrees to make available, in cash, non-Federal contributions toward such costs in an amount that is not less than $1 for each $2 of Federal funds provided under the grant.
Determination of amount contributed.--In determining the amount of non-Federal contributions in cash that a State has provided pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary may not include any amounts provided to the State by the Federal Government.
Application for Grant.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Coordination of Activities.--The Secretary shall ensure that activities under this section are coordinated as appropriate with other agencies of the Public Health Service that carry out activities regarding traumatic brain injury.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate, a report describing the findings and results of the programs established under this section, including measures of outcomes and consumer and surrogate satisfaction.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `traumatic brain injury' means an acquired injury to the brain.
Such term does not include brain dysfunction caused by congenital or degenerative disorders, nor birth trauma, but may include brain injuries caused by anoxia due to near drowning.
The Secretary may revise the definition of such term as the Secretary determines necessary.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1997.''.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the appropriate agencies of the Public Health Service, shall conduct a study for the purpose of carrying out the following with respect to traumatic brain injury: (A) In collaboration with appropriate State and local health-related agencies-- (i) determine the incidence and prevalence of traumatic brain injury; and (ii) develop a uniform reporting system under which States report incidents of traumatic brain injury, if the Secretary determines that such a system is appropriate.
Identify common therapeutic interventions which are used for the rehabilitation of individuals with such injuries, and shall, subject to the availability of information, include an analysis of-- (i) the effectiveness of each such intervention in improving the functioning of individuals with brain injuries; (ii) the comparative effectiveness of interventions employed in the course of rehabilitation of individuals with brain injuries to achieve the same or similar clinical outcome; and (iii) the adequacy of existing measures of outcomes and knowledge of factors influencing differential outcomes.
Develop practice guidelines for the rehabilitation of traumatic brain injury at such time as appropriate scientific research becomes available.
Dates certain for reports.-- (A) Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate, a report describing the findings made as a result of carrying out paragraph (1)(A).
Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees specified in subparagraph (A) a report describing the findings made as a result of carrying out subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (1).
Consensus Conference.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research within the National Institute for Child Health and Human Development, shall conduct a national consensus conference on managing traumatic brain injury and related rehabilitation concerns.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``traumatic brain injury'' means an acquired injury to the brain.
Such term does not include brain dysfunction caused by congenital or degenerative disorders, nor birth trauma, but may include brain injuries caused by anoxia due to near drowning.
The Secretary may revise the definition of such term as the Secretary determines necessary.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1997.