This Act may be cited as the ``International Student and Scholar Access Act of 2004''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States has a strategic need to improve its student visa screening process to protect against terrorists who would abuse the system to harm the United States.
At the same time, openness to international students and exchange visitors serves longstanding and important United States foreign policy, educational, and economic interests, and the erosion of such exchanges is contrary to United States national security interests.
Educating successive generations of future world leaders in the United States has long been an important underpinning of United States international influence and leadership.
Open scientific exchange, which enables the United States to benefit from the knowledge of the world's top scientists, has long been an important underpinning of United States scientific leadership.
The United States has seen a dramatic increase in requests for Visa Mantis checks designed to protect against illegal transfers of sensitive technology, from 1,000 in fiscal year 2000 to 20,000 in fiscal year 2003.
Delays in issuing Visa Mantis security clearances have discouraged some international scholars from coming to the United States.
International students and their families studying in the United States contribute close to $12,000,000,000 to the United States economy each year, making higher education a major service sector export.
Delays in obtaining student visas have discouraged many international students from studying in the United States.
Total international applications to graduate schools in the United States for fall 2004 declined 32 percent from fall 2003.
The number of international students enrolled in the United States, which in raw numbers consistently increased over time and grew by 6 percent during both the 2000-2001 and 2001- 2002 school years, leveled off dramatically during the 2002- 2003 school year to an increase of only .6 percent.
Concerns related to the anticipated international student monitoring system known as ``SEVIS'' have contributed to the decline in the number of foreign applicants to educational institutions in the United States.
The United States requires a visa system for exchange programs that maximizes United States national security.
The United States requires a comprehensive strategy for recruiting international students as well as enhancing the access of international students to higher education in the United States.
TITLE I--NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ENHANCING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT ACCESS TO THE UNITED STATES SEC.
Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President, in consultation with United States higher education institutions, organizations that participate in international exchange programs, and other appropriate groups, shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives a strategic plan for enhancing international student access to the United States for study and exchange activities that includes: (1) A marketing plan to makes use of Internet and other media resources to promote and facilitate study in the United States by international students.
A clear division of responsibility that eliminates duplication and promotes inter-agency cooperation with regard to the roles of the Departments of State, Commerce, Education, and Homeland Security in promoting and facilitating access to the United States for international student and exchange visitors.
A mechanism for institutionalized coordination of the efforts of Departments of State, Commerce, Education, and Homeland Security in facilitating access to the United States for international student and exchange visitors.
An effective mandate and strategic plan for use of the overseas educational advising centers of the Department of State to promote study in the United States and to prescreen visa applicants.
Well-defined lines of authority and responsibility for international students in the Department of Commerce.
A clear mandate related to international student access for the Department of Education.
Streamlined procedures within the Department of Homeland Security related to international student and exchange visitors.
ANNUAL REPORTS TO CONGRESS.
In General.--The President, acting through the Secretary of State and in consultation with the Secretary of Education, Secretary of Commerce, and Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit an annual report on the implementation of the national strategy developed in accordance with section 101 to Congress that would describe the following: (1) Measures undertaken to enhance international student access to the United States and improve inter-agency coordination with regard to international students and exchange visitors as provided in section 101.
Measures taken to implement section 202.
The number of student and exchange visitors who apply for visas from the United States, and the number whose visas are approved.
The average processing time for student and international visitor visas.
The number of student and international visitor visas requiring inter-agency review.
The number of student and international visitor visas approved after submission of the visa applications during each of the following durations: (A) Less than 15 days.
More than 90 days.
Submission of Report.--Not later than May 30 of 2005, and annually thereafter through 2008, the President shall submit to Congress the report described in subsection (a).
REFORMING SEVIS FEE PROCESS.
Reduced Fee for Short-Term Study.--Section 641(e)(4)(A) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 United States Code 1372(e)(4)(A)) is amended in the second sentence, by inserting before the period the following: ``or the admission of an alien under section 101(a)(15)(F) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(15)(F)) for a program that does not exceed 90 days''.
Improving Fee Collection.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Secretary of State shall jointly submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives a report on the feasibility of collecting the fee required by section 641(e) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 United States Code 1372(e))-- (1) in local currency at local financial institutions under procedures established by the Secretary of State; and (2) by universities as part of a student's tuition and fees.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of State, Department of Education, Department of Homeland Security, and Department of Commerce such sums as may be necessary to carry out the activities described in section 101.
TITLE II--IMPROVING THE VISA PROCESS SEC.
SENSE OF CONGRESS; PURPOSE.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) improvements in visa processing would enhance the national security of the United States by-- (A) permitting closer scrutiny of visa applicants who might pose risks; and (B) permitting the timely adjudication of visa applications of those whose presence in the United States serves important national interests; and (2) improvements must include-- (A) an operational visa policy that articulates the national interest of the United States in denying entry to visitors who seek to harm the United States and in opening entry to legitimate visitors, to guide consular officers in achieving the appropriate balance; (B) a greater focus by the visa system on visitors who require special screening, while minimizing delays for legitimate visitors; (C) a timely, transparent, and predictable visa process, through appropriate guidelines for inter- agency review of visa applications; and (D) a provision of the necessary resources to fund a visa processing system that meets the requirements of this title.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this title to specify the improvements described in subsection (a).
In General.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State-- (1) shall issue appropriate guidance to consular officers in order to-- (A) give consulates appropriate discretion to grant waivers of personal appearance in order to minimize delays for legitimate travelers while permitting more thorough interviews of visa applicants in appropriate cases; (B) give consulates appropriate discretion to allow security clearances under the Visas Mantis system to be valid for the duration of status or program, in order to avoid repetitive reviews of those visitors who leave the United States temporarily; and (C) establish a presumption of visa approval for frequent visitors who have previously been granted visas for the same purpose and who have no status violations; and (2) in consultation with the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy and appropriate representatives of the United States scientific community, shall issue appropriate guidance to consular officers in order to refine controls on the entry of visitors who propose to engage in study or research in advanced science and technology in order to ensure that only cases of concern, and not nonsensitive cases, are subjected to special review.
Timeliness Standards.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall institute guidelines for inter-agency review of visa applications requiring security clearances which establish the following standards for timeliness in international student and visitor visas: (1) Establish a 15-day standard for responses to the Department of State by other agencies involved in the clearance process.
Establish a 30-day standard for completing the entire inter-agency review and advising the consulate of the result of the review.
Provide for expedited processing of any visa application with respect to which a review is not completed within 30 days, and for advising the consulate of the delay and the estimated processing time remaining.
Require the establishment of a process by which the applicant, or the program to which the applicant seeks access, can inquire about the application's status and the estimated processing time remaining.
Establish a special review process to resolve any cases whose resolution is still pending after 60 days.
INTEROPERABLE DATA SYSTEMS AT THE FBI.
Responsibilities of the FBI Director.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall take the steps necessary to ensure that-- (1) the Federal Bureau of Investigation's databases and systems used in the National Name Check Program are interoperable with the requisite databases and systems at the Department of State; (2) the files of the Federal Bureau of Investigation are automated and a common database is set up between the field offices and headquarters of the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and (3) the Federal Bureau of Investigation has full connectivity to the Consular Consolidated Database through the Open Source Information System.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall report to the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and the House of Representatives on progress in implementing subsection (a).
SETTING REALISTIC STANDARDS FOR VISA EVALUATIONS.
In General.--Section 101(a)(15)(F)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(15)(F)(i)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``having a residence in a foreign country which he has no intention of abandoning'' and inserting ``having the intention, capability, and sufficient financial resources to complete a course of study in the United States''; and (2) by striking ``and solely'' after ``temporarily''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--Section 214(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1184(b)) is amended by striking ``subparagraph (L) or'' and inserting ``subparagraph (F), (J), (L), or''.
Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall report to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives on-- (1) the feasibility of expediting visa processing for participants in official exchange programs, and for students, scholars, and exchange visitors through prescreening of applicants by sending countries, sending universities, State Department overseas educational advising centers, or other appropriate entities; (2) the feasibility of developing abilities to collect biometric data without requiring a visit to the Embassy by the visa applicant; and (3) the implementation of the guidance described in subsections (a) and (b) of section 202, including the training of consular officers, and the effect of this guidance and training on visa processing volume and timeliness.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out to carry out this Act for the consular affairs function of the Department of State, the visa application review function of the Department of Homeland Security, and for database improvements in the Federal Bureau of Investigations as specified in section 203.