This Act may be cited as the ``Great Lakes Federal Effectiveness Act''.
great lakes research council Sec.
Establishment of Council.--There is established a Great Lakes Research Council.
Duties of Council.--The Council shall-- (1) advise and promote the coordination of Federal research activities to avoid unnecessary duplication and ensure greater effectiveness in achieving ecosystem protection of the Great Lakes through the goals of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement; (2) no later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, prepare and provide to interested parties, a document which includes-- (A) an assessment of the research activities needed to fulfill the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement goals; (B) an assessment of existing Federal expertise and capabilities in those activities needed to fulfill the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement goals, including an inventory of existing Federal Great Lakes research programs, projects, facilities, and personnel; and (C) recommendations for long-term and short-term priorities for Federal research on the Great Lakes, based on a comparison of the assessment conducted under subparagraph (A) and existing programs; (3) identify topics for and participate in meetings, workshops, symposia, and conferences on Great Lakes research issues; (4) make recommendations for the uniform collection of data for enhancing research and management protocols relating to the Great Lakes ecosystem; (5) advise and cooperate in the establishment of a comprehensive, multi-media data base for the Great Lakes ecosystem; and (6) ensure that the results, findings, and information regarding Great Lakes research programs conducted or sponsored by the Federal Government be disseminated in a timely manner, and in useful forms, to interested persons, using as much as possible existing mechanisms, such as the Great Lakes Research Inventory prepared by the International Joint Commission.
Membership.--(1) The Council shall be comprised of one research manager with extensive knowledge, scientific expertise, and experience in the Great Lakes ecosystem for each of the following agencies-- (A) the Environmental Protection Agency; (B) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; (C) the United States Coast Guard; (D) the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; and (E) any other relevant Federal department, agency or instrumentality, as determined by the Council membership.
Other persons who are not Federal employees may serve as ex officio members of the Council, at the request of the Council membership.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Council shall be elected by the members and shall serve for a period of two years.
No member of the Council may serve as Chairperson for more than two consecutive terms.
Compensation.--While performing official duties as members of the Council, members of the Council are entitled to receive compensation for travel and transportation expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Interagency Cooperation.--The head of each department, agency, or other instrumentality of the Federal Government which is a member of the Council-- (1) shall cooperate with the Council to implement the recommendations developed under subsection (b); (2) may, upon written request of the Chairperson of the Council, make available, on a reimbursable basis or otherwise, personnel, services, or facilities as may be necessary to assist the Council in achieving the purposes of this Act; and (3) shall, upon written request from the Chairperson, furnish data or information necessary to achieve the purposes of this Act.
International Joint Commission.--The Council shall invite the International Joint Commission to serve as Secretariat and principal coordinating body for the Council.
Funding.--Agencies represented on the Council may reimburse costs associated with activities authorized under this Act conducted by the International Joint Commission.
effect on other laws Sec.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to amend, restrict, or otherwise alter the authority of any Federal department, agency, or instrumentality, under any law, to undertake Great Lakes research activities.
In this Act-- (1) ``Council'' means the Great Lakes Research Council established under section 102 of this Act.
``Great Lakes'' means-- (A) Lake Erie, Lake Huron, Lake Michigan, Lake Ontario, and Lake Superior; (B) their connecting waters, including the St. Marys River; the St. Clair River, Lake St. Clair, the Detroit River, and the Niagara River; and (C) the St. Lawrence River.
``Great Lakes research'' means the application of scientific and/or engineering expertise to explain, understand, and predict physical, chemical, biological, and socioeconomic processes, and their interaction, in the Great Lakes ecosystem.
``Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement'' means the bilateral agreement between the United States and Canada which was signed in 1978 and amended by the Protocol of 1987.