This Act may be cited as the ``Waste Export and Import Prohibition Act''.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Proposals to export solid waste from the United States to foreign countries are increasing.
In numerous instances exported waste has contaminated the environment, adversely affected public health, and contributed to foreign policy liabilities for the United States.
Exports of solid waste are being undertaken to avoid the community opposition and higher treatment and disposal expenses that are associated with waste disposal, treatment, and recycling in the United States.
Increasingly, hazardous waste exports are justified by the agreeable term ``recycling'', even though the result of the export is a transfer of pollution to areas of the world with little capability to manage that pollution.
Continued exports of solid waste serve as a disincentive to implementation of existing domestic policy, which recognizes reuse and waste reduction as the best methods of solid waste management.
Imports of waste from foreign countries strain diminishing domestic waste disposal capacity, threaten public health, and contaminate the environment.
The international Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal recognizes the right and indeed encourages waste export and import prohibitions.
In the first meeting of the Parties, a decision was made requesting industrialized countries to prohibit transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and other wastes for disposal to developing countries and further requesting developing countries to prohibit the import of hazardous wastes from industrialized countries.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to prohibit the export of solid waste from the United States and the import of solid waste from foreign countries.
PROHIBITION OF EXPORT AND IMPORT OF SOLID WASTE.
Prohibition.--Subtitle A of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EXPORT AND IMPORT OF SOLID WASTE.
Prohibition on Exports to Non-OECD Countries.--Effective July 1, 1994, no person may export any solid waste from the United States to a non-OECD country, except as provided in subsection (c).
Prohibition on Exports to and Imports from OECD Countries.-- Effective January 1, 1999, no person may export any solid waste from the United States to an OECD country, or import any solid waste into the United States from an OECD country, except as provided in subsection (c).
Specific Exceptions.--(1) The prohibitions contained in subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to baled waste paper, scrap textiles, or waste glass, if all of the following conditions are met with respect to such waste: ``(A) The waste is exported or imported for the purposes of recycling.
The waste is separated from the waste stream.
The waste does not contain any substances whose storage, treatment, or disposal within the United States is regulated under subtitle C. ``(2) The prohibition contained in subsection (b) shall not apply to any scrap metal that-- ``(A) meets all of the conditions listed in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph (1); ``(B) is not, and does not contain, a sludge; and ``(C) meets either of the following conditions: ``(i) The waste is not within, and does not contain a waste within, a category of waste listed in Annex I or Annex II of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal.
The waste does not have a characteristic listed in Annex III of such convention.
Requirement to Retrieve or Clean Up Waste.--(1) In any case in which waste is exported in violation of this section, the Administrator shall ensure that the waste is retrieved from the recipient foreign country, if the foreign country agrees to such retrieval, by either requiring the violator to retrieve such waste pursuant to a compliance order issued under subsection (g), or by retrieving the waste directly.
If the Administrator retrieves the waste directly, the Administrator shall ensure that the waste is retrieved-- ``(A) in the case of a violation with respect to which a compliance order has been issued, not later than 90 days after the expiration of the time period specified in the compliance order for retrieval of the waste by the violator, if the violator has failed to retrieve the waste; and ``(B) in the case of a violation with respect to which a compliance order has not been issued, not later than 90 days after discovery of the violation.
If the foreign country does not agree to retrieval of the waste, the Administrator shall dispose of or clean up such waste in the foreign country, to the extent the foreign country agrees to such action.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: ``(1) The term `solid waste' has the meaning given that term by section 1004(27), except that such term also includes the following: ``(A) Low-level radioactive waste, as defined in part 61 of title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `mixed waste' means hazardous waste or nonhazardous waste mixed with low-level radioactive waste.
All wastes covered by the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, as set forth in Annexes I, II, and III of that convention.
The term `OECD country' means any foreign country that is a member of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The term `non-OECD country' means any foreign country that is not an OECD country.
Regulations.--The Administrator shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to implement this section.
The regulations shall exclude from the prohibitions contained in subsections (a) and (b) small quantities of personal household waste carried by individuals traveling abroad.
Enforcement.-- ``(1) Compliance orders.--(A) Whenever on the basis of any information the Administrator determines that any person has violated or is in violation of any requirement of this section, the Administrator may-- ``(i) issue an order assessing a civil penalty for any past or current violation, requiring compliance immediately or within a specified time period, or both; or ``(ii) commence a civil action in the United States district court in the district in which the violation occurred for appropriate relief, including a temporary or permanent injunction.
A compliance order issued under subparagraph (A)(i) shall include, in the case of a person exporting waste in violation of this section, a requirement to retrieve the waste from the recipient foreign country within 90 days after issuance of the order, or within such shorter period of time as the Administrator considers appropriate, if the foreign country agrees to such retrieval.
A compliance order issued under subparagraph (A)(i) may include-- ``(i) in the case of a person exporting waste in violation of this section, a requirement to dispose of or clean up the waste in the foreign country, to the extent agreed to by the foreign country; or ``(ii) in the case of a person importing waste in violation of this section, a requirement to return the waste to the foreign country from which the waste originated, if the foreign country agrees to accept such waste, or to dispose of or clean up the waste in compliance with applicable law.
Public hearing.--Any order issued under this subsection shall become final unless, not later than 30 days after the order is served, the person or persons named in the order request a public hearing.
Upon such request, the Administrator shall promptly conduct a public hearing.
In connection with any proceeding under this section the Administrator may issue subpoenas for the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers, books, and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery procedure.
Civil penalties.--(A) Any person who violates any requirement of this section shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $25,000 for each such violation.
Each day of such violation shall, for purposes of this subsection, constitute a separate violation.
If a violator fails to take the action required by a compliance order issued under paragraph (1) within the time specified in the order, the Administrator may assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day of continued noncompliance with the order.
Criminal penalties.--Any person who knowingly violates the prohibition contained in this section or any requirement of regulations promulgated under subsection (e) shall be subject to imprisonment for not to exceed 10 years, fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or both, for each such violation.
Citizen suits.--For purposes of this section, a government of a foreign country shall be considered a person under section 7002 (relating to citizen suits).''.
Repeal of Existing Authority.--Section 3017 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is repealed.
The table of contents for subtitle C of such Act is amended by striking out the item relating to such section.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for subtitle A of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Export and import of solid waste.