This Act may be cited as the ``Pilot Small Business Technology Transfer Program Extension Act of 1996''.
Section 9(n) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(n)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``in fiscal year 1994, 1995, or 1996,''; (B) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B); (C) by striking the comma at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``; and''; and (D) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph: ``(D) not less than 0.25 percent of such budget in fiscal year 1997 and each succeeding fiscal year,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Program expiration.--Authorization to carry out the STTR program pursuant to this subsection (and subsections (o) and (p) of this section) shall expire on September 30, 2000.''.
ASSESSMENT BY THE COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
Assessment Required.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an assessment of the ongoing implementation of the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program and the pilot Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program.
The assessment shall address the following issues with respect to each program: (1) The extent of competition and the quality of proposals submitted for the award of SBIR and STTR agreements, and the quality of subsequent performance by the recipients of such awards.
Whether any adverse effects on the research or research and development programs of any sponsoring agency are attributable to the agency's participation in the SBIR program or the pilot STTR program.
Whether any awards by a sponsoring agency in each fiscal year represent the applicable percentages of such agency's extramural budget, identifying any systemic management weaknesses contributing to such limitation on implementation.
Any management techniques initiated by sponsoring agencies that attempt to minimize delays between the successful completion of a Phase I agreement and the award (and commencement of performance) under a Phase II agreement or ameliorate the adverse effects of such delays.
The implementation of Phase III by participating agencies, including awards in support of Phase III and other techniques adopted by the agencies to foster commercialization.
The extent to which small business participants in each program, especially recipients of STTR awards, utilize the results of research undertaken for Federal agencies by universities, federally funded research and development centers, and other research institutions, and the extent to which the results were subsequently developed by such small firms to meet the needs of Federal, State, and local government or advanced to use in the commercial marketplace.
Whether the required and structured collaboration between a small business and a research institution under the pilot STTR program is necessary in light of the experiences with voluntary collaborations under the SBIR program.
Any duplication between the SBIR program and the pilot STTR program.
The extent to which each agency participating in the SBIR program has complied with the policy directives to enhance outreach efforts to increase the participation of socially and economically disadvantaged small business concerns and women- owned small business concerns issued under section (9)(j)(2)(F) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(j)(2)(F)) and the extent to which each agency participating in the STTR program has made outreach efforts to increase the participation of such concerns in the agency's STTR program.
Any other relevant information as determined by the Comptroller General.
Period of Assessment.--The assessment required by subsection (a) shall focus on the implementation of each program during the period beginning October 1, 1995, and ending September 30, 1999.
Report.-- (1) Submission of report.--The Comptroller General shall submit a report of the assessment required by subsection (a) to the Committees on Small Business of the Senate and House of Representatives not later than February 1, 2000.
Appendices to report.--The report shall include-- (A) an appendix summarizing the findings of previous reports issued by the Comptroller General with respect to the SBIR program and the pilot STTR program; and (B) an appendix listing reports of other assessments of the SBIR program or the pilot STTR program issued by the Small Business Administration, any of the sponsoring agencies, and any other entities determined by the Comptroller General to be useful resources to the Congress in evaluating each program for reauthorization.
INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE ON COMMERCIALIZATION.
In General.--The Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall convene and supervise an interagency task force on fostering commercialization of the results of projects being undertaken by small business concerns through the SBIR program and the pilot STTR program.
Duties.--The interagency task force shall-- (1) review existing studies and analyses and conduct independent assessments, as may be appropriate, regarding the obstacles faced by small business entrepreneurs seeking to commercialize results of basic research or research and development undertaken through Federal funding; (2) devise recommendations to overcome (or minimize the effects of) such obstacles; and (3) address other matters that the Administrator determines are appropriate to ensure a comprehensive analysis and the development of practical recommendations.
Participation.-- (1) Task force membership.--The interagency task shall include participation by representatives of-- (A) the Office of the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small Business Administration; (B) the 5 Executive agencies having the greatest dollar value of awards under the SBIR program in fiscal year 1995; (C) the Executive agencies participating in the pilot STTR program in fiscal year 1995; (D) the Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President; and (E) any other Executive agencies invited by the Administrator.
Public participation.--In undertaking its assessments and fashioning its recommendations, the interagency task force shall provide opportunities for consultation with representatives of-- (A) small businesses and other entities that have participated in the SBIR program or the pilot STTR program; (B) organizations representing small business concerns; (C) organizations representing venture capital sources, especially those focusing on the needs of small high-technology entrepreneurs; and (D) any other public or private entities that the Administrator determines are appropriate.
Schedule.-- (1) Notice and initial call for public participation.--Not earlier than May 1, 1997, the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register (and through other means likely to result in broad dissemination) a notice, which at a minimum, announces the existence of the interagency task force, identifies the members of task force, summarizes purposes and objectives of the task force, requests suggestions and recommendations from the public regarding the work of the task force, providing at least 180 days to make a submission in response to such notice, and announces any schedule of meetings of the task force or other public meetings.
Ongoing public participation.--In conducting its assessments and fashioning its recommendations the task force shall make every reasonable effort to solicit ideas from the public.
Report.--Not later than March 1, 1999, the Administrator shall submit to the Committees on Small Business of the Senate and House of Representatives a report of the work of the interagency task force, including such recommendations for legislative or administrative action.
Section 9(e)(4)(A) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(e)(4)(A)) is amended by striking ``(B)(ii)'' and inserting ``(B)''.