This Act may be cited as the ``Black Canyon Conservation Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds and declares that: (1) The resources within the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument and on the adjacent Federal lands are nationally and internationally significant.
These resources offer exceptional opportunities to expand and interpret ecological components and geologic features.
These resources offer a superlative opportunity for recreation.
These resources coincide with, compliment, and expand the purposes for which the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument was established.
Therefore, given that the historic boundary of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument was statutorily established and enlarged by Public Law 98-357.
The lands in the lower Gunnison Gorge have been studied and recommended for wilderness designation by the Bureau of Land Management in 1987.
The Gunnison River was studied by the Bureau of Land Management in 1979 and was found to be eligible for wild and scenic designation.
The fishery in the Gunnison River that flows through the Gunnison Gorge has been recognized by the State of Colorado as a ``Gold Medal Stream'' and ``Wild Trout Water''.
The creation of a national park, national conservation area and the designation of the Gunnison River as a wild and scenic river is appropriate and necessary to protect and enhance the Black Canyon, the Gunnison Gorge, and the surrounding natural resources for future generations.
REDESIGNATION OF THE NATIONAL MONUMENT AS A NATIONAL PARK.
Redesignation.--In order to protect, interpret, and promote the spectacular gorges formed by the erosive work of the Gunnison River, the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument is hereby redesignated as the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park.
Area Included.--The national park shall consist of the existing Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument.
Any funds available for the purposes of the monument shall be made available for the purposes of the park.
All valid existing rights within the monument shall be included in the national park.
Administration.--The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter referred to as the Secretary) shall administer the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park in accordance with this Act and with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including, but not limited to, the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1-4), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461-467).
Water Right.--Designation of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park shall not constitute a reservation of water, water rights, or instream flows beyond the water right described in section 6(c) of this Act.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BLACK CANYON OF THE GUNNISON NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA.
Establishment.--In order to protect that area in Colorado containing the Gunnison Gorge and other unique and nationally important recreational, geological, ecological, scenic, educational, scientific, and wilderness resources of the public lands in and around the lower Gunnison Gorge for the benefit and enjoyment of future generations, there is hereby established the Gunnison Gorge National Conservation Area (hereinafter referred to as the ``conservation area'').
Area Included.--The conservation area shall consist of approximately sixty-four thousand one hundred and thirty-nine acres as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Gunnison Gorge National Conservation Area'' numbered and dated .
The map shall be on file and available for inspection in the offices of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management of the Department of the Interior.
Legal Description.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a legal description of the conservation area designated under this section with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the United States House of Representatives.
Such legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal description.
The legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior.
Administration.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, shall manage the conservation area to protect its resources in accordance with this Act, the Federal Land Management and Policy Act of 1976 and other applicable provisions of law.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal lands within the conservation area and all lands and interests therein which are hereafter acquired by the United States are hereby withdrawn from all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws and from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws, and from operation of the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws and all amendments thereto.
Hunting, Trapping, and Fishing.--The Secretary shall permit hunting, trapping, and fishing within the conservation area in accordance with applicable laws and regulations of the United States and the State of Colorado; except that the Secretary, after consultation with the Colorado Division of Wildlife, may issue regulations designating zones where and establishing periods when no hunting or trapping shall be permitted for reasons of public safety, administration, or public use and enjoyment.
Grazing.--The grazing of livestock in the conservation area designated by this Act, where established prior to the date of the enactment of this Act, shall be administered in accordance with section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(4)) and section 108 of the Act entitled ``An Act to designate certain National Forest System lands in the State of Colorado, South Dakota, Missouri, South Carolina, and Louisiana for inclusion in the National Wilderness Preservation System, and for other purposes'' (Public Law 96-560).
Water Rights.--Designation of the conservation area shall not constitute a reservation of water, water rights or instream flows beyond the water right described in section 6(c) of this Act.
Motorized Vehicles.--The use of motorized vehicles in the conservation area shall be allowed on routes specifically designated for such use as part of the management plan prepared pursuant to section 7 of this Act, except where needed for administrative or emergency purposes.
The Secretary shall have the power to implement such reasonable limits to visitation and use of the conservation area as he finds appropriate for the protection of the resources of the conservation area, including requiring permits for public use, or closing portions of the conservation area to public use.
Enforcement.--Any person who violates the provisions of this Act or any regulation promulgated by the Secretary to implement this Act shall be subject to a fine of up to $10,000 or imprisonment of up to one year, or both.
DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS WITHIN THE CONSERVATION AREA.
Designation.--Within the conservation area there are hereby designated as wilderness, and as a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System, the Gunnison Gorge Wilderness of approximately twenty-one thousand thirty-eight acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled the Gunnison Gorge Wilderness Area numbered and dated .
The map shall be on file and available for inspection in the offices of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior.
Legal Description.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a legal description of the wilderness area designated by this Act with the Committee on Natural Resources of the United States House of Representatives and with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate.
Such legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal description.
The legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior.
Administration.--Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness area designated by this Act shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the provisions of the Wilderness Act (78 United States Statutes at Large 890; 16 United States Code 131), governing areas designated by that Act as wilderness.
No Buffer Zones.--The Congress does not intend for the designation of this wilderness area to lead to the creation of protective perimeters or buffer zones around any such wilderness area.
The fact that nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard from areas within a wilderness shall not, of itself, preclude such activities or uses up to the boundary of the wilderness areas.
Fish and Wildlife.--As provided in paragraph (7) of section 4(d) of the Wilderness Act, nothing in this Act or in the Wilderness Act shall be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State of Colorado with respect to wildlife and fish on the public lands located in that State.
Grazing.--The grazing of livestock in the conservation area designated by this Act, where established prior to the date of the enactment of this Act, shall be administered in accordance with section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(4)) and section 108 of the Act entitled ``An Act to designate certain National Forest System lands in the State of Colorado, South Dakota, Missouri, South Carolina, and Louisiana for inclusion in the National Wilderness Preservation System, and for other purposes'' (Public Law 96-560).
Water Rights.--Designation of the Gunnison Gorge Wilderness shall not constitute a reservation of water, water rights or instream flows beyond the water right described in section 6(c) of this Act.
DESIGNATING THE GUNNISON RIVER AS A WILD AND SCENIC RIVER.
Designation.--Section 3(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)) is amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end: ``( ) Gunnison, Colorado--the Gunnison River from the upstream boundary of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument down stream to the confluence of the North Fork of the Gunnison River to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior.''.
Water Development.--For the purposes of this Act, the storage and diversion of water outside of the designated reach shall not be considered to have an adverse effect on the values for which the reach was established.
Water Rights.--No water rights or the reservation of water which would expand on the existing reserved water right for the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument, shall be created by this designation.
In General.--Within three full fiscal years following the fiscal year of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop and transmit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the United States House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate, a comprehensive plan for the long-range protection and management of the conservation area which shall describe the appropriate uses and development of the conservation area consistent with the purposes of this Act.
This plan shall incorporate appropriate decisions contained in the Uncompahgre Basin Resource Management Plan (completed in September, 1988), the Gunnison Gorge Recreation Area Management Plan (completed on July 24, 1985 and supplemented on July 21, 1988).
The conservation area plan shall also incorporate wildlife habitat management plans that have been prepared for the area, and will be prepared in close consultation with appropriate agencies of the State of Colorado and consider previous studies of the area.
Public Lands.--For the purpose of this Act, the term ``public lands'' shall have the same meaning as such term has when used in the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.
Management of Acquired Lands.--Any non-Federal lands or interests within or adjacent to the boundaries of the conservation area which after the date of enactment of this Act may be acquired by the United States shall be incorporated into the conservation area, and shall be managed in accordance with all the provisions of this Act and other laws applicable to the conservation area.
Limitations.--No federally owned lands located within the boundaries of the conservation area shall be transferred out of Federal ownership, or be placed in trust, by exchange or otherwise.
There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.