This Act may be cited as the ``Sexually Violent Predators Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) there exists a small but extremely dangerous group of sexually violent persons who do not have a mental disease or defect; (2) persons who are sexually violent predators generally have antisocial personality features that-- (A) are not amenable to mental illness treatment modalities in existence on the date of enactment of this Act; and (B) render the persons likely to engage in sexually violent behavior; (3) the likelihood that sexually violent predators will repeat acts of predatory sexual violence is high; and (4) the prognosis for curing sexually violent predators is poor and the treatment needs of the population of the predators are very long-term.
As used in this Act: (1) Mental abnormality.--The term ``mental abnormality'' means a congenital or acquired condition of a person that affects the emotional or volitional capacity of the person in a manner that predisposes the person to the commission of criminal sexual acts to a degree that makes the person a menace to the health and safety of other persons.
Predatory.--The term ``predatory'', with respect to an act, means an act directed towards a stranger, or a person with whom a relationship has been established or promoted, for the primary purpose of victimization.
Sexually violent offense.--The term ``sexually violent offense'' means an act that is a violation of title 18, United States Code or State criminal code that-- (A) involves the use or attempted or threatened use of physical force against the person or property of another person; and (B) is determined beyond a reasonable doubt to be sexually motivated.
Sexually violent predator.--The term ``sexually violent predator'' means a person who has been convicted of a sexually violent offense and who suffers from a mental abnormality or personality disorder that makes the person likely to engage in predatory sexually violent offenses.
In General.-- (1) State guidelines.--In accordance with this section, the Attorney General shall establish guidelines for State programs to require a sexually violent predator to register a current address with a designated State law enforcement agency upon release from prison, being placed on parole, or being placed on supervised release.
The Attorney General shall approve each State program that complies with the guidelines.
State compliance.-- (A) Implementation date.--A State that does not implement a program described in paragraph (1) by the date that is 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, and maintain the implementation thereafter, shall be ineligible for funds in accordance with subparagraph (B).
Ineligibility for funds.-- (i) In general.--A State that does not implement the program as described in subparagraph (A) shall not receive 10 percent of the funds that would otherwise be allocated to the State under section 506 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3756).
Reallocation of funds.--Funds made available under clause (i) shall be reallocated, in accordance with such section, to such States as implement the program as described in subparagraph (A).
Registration Requirement Upon Release, Parole, or Supervised Release.-- (1) In general.--An approved State program established in accordance with this section shall contain the requirements described in this section.
Determination.--The determination that a person is a ``sexually violent predator'' and the determination that a person is no longer a ``sexually violent predator'' shall be made by the sentencing court after receiving a report by a board of experts on sexual offenses.
Each State shall establish a board composed of experts in the field of the behavior and treatment of sexual offenders.
Notification.--If a person who is required to register under this section is anticipated to be released from prison, paroled, or placed on supervised release, a State prison officer shall, not later than 90 days before the anticipated date of the release or commencement of the parole-- (A) inform the person of the duty to register; (B) inform the person that if the person changes residence address, the person shall give the new address to a designated State law enforcement agency in writing not later than 10 days after the change of address; (C) obtain the name of the person, identifying factors, anticipated future residence, offense history, and documentation of any treatment received for the mental abnormality or personality disorder of the person; and (D) require the person to read and sign a form stating that the duty of the person to register under this section has been explained.
Transfer of information to state and the fbi.--Not later than 3 days after the receipt of the information described in paragraph (3)(C), the officer shall forward the information to a designated State law enforcement agency.
As soon as practicable after the receipt of the information by the State law enforcement agency, the agency shall-- (A) enter the information into the appropriate State law enforcement record system and notify the appropriate law enforcement agency that has jurisdiction over the area in which the person expects to reside; and (B) transmit the information to the Identification Division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Quarterly verification.-- (A) Mailing to person.--Not less than every 90 days after the date of the release or commencement of parole of a person required to register under this section, the designated State law enforcement agency shall mail a nonforwardable verification form to the last reported address of the person.
Return of verification form.-- (i) In general.--The person shall return, by mail, the verification form to the agency not later than 10 days after the receipt of the form.
The verification form shall be signed by the person, and shall state that the person continues to reside at the address last reported to the designated State law enforcement agency.
Failure to return.--If the person fails to mail the verification form to the designated State law enforcement agency by the date that is 10 days after the receipt of the form by the person, the person shall be in violation of this section unless the person proves that the person has not changed the residence address of the person.
Notification of local law enforcement agencies of changes in addresses.--Any change of address by a person required to register under this section that is reported to the designated State law enforcement agency shall as soon as practicable be reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency that has jurisdiction over the area in which the person is residing.
Penalty.--A person required to register under a State program established pursuant to this section who knowingly fails to register and keep the registration current shall be subject to criminal penalties in the State.
It is the sense of Congress that the penalties should include imprisonment for not less than 180 days.
Termination of obligation to register.--The obligation of a person to register under this section shall terminate on a determination made in accordance with the provision of paragraph (2) of this section that the person no longer suffers from a mental abnormality or personality disorder that would make the person likely to engage in a predatory sexually violent offense.
Community Notification.--The designated State law enforcement agency shall release relevant information that is necessary to protect the public concerning a specific sexually violent predator required to register under this section.
Immunity for Good Faith Conduct.--Law enforcement agencies, employees of law enforcement agencies, and State officials shall be immune from liability for any good faith conduct under this section.