PUGET SOUND ECOSYSTEM RESTORATION.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall conduct studies and carry out ecosystem restoration and other protective measures within Puget Sound, Washington, and adjacent waters and associated estuary and near-shore habitat, including-- (1) the 17 watersheds that drain directly into Puget Sound; (2) Admiralty Inlet; (3) Hood Canal; (4) Rosario Strait; and (5) the eastern portion of the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
Implementation.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall use funds made available to carry out this section to carry out ecosystem restoration and other protective measures (including environmental improvements related to facilities of the Corps of Engineers in existence on the date of enactment of this Act) determined by the Secretary to be feasible based on-- (A) the studies conducted under subsection (a); or (B) analyses conducted before such date of enactment by non-Federal interests.
Criteria and procedures for review and approval.--In consultation with the Secretary of Commerce and the Governor of the State of Washington, the Secretary shall develop criteria and procedures consistent with the National Marine Fisheries Service and State fish restoration goals and objectives for reviewing and approving analyses described in paragraph (1)(B) and the protective measures proposed in those analyses.
The Secretary shall use prior studies and plans to identify project needs and priorities wherever practicable.
Prioritization of projects.--In prioritizing projects for implementation under this subsection, the Secretary shall consult with public and private entities active in watershed planning and ecosystem restoration in Puget Sound watersheds, including the Salmon Recovery Funding Board, the Northwest Straits Commission, Hood Canal Coordinating Council, county watershed planning councils, and salmon enhancement groups, and give full consideration to their priorities for projects.
Public Participation.--In developing and implementing protective measures under subsections (a) and (b), the Secretary shall provide for public review and comment in accordance with applicable Federal law, including-- (1) providing advance notice of public meetings; (2) providing adequate opportunity for public input and comment; (3) maintaining appropriate records; and (4) compiling a record of the proceedings of meetings.
Compliance With Applicable Law.--In developing and implementing protective measures under subsections (a) and (b), the Secretary shall comply with applicable Federal law, including the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes).
Cost Sharing.-- (1) In general.--Studies and technical assistance provided to determine the feasibility of protective measures under subsections (a) and (b) shall-- (A) be considered to be project costs; and (B) be shared by non-Federal interests during project implementation in accordance with this subsection.
Non-federal share.--Subject to paragraph (4), the non- Federal share of the cost of the protective measures shall be 35 percent; except that if a project would otherwise be eligible for cost-sharing under section 1135 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2294 note), the non-Federal share of the cost of the protective measures for the project shall be 25 percent.
In-kind contributions.--Not more than 80 percent of the non-Federal share may be provided in the form of services, materials, supplies, or other in-kind contributions necessary to carry out the protective measures.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of any single protective measure shall not exceed $5,000,000.
Operation and maintenance.--The operation and maintenance of the protective measures shall be a non-Federal responsibility.
Tribal cost-sharing.--The Secretary shall waive the first $200,000 in non-Federal cost share for all studies and projects cosponsored by federally recognized Indian tribes.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated not to exceed $125,000,000 to pay the Federal share of the cost of carrying out this section.