This Act may be cited as the ``Lewis and Clark Voyage of Scientific Discovery Act''.
Establishment.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Director of the United States Geological Survey, shall establish a program at the River Studies Center of the Biological Resources Division of the United States Geological Survey, located in Columbia, Missouri-- (1) to determine and monitor the biological and chemical characteristics of the Missouri River; (2) to determine and monitor the interrelationship of those characteristics with the hydrology and geomorphology of the river; and (3) to monitor and assess the biota, including threatened or endangered species, habitats, and water quality of the Missouri River.
Development.--To develop the program, the Secretary of the Interior and the Director of the United States Geological Survey shall consult with-- (1) the Governors of affected States, acting through-- (A) the Missouri River Natural Resources Committee; and (B) the Missouri River Basin Association; and (2) the Secretary of Agriculture; (3) the Secretary of the Army; (4) the Western Area Power Administration; (5) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; and (6) the Missouri River Basin Tribes.
Activities.--The program under subsection (b) shall provide scientific information to-- (1) guide operation and management of the Missouri River; and (2) measure and model the impact of management alternatives through-- (A) monitoring of biota, including threatened or endangered species, habitats, and water quality; (B) focused investigations of cause and effect relationships; and (C) identification and evaluation of methods to conserve fish and wildlife, including threatened and endangered species.
Baseline.--The program under subsection (b) shall establish a baseline of conditions against which future activities can be measured.
Database.--The Secretary of the Interior shall-- (1) establish a database on Missouri River biota, including threatened or endangered species, habitats, and water quality; and (2) make the database readily available to the public.
Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of establishment of the program under subsection (b), and not less frequently than every 3 years thereafter, the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Geological Survey, shall-- (1) review the program; (2) as necessary, establish and revise the objectives of the program; and (3) submit to Congress a report on the environmental health of the Missouri River.
Indian Tribes.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior shall enter into contracts, pursuant to the Indian Self Determination Act (title I of the Indian Self Determination and Education Assistance Act; 25 United States Code chapter 14, subchapter II, part A (25 United States Code 450f et.
with Tribes whose Reservations are located along the Missouri River and have an interest in environmental restoration.
The tasks to be contracted shall implement the goals set forth in this section and shall complement the activities undertaken by the Secretary of the Interior and the affected State Governments.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior to carry out this section-- (A) $6,500,000 for fiscal year 2002; (B) $8,500,000 for fiscal year 2003; and (C) $15,100,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2016.
Allocation of funds.--Funding of the program shall be implemented in the following manner: (A) Not more than the following percentage of the funds available shall be directed to the River Studies Center of the Biological Resources Division of the United States Geological Survey, located in Columbia, Missouri: (i) 25 percent in fiscal year 2002 (ii) 40 perccent in fiscal year 2003 (iii) 65 percent in fiscal years after 2003.
At least 50 percent of such funds shall be directed to the River Studies Center in fiscal years after 2003.
The remaining funds shall be made available to State fish and wildlife agencies in the Missouri River basin to conduct monitoring activities designed to enhance and supplement existing scientific knowledge of the Missouri River system.
Threatened and endangered species.--Of the amounts made available under paragraph (1) for each fiscal year, $1,500,000 shall be made available to the Secretary of the Interior and the State agencies with jurisdiction for Missouri River fish and wildlife to monitor and conduct focused investigations of endangered fish, including pallid sturgeon response to main stem reservoir operations.
State agency funding.--Funds authorized to be appropriated under this section shall be made available as necessary to contract with the State agencies with jurisdiction for Missouri River fish and wildlife to collect field data and support field operations for the monitoring component of the program.
Funding of focused investigations.--The focused investigations component of the program established under this section shall be funded using a competitive process.
Each year, the directors of the State fish and game agencies with jurisdiction for Missouri River fish and wildlife, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, and the entities listed under section 2(b)(1), shall prioritize information needs and issue a request for proposals to State, Federal, for-profit, and not-for-profit organizations with Missouri River interest and expertise.
The directors and the Secretary shall review and select those proposals to be funded.