SHORT TITLE, REFERENCES, AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Air Act Amendments of 1996''.
References.--Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Clean Air Act.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents is as follows: Sec.
Short title, references, and table of contents.
Recognition of effective controls.
Voluntary controls adopted prior to nonattainment.
10. Credit for episodic controls.
Opt-in reformulated gas areas.
NOx reductions for reformulated gas.
Establishing national primary ambient air quality standards.
Automobile inspection and maintenance.
Definition of Applicable Requirement.--Section 501 (42 United States Code 7661) is amended by adding the following new paragraph after paragraph (4): ``(5) Applicable requirement.--The term `applicable requirement' means any requirement promulgated by the Administrator pursuant to section 111 (42 United States Code 7411), section 112 (42 United States Code 7412) with the exception of section 112(r), section 129 (42 United States Code 7429), Section 165 (42 United States Code 7475), subsections (e) and (f) of section 183 (42 United States Code 7511b), section 328 (42 United States Code 7627), title IV or title VI (unless the permitting authority determines that a requirement imposed pursuant to title VI need not be contained in a permit issued under this title) and any limitation on emissions or operations contained in a construction permit issued pursuant to Parts C or D of title I.
The term `applicable requirement' also includes any other requirement provided for in an applicable state implementation plan, except that a requirement imposed pursuant to a State minor new source review program under section 110(a)(2) (42 United States Code 7410(a)(2)) shall not be considered an applicable requirement for purposes of this title.
Notwithstanding this paragraph, any permitting authority may provide for the terms of permits issued under its minor new source review to be appended to or incorporated in an operating permit issued under this subchapter.
Nothing in this paragraph shall affect the authority of any person to enforce any requirement imposed under any rule, permit, or implementation plan under this Act.''.
Assurance of Operating Flexibility.--(1) Section 502 (b)(10) (42 United States Code 766la(b)(10)), is amended to read as follows: ``(10) The permitting authority may not require any source to obtain or modify a permit issued under this title for any physical or operational change at the source or for taking any other action prior to the date 7 days after the physical or operational change or other action is initiated.
Nothing in this title shall be construed to alter the requirements of any other title of this Act that a permit be obtained before construction or modification of a source.
Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude any State from continuing to impose any requirement or employ any procedure separate and apart from the program required under this title, provided that such requirements and procedures shall not be applicable requirements under this title.''.
Section 502(b) (42 United States Code 766la(b)) is amended by adding the following paragraph after paragraph (10): ``(11) A provision giving major stationary sources the option of obtaining permits that would allow emissions increases and decreases at various units within the major stationary source without permit revisions if overall emissions limits for the major stationary source are not exceeded and preconstruction review is not required under title I.
Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude any State from continuing to impose any requirement or employ any procedure separate and apart from the program required under this title, provided that such requirements and procedures shall not be applicable requirements under this title.''.
Sanctions and Federal Implementation.--Section 502(d) (42 United States Code 7661a(d)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2) and before the period at the end of (3) the following: ``in any case in which the Administrator determines that such failure will cause the State to fail to attain a national primary ambient air quality standard by the applicable attainment date''.
Permit Term.--Section 502(b)(5)(B) is amended by striking out ``5 years'' and inserting ``10 years''.
Section 114(a) (42 United States Code 7414(a)(3)) is amended by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following: ``(3) The Administrator shall in the case of any person which is the owner or operator of a major source, and may, in the case of any other person, require submission of compliance certifications.
Compliance certifications shall include (A) identification of the applicable requirement that is the basis of the certification, (B) the method used for determining the compliance status of the source, and (C) its compliance status.
Compliance certifications and monitoring data shall be subject to subsection (c) of this section.
Submission of a compliance certification shall in no way limit the Administrator's authorities to investigate or otherwise implement this Act.
Nothing in this section or in title V shall authorize the Administrator to revise significantly, or to require significant revision of, an existing compliance method without employing procedures, such as a rulemaking, to allow meaningful comment on that revision and to assess the effect of the revision on the stringency of the underlying emission standard or limitation.
Nothing in this section or section 113 (42 United States Code 7413) shall authorize the use of evidence other than the applicable compliance method or test method to establish a violation of the numerical component of an emission limitation or standard.
For purposes of this paragraph, compliance method as test method shall meet the requirements contained in a regulation or permit for monitoring or testing to determine compliance with the applicable emission standard or limitation.
Nothing in this subparagraph shall limit the authority of the Administrator to increase the stringency of controls or to impose new controls, as required under any other section of this Act.
RECOGNITION OF EFFECTIVE CONTROLS.
Section 302 (42 United States Code 7602) is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``(aa) Potential To Emit.--The term `potential to emit' means the maximum capacity of a stationary source to emit any regulated air pollutant under its physical and operational design.
Any physical or operational limit on the capacity of a source to emit any regulated air pollutant, including any limit enforceable under Federal, State, or local law and including any pollution control equipment and restrictions on hours of operation or on the type or amount of material used, produced, stored, combusted or processed at such source shall be treated as part of its design if the limitation is effective.''.
The first sentence of section 179(a) (42 United States Code 7509(a)) is amended by striking ``one of the sanctions referred to in subsection (b) shall apply, as selected by the Administrator'' and all that follows down through the period at the end thereof and inserting ``the Administrator may apply one of the sanction referred to in subsection (b) if the Administrator finds that such deficiency is likely to result in a failure by the State to attain a national primary ambient air quality standard by the applicable attainment date.''.
Section 112(j)(6) is amended in the second sentence by striking all after ``the Administrator shall revise such permit'' and inserting ``to comply with such standard and such revision shall take effect on the date 10 years after the date such standard is promulgated.''.
VOLUNTARY CONTROLS ADOPTED PRIOR TO NONATTAINMENT.
Section 182(b)(1)(C) is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``Any measures that were not expressly required by this Act, but that were voluntarily implemented, prior to the designation of the area as a nonattainment area shall be credited as additional reductions for purposes of any revised plan adopted for the area pursuant to this part following designation of the area as an ozone nonattainment area.''.
Paragraph (5) Extensions.--Section 181(a)(5)(B) is amended to read as follows: ``(B)(i) no more than one exceedance of the national ambient air quality standard for ozone has occurred in the area in the year preceding the Extension Year, ``(ii) the design value of the area (based on data from the year preceding the extension year) does not exceed the design value for the current classification of the area as specified in table 1 of paragraph (1), or ``(iii) the Administrator determines that infrequent episodic variations in air pollution levels caused by weather impact an area's ability to demonstrate attainment.''.
Additional Extension for Certain Areas.--Section 181(a) is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``(6) Attainment followed by violation.--Upon application by any State, the Administrator may extend, for up to an additional 3 years, the date specified in Table I of paragraph (1) of this subsection and the dates specified in section 182(b) regarding reasonable further progress, if-- ``(A) the area has in a 3-year period prior to the attainment date, qualified for redesignation as attainment for ozone, but ``(B) subsequent to such 3-year period, the area has violated the ozone standard.
No more than one extension may be issued under this paragraph for a single nonattainment area.''.
Section 107(d)(3) is amended as follows: (1) By amending the second sentence of subparagraph (D) to read as follows: ``The Administrator shall publish notice in the Federal Register of the Administrator's receipt of a request for redesignation.
The Administrator shall also publish notice in the Federal Register of the Administrator's proposed approval or denial within 90 days after receipt of a complete State redesignation submittal and approve or deny such redesignation within 90 days thereafter.''.
By adding the following at the end of subparagraph (E): ``If a State requests the Administrator to redesignate an area as attainment and submits information to the Administrator regarding such area adequate to demonstrate compliance with clauses (ii) through (v) and compliance (for a period of 3 years prior to the submission) with clause (i) and if the Administrator fails to publish notice in the Federal Register of the Administrator's proposed approval or denial of such request within 90 days after receipt of a complete State redesignation request or fails to approve or deny such request within 90 days thereafter, the area shall be deemed to be redesignated as an attainment area by operation of law on the date 180 days after the Administrator's receipt of a complete State redesignation request.''.
10. CREDIT FOR EPISODIC CONTROLS.
Section 110(a) is amended by inserting the following new subparagraph immediately after paragraph (3): ``(4) In determining whether the provisions of any plan or plan revision submitted under this Act are adequate to attain and maintain any national primary or secondary ambient air quality standard, the Administrator shall provide appropriate credits for plan provisions which are designed to control air pollution only during certain periods when levels of one or more air pollutants are, or are likely to be, at higher levels than at other periods.''.
OPT-IN REFORMULATED GAS AREAS.
Section 211(k)(6)(A) of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows: (1) By inserting the following after the second sentence: ``No area included in the coverage of the prohibition set forth in paragraph (5) pursuant to an application under this paragraph may continue to be included in such prohibition after December 31, 1999, unless the Governor of the State in which such area is located has notified the Administrator of such continued inclusion prior to December 31, 1997, and the Administrator has published such notice in the Federal Register.''.
By adding the following at the end thereof: ``An area that has been included in the coverage of the prohibition set forth in paragraph (5) pursuant to an application under this paragraph may subsequently be excluded from such coverage pursuant to an application by the Governor to the Administrator, but such exclusion shall not take effect for a period of 1-year after the application is approved (in the case of Phase I Reformulated Gas Regulations) or 8-years after the date on which the area was first included in the coverage of such prohibition (in the case of Phase II Reformulated Gas Regulations).
After an area is excluded from coverage pursuant to the preceding sentence, any subsequent inclusion (or subsequent exclusion) of the area from such coverage shall not take effect for a period of 1-year after the Governor's application is approved.
A Governor's application shall be treated as approved under this subparagraph on the date on which the Administrator publishes notice of such approval in the Federal Register.''.
NO&lt;greek-KH&gt; REDUCTIONS FOR REFORMULATED GAS.
Section 211(k)(2)(A) of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``The Administrator may not require that emissions of oxides of nitrogen (NO&lt;greek-KH&gt;) from baseline vehicles when using the reformulated gasoline be less than emissions from such vehicles when using baseline gasoline.''.
ESTABLISHING NATIONAL PRIMARY AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS.
Section 109 of the Clean Air Act is amended as follows: (1) At the end of subsection (a) add the following: ``(3) Within two years after the enactment of this paragraph the Administrator shall promulgate national primary ambient air quality goals and revised national primary ambient air quality standards.''.
In subsection (b)(1), strike ``prescribed, under subsection (a)'' and insert ``prescribed under subsection (a)(1)''.
Strike the last sentence of subsection (a)(1) and insert ``The national primary ambient air quality goals promulgated under subsection (a)(3) shall set forth a level of ambient air quality, based on such criteria and allowing an adequate margin of safety, that is requisite to protect the public health.
In establishing such level the Administrator shall not take into account infrequent episodic variations in air pollution levels that are caused by weather.
The revised national primary ambient air quality standards promulgated under subsection (a)(3) shall be as close to such national primary ambient air quality goals as feasible such that the incremental costs of attaining such standard do not exceed the incremental benefits of attaining the standard.''.
Section 176 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``Beginning on November 15, 1996, and at 4-year intervals thereafter, each State shall submit a revised inventory and performance plan for review by the Administrator.
Such plan shall include a certification by the State that the plan has been developed so as to meet air quality goals.
The applicability of a State approved implementation plan shall become effective for the purposes of this section upon signature of the Governor and shall continue unless disapproved by the Administrator within 30 days.
The form and content of the inventory and performance plan shall solely be within the purview of each State and the Administrator shall not disapprove such plan unless the Administrator determines that a State has developed an inventory and plan without adhering to such State's own processes and procedures.
If not disapproved within 30 days, such inventories and plans shall be considered approved.
Nothing in this section shall require the submission of an inventory or plan more than once every 4 years.''.
Section 181 is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``(d) Overwhelming Transport.--If, based on photochemical grid modeling demonstrations or any other analytical method determined by the Administrator to be as effective, the Administrator determines that the area is a downwind nonattainment area receiving ozone or ozone precursor transport from outside the area and control of ozone concentrations is beyond the ability of the area to control because volatile organic compounds and oxides of nitrogen from sources within such area do not make a significant contribution to ozone concentrations in such area (or in any other ozone nonattainment area), the Administrator may redesignate the area as attainment or as having a lower classification.''.
AUTOMOBILE INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
Section 182(c)(3)(C)(iv) is amended by inserting ``safety inspection approval or'' after ``denial of''.
Section 110 is amended by inserting the following new subsection immediately before subsection (f): ``(e) Emissions Trading Programs.--The Administrator shall approve any emissions trading program submitted under this section as part of an applicable implementation plan or implementation plan revision for any area unless the Administrator determines that such program would result in the failure of a nonattainment area to attain the national primary or secondary ambient air quality standards by the applicable attainment date or in the failure of an area that has been designated as attainment to maintain such standards.
The Administrator shall not be required to approve any plan which will result in increased emissions (beyond the maintenance plan level) of the criteria pollutant for which the area is classified as nonattainment.