OFFICE FOR MINORITY VETERANS.
In General.--Section 317 of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Office for Minority Veterans ``(a) There is in the Department an Office for Minority Veterans.
(1) There is at the head of the Office a Director who shall be appointed by the Secretary.
The Director shall be a career appointee in the Senior Executive Service.
In appointing the Director, the Secretary shall give preference to the appointment of a veteran.
The Director shall be appointed for a term of six years and may be reappointed for an additional term.
There is in the Office a Deputy Director who is the principal assistant of the Director.
The Deputy Director shall perform such functions as the Director shall prescribe.
The Director reports directly to the Secretary or the Deputy Secretary concerning the activities of the Office.
The Director shall perform the following functions with respect to veterans who are minority group members: ``(1) Serve as principal adviser to the Secretary on the adoption and implementation of policies and programs affecting veterans who are minority group members.
Make recommendations to the Secretary, the Under Secretary for Health, the Under Secretary for Benefits, and other Department officials for the establishment or improvement of programs in the Department for which veterans who are minority group members are eligible.
Promote the use of benefits authorized by this title by veterans who are minority group members and the conduct of outreach activities to veterans who are minority group members, in conjunction with outreach activities carried out under chapter 77 of this title.
Disseminate information and serve as a resource center for the exchange of information regarding innovative and successful programs which improve the services available to veterans who are minority group members.
Conduct and sponsor appropriate social and demographic research on the needs of veterans who are minority group members and the extent to which programs authorized under this title meet the needs of those veterans, without regard to any law concerning the collection of information from the public.
Analyze and evaluate complaints made by or on behalf of veterans who are minority group members about the adequacy and timeliness of services provided by the Department and advise the appropriate official of the Department of the results of such analysis or evaluation.
Consult with, and provide assistance and information to, officials responsible for administering Federal, State, local, and private programs that assist veterans, to encourage those officials to adopt policies which promote the use of those programs by veterans who are minority group members.
Advise the Secretary when laws or policies have the effect of discouraging the use of benefits by veterans who are minority group members.
Publicize the results of medical research which are of particular significance to veterans who are minority group members.
Advise the Secretary and other appropriate officials on the effectiveness of the Department's efforts to accomplish the goals of section 492B of the Public Health Service Act (relating to the inclusion of women and minorities in clinical research) and of particular health conditions affecting the health or minority group members which should be studied as part of the Department's medical research program and promote cooperation between the Department and other sponsors of medical research of potential benefit to veterans who are minority group members.
Perform such other duties consistent with this section as the Secretary shall prescribe.
The Secretary shall ensure that the Director is furnished sufficient resources to enable the Director to carry out the functions of the Office in a timely manner.
The Secretary shall include in documents submitted to Congress by the Secretary in support of the President's budget for each fiscal year-- ``(1) detailed information on the budget for the Office; ``(2) the Secretary's opinion as to whether the resources (including the number of employees) proposed in the budget for that fiscal year are adequate to enable the Office to comply with its statutory and regulatory duties; and ``(3) a report on the activities and significant accomplishments of the Office during the preceding fiscal year.
In this section, the term `minority group member' means an individual who is-- ``(1) Asian American; ``(2) Black; ``(3) Hispanic; ``(4) Native American (including American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian); or ``(5) Pacific-Islander American.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by striking out the item relating to section 317 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``317.
Office for Minority Veterans.''.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON MINORITY VETERANS.
Establishment.--Subchapter III of chapter 5 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Advisory Committee on Minority Veterans ``(a)(1) The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee to be known as the Advisory Committee on Minority Veterans (hereinafter in this section referred to as ``the Committee'').
(A) The Committee shall consist of members appointed by the Secretary from the general public, including-- ``(i) representatives of veterans who are minority group members; ``(ii) individuals who are recognized authorities in fields pertinent to the needs of veterans who are minority group members; ``(iii) veterans who are minority group members and who have experience in a military theater of operations; and ``(iv) veterans who are minority group members and who do not have such experience.
The Committee shall include, as ex officio members-- ``(i) the Secretary of Labor (or a representative of the Secretary of Labor designated by the Secretary after consultation with the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans' Employment); ``(ii) the Secretary of Defense (or a representative of the Secretary of Defense designated by the Secretary of Defense); ``(iii) the Secretary of the Interior (or a representative of the Secretary of the Interior designated by the Secretary of the Interior); ``(iv) the Secretary of Commerce (or a representative of the Secretary of Commerce designated by the Secretary of Commerce); ``(v) the Secretary of Health and Human Services (or a representative of the Secretary of Health and Human Services designated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services); and ``(vi) the Under Secretary for Health and the Under Secretary for Benefits, or their designees.
The Secretary may invite representatives of other departments and agencies of the United States to participate in the meetings and other activities of the Committee.
The Secretary shall determine the number, terms of service, and pay and allowances of members of the Committee appointed by the Secretary, except that a term of service of any such member may not exceed three years.
The Secretary may reappoint any such member for additional terms of service.
The Committee shall meet as often as the Secretary considers necessary or appropriate, but not less often than twice each fiscal year.
The Secretary shall, on a regular basis, consult with and seek the advice of the Committee with respect to the administration of benefits by the Department for veterans who are minority group members, reports and studies pertaining to such veterans and the needs of such veterans with respect to compensation, health care, rehabilitation, outreach, and other benefits and programs administered by the Department.
(1) Not later than July 1 of each even-numbered year, the Committee shall submit to the Secretary a report on the programs and activities of the Department that pertain to veterans who are minority group members.
Each such report shall include-- ``(A) an assessment of the needs of veterans who are minority group members with respect to compensation, health care, rehabilitation, outreach, and other benefits and programs administered by the Department; ``(B) a review of the programs and activities of the Department designed to meet such needs; and ``(C) such recommendations (including recommendations for administrative and legislative action) as the Committee considers appropriate.
The Secretary shall, within 60 days after receiving each report under paragraph (1), submit to Congress a copy of the report, together with any comments concerning the report that the Secretary considers appropriate.
The Committee may also submit to the Secretary such other reports and recommendations as the Committee considers appropriate.
The Secretary shall submit with each annual report submitted to the Congress pursuant to section 529 of this title a summary of all reports and recommendations of the Committee submitted to the Secretary since the previous annual report of the Secretary submitted pursuant to such section.
In this section, the term `minority group member' means an individual who is-- ``(1) Asian American; ``(2) Black; ``(3) Hispanic; ``(4) Native American (including American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian); or ``(5) Pacific-Islander American.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding after the item relating to section 543 the following new item: ``544.
Advisory Committee on Minority Veterans.''.
REPRESENTATIVES FOR MINORITY VETERANS AT DEPARTMENT FACILITIES.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall designate an appropriate official at each regional office of the Department of Veterans Affairs and at each medical facility of the Department to serve as the minority affairs officer of the Department at the office or facility.
The officials shall perform such functions as the Secretary shall prescribe.
OFFICE FOR WOMEN VETERANS.
In General.--(1) Chapter 3 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 1(a) of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Office for Women Veterans ``(a) There is in the Department an Office for Women Veterans.
(1) There is at the head of the Office a Director who shall be appointed by the Secretary.
The Director shall be a career appointee in the Senior Executive Service.
In appointing the Director, the Secretary shall give preference to the appointment of a veteran.
The Director shall be appointed for a term of six years and may be reappointed for an additional term.
There is in the Office a Deputy Director who is the principal assistant of the Director.
The Deputy Director shall perform such functions as the Director shall prescribe.
The Director reports directly to the Secretary or the Deputy Secretary concerning the activities of the Office.
The Director shall perform the following functions with respect to veterans who are women: ``(1) Serve as principal adviser to the Secretary on the adoption and implementation of policies and programs affecting veterans who are women.
Make recommendations to the Secretary, the Under Secretary for Health, the Under Secretary for Benefits, and other Department officials for the establishment or improvement of programs in the Department for which veterans who are women are eligible.
Promote the use of benefits authorized by this title by veterans who are women and the conduct of outreach activities to veterans who are women, in conjunction with outreach activities carried out under chapter 77 of this title.
Disseminate information and serve as a resource center for the exchange of information regarding innovative and successful programs which improve the services available to veterans who are women.
Conduct and sponsor appropriate social and demographic research on the needs of veterans who are women and the extent to which programs authorized under this title meet the needs of those veterans, without regard to any law concerning the collection of information from the public.
Analyze and evaluate complaints made by or on behalf of veterans who are women about the adequacy and timeliness of services provided by the Department and advise the appropriate official of the Department of the results of such analysis or evaluation.
Consult with, and provide assistance and information to, officials responsible for administering Federal, State, local, and private programs that assist veterans, to encourage those officials to adopt policies which promote the use of those programs by veterans who are women.
Advise the Secretary when laws or policies have the effect of discouraging the use of benefits by veterans who are women.
Publicize the results of medical research which are of particular significance to veterans who are women.
Advise the Secretary and other appropriate officials on the effectiveness of the Department's efforts to accomplish the goals of section 492B of the Public Health Service Act (relating to the inclusion of women and minorities in clinical research) and of particular health conditions affecting womens' health which should be studied as part of the Department's medical research program and promote cooperation between the Department and other sponsors of medical research of potential benefit to veterans who are women.
Provide support and administrative services to the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans established under section 542 of this title.
Perform such other duties consistent with this section as the Secretary shall prescribe.
The Secretary shall ensure that the Director is furnished sufficient resources to enable the Director to carry out the functions of the Office in a timely manner.
The Secretary shall include in documents submitted to Congress by the Secretary in support of the President's budget for each fiscal year-- ``(1) detailed information on the budget for the Office; ``(2) the Secretary's opinion as to whether the resources (including the number of employees) proposed in the budget for that fiscal year are adequate to enable the Office to comply with its statutory and regulatory duties; and ``(3) a report on the activities and significant accomplishments of the Office during the preceding fiscal year.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter, as amended by section 1(b) of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``318.
Office for Women Veterans.''.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON WOMEN VETERANS.
Members.--Paragraph (2)(A) of section 542(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking out ``and'' at the end of clause (ii); (2) by striking out the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting in lieu a semicolon; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(iii) women veterans who have experience in a military theater of operations; and ``(iv) women veterans who do not have such experience.