This Act may be cited as the ``K-12 Community Participation Act of 1998''.
CREDIT FOR ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOL EXPENSES AND FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS WHICH PROVIDE SCHOLARSHIPS FOR STUDENTS ATTENDING SUCH SCHOOLS.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOL EXPENSES AND FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS WHICH PROVIDE SCHOLARSHIPS FOR STUDENTS ATTENDING SUCH SCHOOLS.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(1) the qualified elementary and secondary education expenses which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer during such taxable year, and ``(2) the qualified charitable contributions of the taxpayer for the taxable year.
Maximum Credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed-- ``(1) $100 in the case of taxable years beginning in calendar year 1998, ``(2) $150 in the case of taxable years beginning in calendar year 1999, ``(3) $200 in the case of taxable years beginning in calendar year 2000, and ``(4) $250 in the case of taxable years beginning after calendar year 2000.
In the case of a joint return, the limitation under this subsection shall be twice the dollar amount otherwise applicable under the preceding sentence.
Qualified Elementary and Secondary Education Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified elementary and secondary education expenses' means tuition, fees, tutoring, special needs services, books, supplies, computer equipment (including related software and services) and other equipment, transportation, and supplementary expenses required for the enrollment or attendance of any individual at a public, private, or religious school.
Special rule for home-schooling.--Such term shall include expenses described in paragraph (1) required for education provided for homeschooling if the requirements of any applicable State or local law are met with respect to such education.
School.--The term `school' means any school which provides elementary education or secondary education (through grade 12), as determined under State law.
Qualified Charitable Contribution.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified charitable contribution' means, with respect to any taxable year, the amount allowable as a deduction under section 170 for cash contributions to a school tuition organization.
School tuition organization.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `school tuition organization' means any organization described in section 170(c)(2) if the annual disbursements of the organization for elementary and secondary school scholarship are normally not less than 90 percent of the sum of such organization's annual gross income and contributions and gifts.
Exceptions.--Such term shall not include any organization if substantially all of its scholarships (by value) may be used to attend only 1 school.
Elementary and secondary school scholarship.--The term `elementary and secondary school scholarship' means any scholarship excludable from gross income under section 117 for expenses related to education at or below the 12th grade.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Denial of double benefit.--No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any contribution for which credit is allowed under this section.
Application with other credits.--The credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(A) the regular tax for the taxable year, reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and the preceding sections of this subpart, over ``(B) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
Controlled groups.--All persons who are treated as one employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 shall be treated as 1 taxpayer for purposes of this section.
Election To Have Credit Not Apply.--A taxpayer may elect to have this section not apply for any taxable year.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Credit for elementary and secondary school expenses and for contributions to charitable organizations which provide scholarships for students attending such schools.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.