This Act may be cited as the ``College Completion Challenge Grant Act of 2000''.
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001 et sequentes).
SUMMER PROGRAMS AND SUPPLEMENTARY GRANTS.
Duration of Grants.--The matter preceding subparagraph (A) of section 402A(b)(2) (20 United States Code 1070a-11(b)(2)) is amended by inserting ``, except grants made under section 402D(d),'' before ``shall''.
Minimum Grants.--Section 402A(b)(3)(A) (20 United States Code 1070a- 11(b)(3)(A)) is amended by striking ``sections 402D'' and inserting ``sections 402D(a)''.
College Completion Challenge Grants.--Section 402D (20 United States Code 1070a-14) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) College Completion Challenge Grants.-- ``(1) Reservation.--For any fiscal year, the Secretary may reserve not more than 20 percent of the funds made available under this section for College Completion Challenge Grants in accordance with this subsection.
Eligible entities.--The following entities may apply for a College Completion Challenge Grant: ``(A) A recipient of a grant under subsection (a).
Any entity described in section 402A(b)(1) that demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that it is providing services described in subsection (a).
Subject to paragraph (5), any entity that is seeking a grant under subsection (a).
Uses of funds; requirements.--(A) Subject to paragraph (4)(B), a recipient of a grant under this subsection may use those funds to provide grant aid under subparagraph (B) or a summer program under subparagraph (C).
(i) Except as provided in subparagraphs (C)(i) and (D), a recipient of a grant under this subsection may use those funds to provide grants to students who are in their first 2 years of postsecondary education and who are receiving Federal Pell Grants under subpart 1.
(I) The Secretary may, by regulation, establish minimum award levels for grants to students under clause (i), taking into account such factors as the different costs of attendance associated with public and private institutions.
If the Secretary does not establish minimum award levels under subclause (I), or if an institution wishes to provide grants under clause (i) in an amount less than the minimum set by the Secretary, the institution shall demonstrate in its application, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that the size of the grants it will provide to students is appropriate and likely to have a significant effect on student retention at that institution.
A grant provided to a student under clause (i) shall not be considered in determining that student's need for grant or work assistance under this title, except that in no case shall the total amount of student financial assistance awarded to a student under this title exceed that student's cost of attendance, as defined in section 472.
(i) A recipient of a grant under this subsection may use those funds to establish an intensive summer program for incoming first-year students (or students entering their second or third year of postsecondary education if the institution can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that it is addressing the needs of first-year students and that a summer program may help retention of second- or third-year students at risk of dropping out of school).
A summer program under this subparagraph shall-- ``(I) be no shorter than 6 weeks; ``(II) include room, board, and the cost of the program, at no cost to the student; and ``(III) include a stipend.
A recipient of funds under this subsection may serve students who have completed their first 2 years of postsecondary education if it demonstrates in its application, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that-- ``(i) these students are at high risk of dropping out of school; and ``(ii) it will first meet the needs of all its eligible first- and second-year students for services under this subsection.
Applications.--(A) Each eligible applicant that desires a grant under this subsection shall submit to the Secretary an application for that grant at such time and containing such information as the Secretary may prescribe.
Each eligible applicant that submits to the Secretary an application that does not propose to use funds under this subsection for both grants under paragraph (3)(B) and a summer program under paragraph (3)(C) shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, how it will otherwise provide both grants under paragraph (3)(B) and a summer program under paragraph (3)(C).
Each eligible applicant for a grant under this subsection whose grant under subsection (a) will end prior to its grant under this subsection shall describe, in its application for a grant under this subsection, how it will continue to carry out the services and activities it carried out under subsection (a) during the duration of its grant under subsection (a).
Each eligible applicant for a grant under this subsection that is not receiving funds under subsection (a) shall describe in its application, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, the services described under subsection (a) that it is providing using funds other than funds provided under subsection (a).
Special rule.-- Any eligible applicant that is applying for grants under both subsection (a) and this subsection that does not provide the services described under subsection (a) at the time of application through funding sources other than subsection (a) may not receive a grant under this subsection unless it also receives a grant under subsection (a).
Matching funds.--(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a recipient of a grant under this subsection shall provide, from non-Federal funds, not less than 33 percent of the total cost, in cash, of its program under this subsection.
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any institution of higher education that is eligible to receive funds under part A or B of title III, or under title V. ``(7) Duration of grants.--Grants under this subsection shall be awarded for a period of 4 years.