This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive One-Call Notification Act of 1995''.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Damage.--The term ``damage'' means any impact or contact with an underground facility, its appurtenances, or its protective coating, or weakening of the support for the facility or protective housing, which requires repair.
Excavation.--The term ``excavation'' means any operation in which earth, rock, or other material in the ground is moved, removed, or otherwise displaced by means of any mechanized tools or equipment, or any explosive, but shall not include-- (A) any generally accepted normal agricultural practices and activities taken in support thereof, as determined by each State, including tilling of the soil for agricultural purposes to a depth of 18 inches or less; (B) generally accepted normal lawn and garden activities, as determined by each State; and (C) the excavation of a gravesite in a cemetery.
Excavator.--The term ``excavator'' means a person who conducts excavation.
Facility operator.--The term ``facility operator'' means any person who operates an underground facility.
Person.--The term ``person'' includes any agency of Federal, State, or local government.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
State.--The term ``State'' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, or Puerto Rico.
State program.--The term ``State program'' means the program of a State to establish or maintain a one-call notification system.
Underground facility.--The term ``underground facility'' means any underground line, system, or structure that is part of a system in interstate commerce used for transmitting or distributing electricity or communication.
NATIONWIDE TOLL-FREE NUMBER SYSTEM.
Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, in consultation with the Federal Communications Commission, facility operators, excavators, and one-call notification system operators, provide for the establishment of a nationwide toll- free telephone number system to be used by State one-call notification systems.
Consideration.--Each State shall consider whether to adopt a comprehensive statewide one-call notification program with each element described in section 5, to protect all underground facilities from damage due to any excavation.
Such State program may be provided for through the establishment of a new program, or through modification or improvement of an existing program, and may be implemented by a nongovernmental organization.
Such State program may include protection of facilities not part of a system in interstate commerce.
Procedures.--State consideration under subsection (a) shall be undertaken after public notice and hearing, and shall be completed within 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Such consideration may be undertaken as part of any proceeding of a State with respect to the safety of underground facilities.
Compliance.--If a State fails to comply with the requirements of subsection (a), the Secretary or any person aggrieved by such failure may in a civil action obtain appropriate relief against any appropriate officer or entity of the State, including the State itself, to compel such compliance.
Appropriateness.--Nothing in this Act prohibits a State from making a determination that it is not appropriate to adopt a State program described in section 5, pursuant to its authority under otherwise applicable State law.
ELEMENTS OF STATE PROGRAM.
In General.--Each State's consideration under section 4(a) shall include consideration of program elements that-- (1) provide for a one-call notification system or systems which shall-- (A) apply to all excavators and to all facility operators; (B) operate in all areas of the State and not duplicate the geographical coverage of other one-call notification systems; (C) receive and record appropriate information from excavators about intended excavations; (D) inform facility operators of any intended excavations that may be in the vicinity of their underground facilities; and (E) inform excavators of the identity of facility operators who will be notified of the intended excavation; (2) provide for 24-hour coverage for emergency excavation, with the manner and scope of coverage determined by the State; (3) employ mechanisms to ensure that the general public, and in particular all excavators, are aware of the one-call telephone number and the requirements, penalties, and benefits of the State program relating to excavations; (4) inform excavators of any procedures that the State has determined must be followed when excavating; (5) require that any excavator must contact the one-call notification system in accordance with State specifications, which may vary depending on whether the excavation is short term, long term, routine, continuous, or emergency; (6) require facility operators to provide for locating and marking or otherwise identifying their facilities at an excavation site, in accordance with State specifications, which may vary depending on whether the excavation is short term, long term, routine, continuous, or emergency; (7) provide effective mechanisms for penalties and enforcement as described in section 6; (8) provide for a fair and appropriate schedule of fees to cover the costs of providing for, maintaining, and operating the State program; (9) provide an opportunity for citizen suits to enforce the State program; and (10) require railroads to report any accidents that occur during or as a result of routine railroad maintenance to the Secretary and the appropriate local officials.
Exception.--Where excavation is undertaken by or for a person, on real property owned or leased, or in which an oil or gas mineral leasehold interest is held, by that person, and the same person operates all underground facilities located at the site of the excavation, a State program may elect not to require that such person contact the one-call notification system before excavating.
General Penalties.--Each State's consideration under section 4(a) shall include consideration of a requirement that any excavator or facility operator who violates the requirements of the State program shall be liable for an appropriate administrative or civil penalty.
Increased Penalties.--If a violation results in damage to an underground facility resulting in death, serious bodily harm, or actual damage to property exceeding $50,000, the penalties shall be increased, and an additional penalty of imprisonment may be assessed for a knowing and willful violation.
Decreased Penalties.--Each State's consideration under section 4(a) shall include consideration of reduced penalties for a violation, that results in or could result in damage, that is promptly reported by the violator.
Equitable Relief and Mandamus Actions.--Each State's consideration under section 4(a) shall include consideration of provisions for appropriate equitable relief and mandamus actions.
Immediate Citation of Violations.--Each State's consideration under section 4(a) shall include consideration of procedures for issuing a citation of violation at the site and time of the violation.
Authority.--Using $4,000,000 of the amounts previously collected under section 7005 of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (previously codified as 49 United States Code App.
1682a) or section 60301 of title 49, United States Code, for each of the fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998, to the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the Secretary shall make grants to States, or to operators of one-call notification systems in such States, which have elected to adopt a State program described in section 5, or to establish and maintain a State program pursuant to subsection (b) of this section.
Such grants may be used in establishing one-call notification systems, modifying existing systems to conform to standards established under this Act, and improving systems to exceed such standards.
Such grants may be used to-- (1) improve communications systems linking one-call notification systems; (2) improve location capabilities, including training personnel and developing and using location technology; (3) improve record retention and recording capabilities; (4) enhance public information and education campaigns; (5) increase and improve enforcement mechanisms, including administrative processing of violations; and (6) otherwise further the purposes of this Act.
Alternate Form of State Program.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) to a State that establishes or maintains a State program that differs from a State program described in section 5 if such State program is at least as protective of the public health and safety and the environment as a State program described in section 5.
Coordination With Other Responsibilities.-- (1) Coordination.--The Secretary shall coordinate the implementation of this Act with appropriate Federal agencies.
Review of programs.--Within 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall review, and report to Congress on, the extent to which any policies, programs, and procedures of the Department of Commerce could be used to achieve the purposes of this Act.
Model Program.-- (1) Development.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with facility operators, excavators, one-call notification system operators, and State and local governments, shall develop and make available to States a model State program, including a model enforcement program.
Such model program may be amended by the Secretary on the Secretary's initiative or in response to reports submitted by the States pursuant to section 9, or as a result of workshops conducted under paragraph (3) of this subsection.
Suggested elements.--The model program developed under paragraph (1) shall include all elements of a State program described in section 5.
The Secretary shall consider incorporating the following elements into the model program: (A) The one-call notification system or systems shall-- (i) receive and record appropriate information from excavators about intended excavations, including-- (I) the name of the person contacting the one-call notification system; (II) the name, address, and telephone number of the excavator; (III) the specific location of the intended excavation, along with the starting date thereof and a description of the intended excavation activity; and (IV) the name, address, and telephone number of the person for whom the work is being performed; and (ii) maintain records on each notice of intent to excavate for the period of time necessary to ensure that such records remain available for use in the adjudication of any claims relating to the excavation.
The provision of information on excavation requirements at the time of issuance of excavation or building permits, or other specific mechanisms for ensuring excavator awareness.
A requirement that any excavator must contact the one-call notification system at least 2 business days, and not more than 10 business days, before excavation begins.
Alternative notification procedures for excavation activities conducted as a normal part of ongoing operations within specific geographic locations over an extended period of time.
A requirement that facility operators-- (i) provide for locating and marking, in accordance with the American Public Works Association Uniform Color Code for Utilities, or otherwise identifying, in accordance with standards established by the State or the American National Standards Institute, their underground facilities at the site of an intended excavation within no more than 2 business days after notification of such intended excavation; and (ii) monitor such excavation as appropriate.
Provision for notification of excavators if no underground facilities are located at the excavation site.
Provision for the approval of a State program under this Act with time limitations longer than those required under subparagraphs (C) and (E) of this paragraph where special circumstances, such as severe weather conditions or remoteness of location, pertain.
Procedures for excavators and facility operators to follow when the location of underground facilities is unknown.
Procedures to improve underground facility location capabilities, including compiling and notifying excavators, facility operators, and one-call centers of any information about previously unknown underground facility locations when such information is discovered.
Alternative rules for timely compliance with State program requirements in emergency circumstances.
If a State has procedures for licensing or permitting entities to do business, procedures for the revocation of the license or permit to do business of any excavator determined to be a habitual violator of the requirements of the State program.
Workshops.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall conduct workshops with facility operators, excavators, one-call notification system operators, and State and local governments in order to develop, amend, and promote the model program, and to provide an opportunity to share information among such parties and to recognize State programs that exemplify the goals of this Act.
Public Education.--The Secretary shall develop, in conjunction with facility operators, excavators, one-call notification system operators, and State and local governments, public service announcements and other educational materials and programs to be broadcast or published to educate the public about one-call notification systems, including the national phone number.
Requirement.-- (1) Initial report.--Within 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, each State shall submit to the Secretary a report on progress made in implementing this Act.
Status reports.--Within 4\1/2\ years after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, each State shall report to the Secretary on the status of its State program, if any, and its requirements, and any other information the Secretary requires.
Simplified Reporting Form.--Within 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop and distribute to the States a simplified form for complying with the reporting requirements of subsection (a)(2).
Nothing in this Act prohibits a State from implementing a one-call notification system that provides greater protection for underground facilities from damage due to excavation than a system established pursuant to this Act.
SENSE OF CONGRESS; REQUIREMENT REGARDING NOTICE.
Purchase of American-Made Equipment and Products.--It is the sense of Congress that, to the greatest extent practicable, all equipment and products purchased with funds made available under this Act should be American-made.
Notice to Recipients of Assistance.--In providing financial assistance under this Act, the Secretary, to the greatest extent practicable, shall provide to each recipient of the assistance a notice describing the statement made in subsection (a).