This Act may be cited as the ``Rancher Preservation Act''.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS REGARDING BLACK-TAILED PRAIRIE DOG.
In General.--Section 13 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 is amended to read as follows: ``special requirements regarding black-tailed prairie dog ``Sec.
Use of Best Scientific and Commercial Data Available.--In any case in which the Secretary is required by this Act to use the best scientific and commercial data available with respect to determining whether the black-tailed prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicianus) is an endangered species or a threatened species, the Secretary-- ``(1) in evaluating comparable data, shall give greater weight to scientific or commercial data that are empirical or have been field-tested or peer-reviewed; and ``(2) shall include, in data used with respect to that species, data regarding population numbers of the species.
Field Data.-- ``(1) Requirement.--The Secretary may not determine under section 4 that the black-tailed prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicianus) is an endangered species or a threatened species unless the determination is supported by data obtained by observation of the species in the field.
Data from landowners.--The Secretary shall-- ``(A) accept and acknowledge receipt of data regarding the status of that species that is collected by an owner of land through observation of the species on the land; and ``(B) include the data in the rulemaking record compiled for any determination that the species is an endangered species or a threatened species.
Independent Scientific Review Requirements.-- ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection: ``(A) Action.--The term `action' means-- ``(i) the determination that the black- tailed prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicianus) is an endangered species or a threatened species under section 4(a); and ``(ii) the determination under section 4(a) that the black-tailed prairie dog should be removed from any list published under section 4(c)(1).
Qualified individual.--The term `qualified individual' means an individual with expertise in the biological sciences-- ``(i) who through publication of peer- reviewed scientific literature or other means, has demonstrated scientific expertise on the black-tailed prairie dog or a similar species or other scientific expertise relevant to the decision of the Secretary under section 4(a) or (f); ``(ii) who does not have, or represent any person with, a conflict of interest with respect to the determination that is the subject of the review; ``(iii) who is not a participant in any petition or proposed or final determination before the Secretary; and ``(iv) who has no direct financial interest, and is not employed by any person with a direct financial interest, in opposing the action under consideration.
List of independent scientific reviewers.--The Secretary shall solicit recommendations from the National Academy of Sciences and develop and maintain a list of qualified reviewers to participate in independent scientific review of actions.
Appointment of independent scientific reviewers.--(A) Before any action shall become final, the Secretary shall appoint randomly, from among the list prepared in accordance with this section, 3 qualified individuals who shall review and report to the Secretary on the scientific information and analyses on which the proposed action is based.
The selection and activities of the reviewers selected pursuant to this section shall not be subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Reviewers shall be compensated for conducting the independent review.
Opinion of peer reviewers.--Independent reviewers shall provide the Secretary, within 3 months, their opinion regarding all relevant scientific information and assumptions relating to the taxonomy, population models, and supportive biological and ecological information for the black-tailed prairie dog.
Final determination.--If the referees have made a recommendation on a proposed action, the Secretary shall evaluate and consider the information that results from the independent scientific review and include in the final determination-- ``(A) a summary of the results of the independent scientific review; and ``(B) in a case in which the recommendation of a majority of the referees who conducted the independent scientific review is not followed, an explanation as to why the recommendation was not followed.
Public notice.--The report of the peer reviewers shall be included in the official record of the proposed action and shall be available for public review prior to the close of the comment period on the proposed action.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections in the first section of such Act is amended by striking the item relating to section 13 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Special requirements regarding black-tailed prairie dog.