of Disapproval.-- (1) Joint resolution of disapproval defined.--In this section, the term ``joint resolution of disapproval'' means only a joint resolution of the two Houses of Congress-- (A) that does not have a preamble; (B) the title of which is as follows: ``Joint resolution disapproving a nuclear agreement with Iran''; and (C) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress disapproves of the agreement relating to Iran's nuclear program submitted by the President to Congress under section 3(a) of the Iran Nuclear Negotiations Act of 2014 on ______.
'', with the blank space being filled with the appropriate date.
Reconvening.--Upon receipt by Congress of an agreement described in paragraph (2) of subsection (a), as required by paragraph (1) of that subsection-- (A) the Speaker, if the House of Representatives would otherwise be adjourned, shall notify the Members of the House that, pursuant to this section, the House shall convene not later than the second calendar day after receipt of the agreement; and (B) if the Senate has adjourned or recessed for more than 2 days, the majority leader of the Senate, after consultation with the minority leader of the Senate, shall notify the Members of the Senate that, pursuant to this section, the Senate shall convene not later than the second calendar day after receipt of the agreement.
Introduction.--During the 15-calendar day period beginning on the calendar day after the end of the 15-calendar day period described in subsection (b), a joint resolution of disapproval may be introduced-- (A) in the House of Representatives, by the Speaker (or his designee) or the minority leader (or his designee); and (B) in the Senate, by the majority leader (or his designee) or the minority leader (or his designee).
Committee referral.--A joint resolution of disapproval introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations and a joint resolution of disapproval introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
Discharge of committees.--If the committee of either House to which a joint resolution of disapproval has been referred has not reported the joint resolution at the end of the 15-calendar day period after the introduction of the joint resolution, that committee shall be discharged from further consideration of the joint resolution and the joint resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
Floor consideration in the house of representatives.-- (A) Motions to proceed.--After the committee authorized to consider a joint resolution of disapproval reports it to the House of Representatives or has been discharged from its consideration, it shall be in order to move to proceed to consider the joint resolution in the House.
All points of order against the motion are waived.
Such a motion shall not be in order after the House has disposed of a motion to proceed on the joint resolution.
The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the motion to its adoption without intervening motion.
The motion shall not be debatable.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is disposed of shall not be in order.
Consideration.--A joint resolution of disapproval shall be considered as read.
All points of order against the joint resolution and against its consideration are waived.
The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the joint resolution to its passage without intervening motion, except 20 hours of debate equally divided and controlled by the proponent and an opponent.
A motion to reconsider the vote on passage of the joint resolution shall not be in order.
No amendment to, or motion to recommit, a joint resolution of disapproval shall be in order.
Appeals.--All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to a joint resolution of disapproval shall be decided without debate.
Floor consideration in the senate.-- (A) In general.--Notwithstanding Rule XXII of the Standing Rules of the Senate, it is in order at any time after the committee authorized to consider a joint resolution of disapproval reports it to the Senate or has been discharged from its consideration (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) to move to proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution, and all points of order against the joint resolution (and against consideration of the joint resolution) are waived.
The motion to proceed is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to a motion to postpone.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution is agreed to, the joint resolution shall remain the unfinished business until disposed of.
Debate.--Debate in the Senate on a joint resolution of disapproval, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection with such a resolution, shall be limited to not more than 20 hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
A motion to further limit debate is in order and not debatable.
An amendment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the joint resolution of disapproval is not in order.
Vote on passage.--The vote on passage shall occur immediately following the conclusion of the debate on a joint resolution of disapproval, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the Senate.
Rulings of the chair on procedure.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate to the procedure relating to a joint resolution of disapproval shall be decided without debate.
Consideration of veto messages.--Debate in the Senate of any veto message with respect to a joint resolution of disapproval, including all debatable motions and appeals in connection with such a joint resolution, shall be limited to 10 hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Rules relating to senate and house of representatives.-- (A) Coordination with action by other house.--If, before the passage by one House of a joint resolution of disapproval of that House, that House receives from the other House a joint resolution of disapproval, then the following procedures shall apply: (i) The joint resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee.
With respect to a joint resolution of the House receiving the resolution-- (I) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no joint resolution had been received from the other House; but (II) the vote on passage shall be on the joint resolution of the other House.
Treatment of joint resolution of other house.-- If one House fails to introduce or consider a joint resolution of disapproval under this section, the joint resolution of disapproval of the other House shall be entitled to expedited floor procedures under this section.
Treatment of companion measures.--If, following passage of a joint resolution of disapproval in the Senate, the Senate then receives the companion measure from the House of Representatives, the companion measure shall not be debatable.
Rules of the house of representatives and the senate.-- This subsection is enacted by Congress-- (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and the House of Representatives, respectively, and as such is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a joint resolution, and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Limitation on Funding for Implementation of Agreement.--No funds authorized to be appropriated for the Department of State that remain available for obligation as of the date of the enactment of this Act may be obligated or expended to implement an agreement described in subsection (a)(2), including for the waiver, suspension, or other reduction of any sanctions with respect to Iran pursuant to such an agreement, if-- (1) the President fails to submit the agreement to Congress as required by subsection (a); or (2) a joint resolution of disapproval is enacted into law pursuant to subsection (b).
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section or any action taken pursuant to this section shall be construed as approval of any waiver, suspension, or other reduction of any sanctions with respect to Iran in connection with any agreement relating to Iran's nuclear program.
PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE WITH INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS RELATING TO IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
Assessment of Compliance.--If any element of the intelligence community (as defined in section 3 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 3003)) receives information from any person, including the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Energy, a foreign government, a foreign intelligence service, or another reputable source, that Iran has failed to comply with the terms of the Joint Plan of Action, any agreement to implement the Joint Plan of Action, or any other agreement related to Iran's nuclear program (including an agreement described in section 3(a)(2)), or has refused to cooperate in any substantive way with appropriate requests of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Director of National Intelligence shall-- (1) not later than 10 calendar days after receiving that information, determine whether the information is credible and accurate; and (2) submit to the appropriate congressional committees-- (A) the information; and (B) the determination of the Director with respect to whether the information is credible and accurate and the reasons for that determination.
Reinstatement of Sanctions.--If the Director of National Intelligence determines that information described in subsection (a) is credible and accurate, any sanctions imposed with respect to Iran that have been waived, suspended, or otherwise reduced in connection with negotiations with Iran relating to Iran's nuclear program, without regard to whether the waiver, suspension, or other reduction of those sanctions took effect before or after the date of the enactment of this Act, shall be reinstated in full by action of law on that date that is 5 calendar days after the date of the determination.
ENFORCEMENT OF TIMELINE FOR NEGOTIATING NUCLEAR AGREEMENTS WITH IRAN.
Any sanctions imposed with respect to Iran that have been waived, suspended, or otherwise reduced in connection with negotiations with Iran relating to Iran's nuclear program, without regard to whether the waiver, suspension, or other reduction of those sanctions took effect before or after the date of the enactment of this Act, shall be reinstated in full by action of law on November 28, 2014, unless, before that date, the President-- (1) submits to Congress an agreement described in paragraph (2) of section 3(a) as required by paragraph (1) of that section; and (2) certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that the agreement is a comprehensive and long-term agreement that-- (A) addresses all key aspects of Iran's nuclear program; and (B) is of a duration that is significantly longer than any nuclear-related agreement between the United States and Iran entered into before the date of the enactment of this Act.