COVERAGE OF HAIR PROSTHESES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
Group Health Plans.-- (1) Public health service act amendments.--(A) Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
REQUIREMENT FOR COVERAGE OF HAIR PROSTHESES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
Requirement.-- ``(1) In general.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall provide coverage for scalp hair prosthesis for a participant or beneficiary who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata if the attending physician of the participant or beneficiary certifies in writing the medical necessity of that proposed course of rehabilitative treatment.
Cost-Sharing.--The coverage required under this subsection is not subject to dollar limits, deductibles, and coinsurance provisions that are less favorable than those for other prosthesis coverage under the plan or coverage, except that a group health plan or health insurance issuer may provide that the plan or issuer will only pay for 80 percent of the customary and usual costs of the scalp hair prosthesis exclusive of any deductible.
Definition.--As used in this subsection, the term `scalp hair prosthesis' includes any artificial substitutes for scalp hair.
Notice.--A group health plan under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 714(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements of this section as if such section applied to such plan.''.
Section 2723(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-23(c)) is amended by striking ``section 2704'' and inserting ``sections 2704 and 2707''.
ERISA amendments.--(A) Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
REQUIREMENT FOR COVERAGE OF HAIR PROSTHESES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
Requirement.-- ``(1) In general.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall provide coverage for scalp hair prosthesis for a participant or beneficiary who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata if the attending physician of the participant or beneficiary certifies in writing the medical necessity of that proposed course of rehabilitative treatment.
Cost-sharing.--The coverage required under this subsection is not subject to dollar limits, deductibles, and coinsurance provisions that are less favorable than those for other prosthesis coverage under the plan or coverage, except that a group health plan or health insurance issuer may provide that the plan or issuer will only pay for 80 percent of the customary and usual costs of the scalp hair prosthesis exclusive of any deductible.
Definition.--As used in this subsection, the term `scalp hair prosthesis' includes any artificial substitutes for scalp hair.
Notice Under Group Health Plan.--The imposition of the requirement of this section shall be treated as a material modification in the terms of the plan described in section 102(a)(1), for purposes of assuring notice of such requirements under the plan; except that the summary description required to be provided under the last sentence of section 104(b)(1) with respect to such modification shall be provided by not later than 60 days after the first day of the first plan year in which such requirement apply.''.
Section 731(c) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191(c)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 714''.
Section 732(a) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191a(a)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 714''.
The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 713 the following new item: ``Sec.
Requirement for coverage of hair prostheses for individuals with scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.''.
Internal revenue code amendments.-- (A) In general.--Subchapter B of chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (i) in the table of sections, by inserting after the item relating to section 9812 the following new item: ``Sec.
Requirement for coverage of hair prostheses for individuals with scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.
''; and (ii) by inserting after section 9812 the following: ``SEC.
REQUIREMENT FOR COVERAGE OF HAIR PROSTHESES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
Requirement.--A group health plan shall provide coverage for scalp hair prosthesis for an participant or beneficiary who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata if the attending physician of the participant or beneficiary certifies in writing the medical necessity of that proposed course of rehabilitative treatment.
Cost-Sharing.--The coverage required under this section is not subject to dollar limits, deductibles, and coinsurance provisions that are less favorable than those for other prosthesis coverage under the plan or coverage, except that a group health plan may provide that the plan will only pay for 80 percent of the customary and usual costs of the scalp hair prosthesis exclusive of any deductible.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term `scalp hair prosthesis' includes any artificial substitutes for scalp hair.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 4980D(d)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 9811'' and inserting ``sections 9811 and 9813''.
Individual Health Insurance.--(1) Part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after section 2752 the following new section: ``SEC.
REQUIREMENT FOR COVERAGE OF HAIR PROSTHESES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
In General.--The provisions of section 2707(a) shall apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in the individual market in the same manner as they apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan in the small or large group market.
Notice.--A health insurance issuer under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 714(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements referred to in subsection (a) as if such section applied to such issuer and such issuer were a group health plan.''.
Section 2762(b)(2) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-62(b)(2)) is amended by striking ``section 2751'' and inserting ``sections 2751 and 2753''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Group health plans and group health insurance coverage.--Subject to paragraph (3), the amendments made by subsection (a) apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2002.
Individual health insurance coverage.--The amendments made by subsection (b) apply with respect to health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the individual market on or after such date.
Collective bargaining exception.--In the case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining agreements between employee representatives and 1 or more employers ratified before the date of enactment of this Act, the amendments made subsection (a) shall not apply to plan years beginning before the later of-- (A) the date on which the last collective bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the date of enactment of this Act), or (B) January 1, 2002.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), any plan amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to any requirement added by subsection (a) shall not be treated as a termination of such collective bargaining agreement.
Coordination of Administration.--The Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall ensure, through the execution of an interagency memorandum of understanding among such Secretaries, that-- (1) regulations, rulings, and interpretations issued by such Secretaries relating to the same matter over which two or more such Secretaries have responsibility under the provisions of this Act (and the amendments made thereby) are administered so as to have the same effect at all times; and (2) coordination of policies relating to enforcing the same requirements through such Secretaries in order to have a coordinated enforcement strategy that avoids duplication of enforcement efforts and assigns priorities in enforcement.