This Act may be cited as the ``Washita Battlefield National Historic Site Act of 1996''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the Battle of the Washita, November 27, 1868, was one of the largest engagements between Plains tribes and the United States Army on the Southern Great Plains.
The site is a registered National Historic Landmark; (2) Lt.
Colonel George A. Custer, leading the 7th United States Calvary, attacked the sleeping Cheyenne village of peace chief Black Kettle.
Custer's attack resulted in more than 150 Indian casualties, many of them women and children; (3) the Battle of the Washita symbolizes the struggle of the Southern Great Plains tribes to maintain their traditional lifeways and not to submit to reservation confinement; and (4) the Washita battle site possesses a high degree of integrity and the cultural landscape is essentially intact.
The Cheyenne village site has not been altered substantially except by periodic flooding of the Washita River.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) recognize the importance of the Battle of the Washita as a nationally significant element of frontier military history and as a symbol of the struggles of the Southern Great Plains tribes to maintain control of their traditional use areas; and (2) establish the site of the Battle of the Washita as a national historic site and provide opportunities for American Indian groups including the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe to be involved in the formulation of plans and educational programs for the national historic site.
In General.--In order to provide for the preservation and interpretation of the Battle of the Washita, there is hereby established the Washita Battlefield National Historic Site in the State of Oklahoma (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``national historic site'').
Boundary.-- (1) In general.--The national historic site shall consist of-- (A) approximately 326 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Washita Battlefield National Historic Site'', numbered 20,000A and dated 12/95; and (B) the private lands subject to conservation easements referred to in section 5(b).
Map.--The map referred to in paragraph (1) shall be on file in the offices of the Director of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, and other appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
The Secretary of the Interior (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') may, from time to time, make minor revisions in the boundary of the national historic site in accordance with section 7(c) of the Land and Water Conservation Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-4 and following).
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall manage the national historic site in accordance with this Act and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1, 2-4), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461-467).
Management Purposes.--The Secretary shall manage the national historic site for the following purposes, among others: (1) To protect and preserve the national historic site, including the topographic features important to the battle site, artifacts and other physical remains of the battle, and the visual scene as closely as possible as it was at the time of the battle.
To interpret the cultural and natural resources of the historic site, providing for public understanding and appreciation of the area in such manner as to perpetuate these qualities and values for future generations.
Consultation and Training.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall consult regularly with the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe on the formulation of the management plan provisions referred to in section 6(5) and on preparation of educational programs provided to the public.
The Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with the Cheyenne- Arapaho Tribe, its subordinate boards, committees, enterprises, and traditional leaders to further the purposes of this Act.
Park Boundaries.--Within the boundaries of the national historic site, the Secretary is authorized to acquire lands and interest in lands by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange, except that-- (1) no lands or interest in lands within the historic site may be acquired without the consent of the owner thereof, and (2) lands and interests in lands owned by the State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof may be acquired only by donation.
Conservation Easements.--The Congress finds that the State of Oklahoma, acting through the Oklahoma Historical Society, will work with local land owners to acquire and hold in perpetuity conservation easements in the vicinity of the national historic site as deemed necessary for the visual and interpretive integrity of the site.
The intent of the easements will be to keep occupancy of the land in private ownership and use of the land in general agriculture.
Within five years after the date funds are made available for purposes of this Act, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall prepare a general management plan for the national historic site.
The plan shall address, but not be limited to, each of the following: (1) A resource protection program.
A visitor use plan including programs and facilities that will be provided for public use, including the location and cost of public facilities.
A research and curation plan.
A highway signing program.
Involvement by the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe in the formulation of educational programs for the national historic site.
Involvement by the State of Oklahoma and other local and national entities willing to share in the responsibilities of developing and supporting the national historic site.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $5,000,000.