This Act may be cited as the ``Language Mastery Support Act of 2002''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a program of study and overseas training in critical foreign languages and cultures, including the establishment of a Foreign Language and Cultural Institute, in order to-- (1) increase in Federal Government service the number of persons possessing critical skills that are in short supply; (2) create a pool of prospective candidates for employment in those agencies of the Federal Government that rely on significant levels of overseas assignments; (3) provide monetary and employment incentives for candidates to participate in the program; (4) facilitate the identification of potential Federal Government employees with the pool of prospective candidates; (5) provide additional opportunities for candidate development and evaluation; (6) substantially shorten the delay between identification of a desirable candidate and entry upon service by the candidate; (7) minimize the necessity for training during the initial period of employment; (8) provide for ``cross-fertilization'' through the incorporation of both private sector and Government instructors in the faculty of the Institute; (9) reduce the underutilization of existing Government and educational facilities; and (10) achieve these objectives for a minimal cost, that would be partially offset by a reduction in the amount of initial training provided by participating agencies for new employees.
In this Act: (1) Approved facilities.--The term ``approved facilities'' means-- (A) excess Government facilities, including former military installations; and (B) institutions of higher education that are underutilized in the summer months.
Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Interagency Critical Foreign Languages and Cultures Board established by section 4(c).
Critical foreign languages and cultures.--The term ``critical foreign languages and cultures'' means foreign languages and cultures-- (A) identified by the Board as necessary for the effective implementation of United States national security policy; and (B) with respect to which there exists a shortage of skilled personnel among the personnel of participating agencies.
Institute.--The term ``Institute'' means the program established under section 4(a).
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)).
Participant.--The term ``participant'' means a person who is enrolled in the Institute.
Participating agency.--The term ``participating agency'' means the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Participation agreement.--The term ``participation agreement'' means an agreement between the Institute and a person otherwise eligible for enrollment in the Institute under which-- (A) the person agrees-- (i) to respond to any offer of employment extended by a participating agency, not later than 30 days after the commencement of the participant's final academic year, by accepting or rejecting such employment; and (ii) to serve in that agency for a period not less than the period specified in the agreement; and (B) the Institute agrees to provide the allowances established by the Board pursuant to section 4(g)(1).
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INSTITUTE.
In General.--To carry out the purpose of section 2, the President is authorized to establish and maintain a study and training program described in section 5 that shall be known as the ``Foreign Language and Cultural Institute''.
Implementation.--The President shall exercise the authority of subsection (a) through the Interagency Critical Foreign Languages and Cultures Board established in subsection (c).
Establishment of Interagency Board.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established an Interagency Critical Foreign Languages and Cultures Board that shall consist of seven members, as follows: (A) One member appointed by the President from among individuals in the private sector having expertise in matters within the purpose of this Act, who shall serve as Chairman of the Board.
Six members, of whom one each shall be an official of a participating agency, who shall be designated by the head of the agency to serve on the Board.
Duties of the board.--The Board shall, under the supervision of the Chairman-- (A) develop the curriculum of the Institute; (B) provide policy recommendations to the President regarding the administration of the Institute; (C) establish procedures for the operation of the Institute; and (D) provide oversight for the operation of the Institute.
Terms.--The term of office for the Chairman and for each other member of the Board shall be three years.
Compensation.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), each member of the Board shall serve without compensation.
Compensation of the chairman.--The Chairman shall be paid at the rate of basic pay for positions classified at level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of service for the Board.
Administrative support.--The Secretary of State shall provide such staff personnel and other administrative services as may be necessary to support the Board.
Additional staff may be provided by participating agencies.
Regular Program.--Each participant in the Institute shall undertake a program of study and training in critical foreign languages and cultures that shall primarily consist of courses of study or training taken at accredited institutions of higher learning during the normal academic year.
Supplemental Instruction.-- (1) In general.--The program described in subsection (a) shall be supplemented by instruction at Institute facilities approved by the Board, at least one of which shall be located in each major geographic region in the United States.
Program periods.--Such supplemental instruction shall be given through the Institute during specified periods in each of three consecutive years, as follows: (A) For the first year of participation, courses of study taken during the summer period between the participant's sophomore and junior undergraduate years.
For the second year of participation, courses of study or training which may include training at diplomatic missions or consular posts, taken during the summer period between the participant's junior and senior undergraduate years or at such times as the Board may determine.
For the third year of participation, courses of study, or training which may include training at diplomatic or consular posts, taken during the summer period that follows award of a baccalaureate or equivalent degree to the participant or at such times as the Board may determine.
Additional activities.--Supplemental instruction under this subsection may include such other activities as the Board may determine.
The Board may modify the instruction provided for under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (2).
Eligibility.--To be enrolled as a participant in the Institute a person shall-- (1) be a citizen of the United States; (2) be enrolled as a sophomore, junior, or senior in an institution of higher education or graduate of such an institution during the preceding year; (3) be selected for participation in the Institute under procedures prescribed by the Board; and (4) have entered into a participation agreement pursuant to procedures established by the Board.
Conditional Offer of Employment.-- (1) In general.--If a participating agency elects to employ a participant, the agency shall extend to the participant, not later than the commencement of the final academic year of the participant, an offer of employment in the agency conditioned upon satisfactory completion of the Institute program by the participant as specified in the participation agreement.
Statutory construction.--Nothing in this Act is intended to alter or restrict any qualifications for employment established by any of the participating agencies.
Successful Completion.--The Board shall establish criteria to be met by participants the satisfaction of which shall entitle participants to a certificate acknowledging their satisfactory completion of the Institute program.
Curriculum.-- (1) In general.--The Board shall develop the Institute curriculum and shall assign such personnel provided under section 4(c)(4) as may be necessary for instruction under the curriculum and for adequate administrative support.
In addition, the Board is authorized under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, to enter into contracts with instructors employed at institutions of higher education or equivalent institutions and for other services necessary to provide for the establishment and operation of the Institute.
Supplemental instruction.--With the prior approval of the Board, a participant may enroll in courses of study at institutions of higher education with advanced syllabi in foreign affairs, languages, economics, religion, art, and history in lieu of one of the periods of instruction provided for under paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (b).
Financial Assistance.-- (1) Stipend.--The Board shall establish a schedule of stipends to be provided to program participants to offset the costs of tuition, fees, and books, not to exceed the comparable allowances established for the Reserve Officer Training Corps pursuant to section 209 of title 37, United States Code.
Debt relief.-- (A) In general.--The head of a participating agency that employs an individual who has satisfactorily completed the Institute program is authorized to provide for the repayment of student loans made to the participant for expenses incurred while the participant was enrolled in the Institute.
Factors for exercise of discretion.--In determining whether, or to what extent, to provide loan repayment under subparagraph (A), the head of the participating agency shall consider the individual's length of Government service, acceptance of hardship postings, possession of critical foreign languages and cultural skills, and proficiency in critical foreign languages.
Not later than December 1 of each year, the Chairman of the Board shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives a report that-- (1) summarizes the activities of the Institute over the previous academic year ending on September 30; (2) describes the programs planned for the current and succeeding two academic years; and (3) provides statistical data on-- (A) the number of applicants for participation in the Institute; (B) the number of participants enrolled in the Institute; (C) the number of participants who have successfully completed the Institute program; (D) the number of employment offers extended to participants from participating agencies; (E) the number of employment offers accepted by participants; (F) the costs associated with the operations of the Institute, together with an itemization of the costs associated with the operations of the Board; and (G) any other information that the Chairman of the Board determines to be useful for evaluating the operations of the Institute.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President $7,500,000 for the fiscal year 2003 to carry out this Act.
Availability of Funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.