In General.--If negotiations conducted under section 103 do not result in a settlement, the Secretary may refer the State and Indian tribe involved to the Panel established under subsection (b).
Authority of Panel.--To the extent allowable by law, the Panel may consider and render a decision on a dispute referred to the Panel under this section.
Taxation.--Any claim involving the legitimacy of a claim for the collection or payment of certain retail taxes owed by an Indian tribe to a State or political subdivision thereof and shall include or admit of counterclaims, setoffs, or related claims submitted or filed by the tribe in question regarding the original claim.
Membership of the Panel.-- (1) In general.--The Panel shall consist of-- (A) 1 representative from the Department of the Interior; (B) 1 representative from the Department of Justice; (C) 1 representative from the Department of the Treasury; (D) 1 representative of State governments; and (E) 1 representative of tribal governments of Indian tribes.
Chairperson.--The members of the Panel shall select a Chairperson from among the members of the Panel.
Federal Mediation Conciliation Service.-- (1) In general.--In a manner consistent with this title, the Panel shall consult with the Federal Mediation Conciliation Service (referred to in this subsection as the ``Service'') established under section 202 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 172).
Duties of service.--The Service shall, upon request of the Panel and in a manner consistent with applicable law-- (A) provide services to the Panel to aid in resolving disputes brought before the Panel; (B) furnish employees to act as neutrals (as that term is defined in section 571(9) of title 5, United States Code) in resolving the disputes brought before the Panel; and (C) consult with the Administrative Conference of the United States to maintain a roster of neutrals and arbitrators.
Intergovernmental Agreements.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Jurisdiction.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the district courts of the United States shall have original jurisdiction with respect to-- (i) any civil action, claim, counterclaim, or setoff, brought by any party to an agreement or compact entered into in accordance with this title to secure equitable relief, including injunctive and declaratory relief; and (ii) the enforcement of any agreement or compact.
Damages.--No action to recover damages arising out of or in connection with an agreement or compact entered into under this section may be brought, except as specifically provided for in that agreement or compact.
Consent to suit.--Each compact or agreement entered into under this title shall specify that the partner consent to litigation to enforce the agreement, and to the extent necessary to enforce that agreement, each party waives any defense of sovereign immunity.
JOINT TRIBAL-FEDERAL-STATE COMMISSION ON INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS.
In general.--The Secretary shall establish a tribal, Federal, and State commission (to be known as the ``Tribal-Federal-State Commission'') (referred to in this section as the ``Commission'').
Members.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be comprised of representatives of Indian tribes, the States, and the Federal Government.
Duties of the commission.--The Commission shall advise the Secretary concerning issues of intergovernmental concern with respect to Indian tribes, States, and the Federal Government, including-- (A) law enforcement; (B) civil and criminal jurisdiction; (C) taxation; (D) transportation; (E) economy development; and (F) other matters related to a matter described in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), (D), or (E).
Period of appointment.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial meeting.--No later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairman and vice chairman.--The Commission shall select a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among its members.
Powers.-- (A) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this section.
Information from federal agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act section.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Commission personnel matters.-- (A) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President, the Committee on Indian Affairs of the Senate, and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives a report on the implementation of this title that includes any recommendations that the Commission determines to be appropriate.
In General.--With respect to any agreement or compact between an Indian tribe and a State, the United States, upon agreement of the parties and the Secretary, may provide financial assistance to such parties for costs of personnel or administrative expenses in an amount not to exceed 100 percent of the costs incurred by the parties as a consequence of that agreement or compact, including any indirect costs of administration that are attributable to the services performed under the agreement or compact.
Assistance.--The head of each Federal agency may, to the extent allowable by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, provide technical assistance, material support, and personnel to assist States and Indian tribes in the implementation of the agreements or compacts entered into under this title.
TITLE II--TORT LIABILITY INSURANCE SEC.
LIABILITY INSURANCE, WAIVER OF DEFENSE.
Tribal Priority Allocation Defined.--The term ``tribal priority allocation'' means an allocation to a tribal priority account of an Indian tribe by the Bureau of Indian Affairs to allow that Indian tribe to establish program priorities and funding levels.
Insurance.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall obtain or provide tort liability insurance or equivalent coverage for each Indian tribe that receives a tribal priority allocation from amounts made available to the Bureau of Indian Affairs for the operation of Indian programs.
Cost-effectiveness.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall-- (A) ensure that the insurance or equivalent coverage is provided in the most cost-effective manner available; and (B) for each Indian tribe referred to in paragraph (1), take into consideration the extent to which the tort liability is covered-- (i) by privately secured liability insurance; or (ii) chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Federal Tort Claims Act'') by reason of an activity of the Indian tribe in which the Indian tribe is acting in the same capacity as an agency of the United States.
Limitation.--If the Secretary determines that an Indian tribe, described in paragraph (1), has obtained liability insurance in an amount and of the type that the Secretary determines to be appropriate by the date specified in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall not be required to provide additional coverage for that Indian tribe.
Requirements.--A policy of insurance or a document for equivalent coverage under subsection (a)(1) shall-- (1) contain a provision that the insurance carrier shall waive any right to raise as a defense the sovereign immunity of an Indian tribe with respect to an action involving tort liability of that Indian tribe, but only with respect to tort liability claims of an amount and nature covered under the insurance policy or equivalent coverage offered by the insurance carrier; and (2) not waive or otherwise limit the sovereign immunity of the Indian tribe outside or beyond the coverage or limits of the policy of insurance or equivalent coverage.
Prohibition.--No waiver of the sovereign immunity of a Indian tribe under this section shall include a waiver of any potential liability for-- (1) interest that may be payable before judgment; or (2) exemplary or punitive damages.
Preference.--In obtaining or providing tort liability insurance coverage for Indian tribes under this section, the Secretary shall, to the greatest extent practicable, give preference to coverage underwritten by Indian-owned economic enterprises, as defined in section 3 of the Indian Financing Act of 1974 (25 United States Code 1452), except that for the purposes of this subsection, those enterprises may include non-profit corporations.
Regulations.--To carry out this title, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations that-- (1) provide for the amount and nature of claims to be covered by an insurance policy or equivalent coverage provided to an Indian tribe under this title; and (2) establish a schedule of premiums that may be assessed against any Indian tribe that is provided liability insurance under this title.
STUDY AND REPORT TO CONGRESS (a) In General.-- (1) Study.--In order to minimize and, if possible, eliminate redundant or duplicative liability insurance coverage and to ensure that the provision of insurance of equivalent coverage under this title is cost-effective, before carrying out the requirements of section 201, the Secretary shall conduct a comprehensive survey of the degree, type, and adequacy of liability insurance coverage of Indian tribes at the time of the study.
Contents of study.--The study conducted under this subsection shall include-- (A) an analysis of loss data; (B) risk assessments; (C) projected exposure to liability, and related matters; and (D) the category of risk and coverage involved which may include-- (i) general liability; (ii) automobile liability; (iii) the liability of officials of the Indian tribe; (iv) law enforcement liability; (v) workers' compensation; and (vi) other types of liability contingencies.
Assessment of coverage by categories of risk.--For each Indian tribe described in section 201(a)(1), for each category of risk identified under paragraph (2), the Secretary, in conducting the study, shall determine whether insurance coverage other than coverage to be provided under this title or coverage under chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, applies to that Indian tribe for that activity.
Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress concerning the implementation of this title, that contains any legislative recommendations that the Secretary determines to be appropriate to improve the provision of insurance of equivalent coverage to Indian tribes under this title, or otherwise achieves the goals and objectives of this title.