This Act may be cited as the ``National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Act''.
In this Act: (1) Administration.--The term ``Administration'' means the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Function.--The term ``function'' includes any duty, obligation, power, authority, responsibility, right, privilege, activity, or program.
Office.--The term ``office'' includes any office, institute, council, unit, organizational entity, or component thereof.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
Under secretary.--The term ``Under Secretary'' means the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere appointed under section 102.
In General.--There shall be in the Department of Commerce an agency known as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Primary Missions.--The primary missions of the Administration are the following: (1) The provision and certification of hydrographic and geodetic products and data.
The conservation and management of the Nation's coastal and marine resources.
The exploration of the oceans.
To further human understanding of-- (A) the oceans; (B) the earth's atmosphere; and (C) the functional relationship of the oceans and the atmosphere.
Components.--The Secretary shall maintain within the Administration the following components: (1) The National Coastal and Ocean Service.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Service.
The National Marine Fisheries Service.
The National Weather Service.
The National Environmental Satellite and Data Information Service.
The Office of Marine and Aviation Operations.
Such other components as the Secretary considers necessary.
Functions.--The Administration shall perform such functions as were vested in the Administration or any officer, employee, or office of the Administration immediately before the enactment of this Act, except as may be provided otherwise by law or by a redelegation of authority after that date by the President, the Secretary of Commerce, or any other officer of the United States who delegated such function to the Administration before that date or who is otherwise authorized to make such a redelegation.
UNDER SECRETARY FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE.
In General.--There shall be at the head of the Administration the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.
The Under Secretary shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Under Secretary shall be paid at the rate of basic pay for level III of the Executive Schedule.
Functions.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary, the Under Secretary shall perform such functions and exercise such powers with respect to the Administration as the Secretary may prescribe, including the following: (1) Serve as the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Policy development and guidance.
Budget formulation, guidance, and execution, and other financial matters.
Resource requirements determination and allocation.
Program management and direction.
Environment, safety, and health operations.
Personnel, including the selection, appointment, distribution, supervision, establishing of compensation, and separation of personnel.
Procurement of services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
External affairs, including legal, legislative, and public affairs, and serving as liaison with other elements of the Department of Commerce and with other Federal agencies, State, tribal, and local governments, and the public.
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration an Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.
The Assistant Secretary shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Assistant Secretarty shall be paid at the rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
Functions.--The Assistant Secretary-- (1) shall perform such functions and exercise such powers as the Secretary or Under Secretary may prescribe; and (2) shall act as Under Secretary during the absence or disability of the Under Secretary or in the event of a vacancy in the office of Under Secretary.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration a Deputy Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere.
The Deputy Under Secretary shall be appointed by the Secretary.
The Deputy Under Secretary shall be paid at the rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
Functions.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary and the Under Secretary, the Deputy Under Secretary-- (1) shall serve as an advisor to the Under Secretary and to the Assistant Secretary on all program and policy issues; (2) shall be responsible for ensuring the timely and effective implementation of the Administration policies and objectives; and (3) in the absence or disability of the Under Secretary or Assistant Secretary, or in the event of a vacancy in either such position, the Deputy Under Secretary shall act in that position.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration a General Counsel.
The General Counsel shall be appointed by the Secretary, subject to approval of the President.
The General Counsel shall be paid at the rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Functions.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary and the Under Secretary, the General Counsel-- (1) shall serve as the chief legal officer of the Administration for all legal matters that arise in connection with the conduct of the functions of the Administration; and (2) shall perform such other functions and exercise such powers as the Secretary or Under Secretary may prescribe.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration the following: (1) An Assistant Administrator for Coastal and Ocean Services.
An Assistant Administrator for Oceanic and Atmospheric Research and Chief Scientist.
An Assistant Administrator for Fisheries.
An Assistant Administrator for Weather.
An Assistant Administrator for Environmental Satellite Data and Information.
A Director of Marine and Aviation Operations and the Commissioned Officer Corps.
Appointment.--Each Assistant Administrator and the Director referred to in subsection (a) shall be appointed by the Secretary.
Qualifications.--Each Assistant Administrator and the Director referred to in subsection (a) shall be an individual who is qualified by reason of background and experience to direct the implementation and administration of the functions for which they are responsible.
Functions.--Each Assistant Administrator and the Director referred to in subsection (a), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary, shall perform such functions and exercise such powers as the Under Secretary may prescribe.
For each fiscal year 2003 through 2007, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary the following: (1) For corporate services provided by the Under Secretary's office, $80,000,000.
For facilities maintenance, repairs, and safety, $13,000,000.
For environmental compliance, in addition to amounts authorized under section 3 of Public Law 104-91, $2,000,000.
For energy management, $550,000.
For marine services, $75,000,000.
For fleet planning and maintenance, $13,027,000.
Any individual serving on the date of the enactment of this Act in a position provided for in this Act may continue to serve in that position until a successor is appointed under this Act.
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS AND REPEALS.
Pay Rate of Deputy Under Secretary.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Deputy Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.''.
Reorganization Plan Number 4 of 1970.-- (1) Repeal.--Reorganization Plan Number 4 of 1970 (5 App.
United States Code) is repealed.
Relationship to administration functions.--Paragraph (1) shall not affect the functions of the Administration under section 3(d).