This Act may be cited as the ``United States Commemorative Coins Act of 1995''.
TITLE I--SPECIFIC COINS AUTHORIZED SEC.
BICENTENNIAL OF UNITED STATES GOLD COINAGE.
Denomination.--In commemoration of the bicentennial of United States gold coinage, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 25,000 10 dollar gold coins, which shall have such weight, diameter, and contents as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Design Requirements.--The design of the coins minted under this section shall be emblematic of the bicentennial of United States gold coinage.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may mint coins under this section only during the 1-year period ending on December 31, 1995.
UNITED NATIONS AND HARRY S TRUMAN.
Denominations.--In commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the role of President Harry S Truman in the founding of the United Nations, the Secretary shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) $5 gold coins.--Not more than 75,000 5 dollar coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 8.359 grams; (B) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
$1 silver coins.--Not more than 350,000 1 dollar coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design Requirements.--The design of the coins minted under this section shall be emblematic of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the role of President Harry S Truman in the founding of the United Nations.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this section only during the 1-year period beginning on the date the 1st such coins are issued in 1996.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this section shall include a surcharge of-- (1) $35 per coin for the $5 coin; and (2) $10 per coin for the $1 coin.
Recipient Organization.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this section shall be promptly distributed by the Secretary as follows: (1) 50 percent shall be paid to the Harry S Truman Library Foundation for the purpose of supporting and maintaining the Harry S Truman Library.
50 percent shall be paid to the United Nations Association for the purpose of assisting with educational activities, such as high school and college model United Nations' programs and other grassroots activities, that highlight the United Nations and the role of the United States in that world body.
Denominations.--In commemoration of the sesquicentennial of the founding of the Smithsonian Institution, the Secretary shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) $5 gold coins.--Not more than 100,000 5 dollar coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 8.359 grams; (B) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
$1 silver coins.--Not more than 800,000 1 dollar coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this section shall be emblematic of the scientific, educational, and cultural significance of the Smithsonian Institution.
Additional inscription.--In addition to the inscriptions required under section 203(a), on each coin minted under this section there shall be an inscription of the following phrase from the original bequest of James Smithson: ``for the increase and diffusion of knowledge''.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this section only during the period beginning on August 1, 1996, and ending on July 31, 1997.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this section shall include a surcharge of-- (1) $35 per coin for the $5 coin; and (2) $10 per coin for the $1 coin.
Recipient Organization.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this section shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Smithsonian Institution for the purpose of supporting the National Numismatic Collection at the National Museum of American History.
Denomination.--In commemoration of the public opening of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial in Washington, DC, which will honor President Roosevelt's leadership and legacy in shaping life in the United States as we know it today, the Secretary shall mint and issue not more than 100,000 5 dollar coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 8.359 grams; (2) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
Design Requirements.--The design of the coins minted under this section shall be emblematic of the leadership and legacy of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this section only during the period beginning on January 1, 1997, and ending on December 31, 1997.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this section shall include a surcharge of $35 per coin.
Recipient Organization.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this section shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial Commission for the purpose of supporting and maintaining the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial.
Denomination.--In commemoration of the 125th anniversary of the establishment of the 1st national park in the United States, Yellowstone National Park, and the birth of the concept of a national park, the Secretary shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 1 dollar coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design Requirements.--The design of the coins minted under this section shall be emblematic of the 125th anniversary of the establishment of the 1st national park in the United States, Yellowstone National Park.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this section only during the period beginning on January 1, 1997, and ending on December 31, 1997.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this section shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Recipient Organizations.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this section shall be promptly distributed by the Secretary as follows: (1) 50 percent shall be paid to the National Park Foundation for the purpose of supporting national parks.
50 percent shall be paid to the Yellowstone National Park for the purpose of supporting Yellowstone National Park.
NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS MEMORIAL.
Denomination.--In commemoration of the sacrifices of law enforcement officers and their families in preserving public safety, the Secretary shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 1 dollar coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design Requirements.--The design of the coins minted under this section shall be emblematic of the sacrifices of law enforcement officers and their families in preserving public safety.
Period for Issuance.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this section only during the period beginning on January 1, 1997, and ending on December 31, 1997.
Commencement of issuance.--The Secretary shall begin issuing coins under this section not later than May 1, 1997.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this section shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Recipient Organization.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this section shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund, Inc. (the nonprofit organization established to raise funds for and oversee the construction of the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial in Washington, DC) for the purpose of supporting the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial and related programs.
TITLE II--GENERAL PROVISIONS SEC.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Recipient Organization Defined.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``recipient organization'' means, with respect to any coins issued under any section of title I (other than section 101), the organization designated, under subsection (e) of such section, as the recipient of surcharges from the sale of such coins.
Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain gold for minting coins under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under other provisions of law.
Silver.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Designation and Inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (1) a designation of the value of the coin; (2) an inscription of the year of issuance of the coin (or, in the case of coins issued in more than 1 year, the 1st year of issuance); and (3) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under any section of title I shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with each recipient organization with respect to such coins and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided under the appropriate section of title I with respect to each such coin; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of each recipient organization with respect to coins issued under this Act as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid to such organization by the Secretary of the Treasury under title I. SEC.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.