This Act may be cited as the ``Private Land Conservation Tax Act''.
CREDIT FOR CERTAIN CHARITABLE CONSERVATION CONTRIBUTIONS OF LAND BY SMALL FARMERS AND RANCHERS.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an eligible farmer or rancher, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount which would (but for subsection (d)(2)) be allowed for such year as a deduction under section 170 for a qualified conservation contribution (as defined in section 170(h)).
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.-- ``(A) In general.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(i) $360,000, over ``(ii) the aggregate amount allowed by subsection (a) (determined without regard to subsection (e)) to the taxpayer for the 15 prior taxable years.
Special rule for joint returns.--The amount of the credit under subsection (a) on a joint return for any taxable year shall be allocated equally between the spouses for purposes of applying the limitation under subparagraph (A) for succeeding taxable years.
Aggregation rule.--For purposes of this paragraph, all members of the same controlled group of corporations (within the meaning of section 267(f)), and all persons under common control (within the meaning of section 52(b)) but treating an interest of more than 20 percent as a controlling interest), shall be treated as 1 taxpayer.
Limitation based on amount of tax.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(A) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and the preceding sections of this subpart, over ``(B) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
Eligible Farmer or Rancher.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible farmer or rancher' means-- ``(1) in the case of an individual, a taxpayer whose gross income from farming (as defined in section 464(e)(1)) is 60 percent or more of the taxpayer's gross income for the taxable year; and ``(2) in the case of a C corporation-- ``(A) the gross income of the corporation from farming (as so defined) is 60 percent or more of the corporation's gross income for the taxable year; ``(B) the stock of the corporation is not publicly traded on a recognized exchange; and ``(C) the fair market value of the assets of the corporation used in farming does not exceed $20,000,000.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Election.--This section shall apply to a taxpayer for the taxable year only if the taxpayer elects its application for such year.
Such an election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
Application with section 170.--No deduction shall be allowed under section 170 for a qualified conservation contribution (as defined in section 170(h)) to a taxpayer who elects to take the credit allowed by subsection (a) for a qualified conservation contribution during the 15-taxable-year period described in subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii).
Carryforward of Excess Credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds the amount of the limitation imposed by subsection (b)(2) for such taxable year, such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to donations of qualified conservation contributions (as defined in section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) made after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASE IN CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTION LIMIT FOR FARMERS AND RANCHERS DOING BUSINESS IN CORPORATE FORM.
In General.--Section 170(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to corporations) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G) and by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following: ``(F) Certain farmers and ranchers.--A qualified farmer or rancher (as defined in section 30B(d)) shall be treated as an individual for purposes of this section with respect to any qualified conservation contribution.''
Conforming Amendment.--Section 170(b)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``corporation,'' and inserting ``corporation (other than a corporation that is an eligible farmer or rancher as defined in section 30B(d) with respect to a qualified conservation contribution),''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXPANSION OF ESTATE TAX EXCLUSION FOR LAND SUBJECT TO QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 2031(c)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking clause (i) and by redesignating clauses (ii) and (iii) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to estates of decedents dying after the date of the enactment of this Act.