LAND OF PECHANGA BAND OF LUISENO MISSION INDIANS.
Limitation on Conveyance.--Land described in subsection (b) (or any interest in that land) shall not be voluntarily or involuntarily transferred or otherwise made available for condemnation until the date on which-- (1)(A) the Secretary of the Interior renders a final decision on the fee to trust application pending on the date of the enactment of this Act concerning the land; and (B) final decisions have been rendered regarding all appeals relating to that application decision; or (2) the fee to trust application described in paragraph (1)(A) is withdrawn.
Description of Land.--The land referred to in subsection (a) is land located in Riverside County, California, that is held in fee by the Pechanga Band of Luiseno Mission Indians, as described in Document No.
211130 of the Office of the Recorder, Riverside County, California, and recorded on May 15, 2001.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section designates, or shall be used to construe, any land described in subsection (b) (or any interest in that land) as an Indian reservation, Indian country, Indian land, or reservation land (as those terms are defined under any Federal law (including a regulation)) for any purpose under any Federal law.
ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION LINE RIGHT-OF-WAY, CLEVELAND NATIONAL FOREST.
Issuance.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue all necessary grants, easements, permits, plan revisions or amendments, and other approvals to allow for the siting and construction of a high-voltage electricity transmission line right- of-way running approximately north to south through the Trabuco Ranger District of the Cleveland National Forest in the State of California and adjacent lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management and the Forest Service.
The right-of-way approvals shall provide all necessary Federal authorization from the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior for the routing, construction, operation, and maintenance of a 500 KV transmission line capable of meeting the region's long-term electricity transmission needs between the existing Valley-Serrano transmission line to the north and the Telega-Escondido transmission line to the south, and for connecting to future generating capacity that may be developed in the region.
Protection of Wilderness Areas.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall not allow any portion of a transmission line right-of-way corridor identified in subsection (a) to enter any identified wilderness area in existence as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Environmental and Administrative Review.--Nothing in this section shall affect the applicability of any environmental or administrative review required under other provision of laws, including the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 note) or the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).
The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Land Management, shall be the lead Federal agency with overall responsibility to ensure completion of required environmental and other reviews of the approvals to be issued under subsection (a).
For the portions of the corridor on Forest Service land, the Secretary of Agriculture shall complete all required environmental reviews and administrative actions, in coordination with the Secretary of the Interior.
It is anticipated that the right-of-way route through the Trabuco Ranger District of the Cleveland National Forest will make it unnecessary to construct regional transmission lines through heavily populated lands in the Temecula Valley.
Time for Review and Issuance.--Any Federal agency that conducts or participates in any environmental or administrative review of the approvals to be issued under subsection (a) shall work expeditiously, and complete such review as soon as possible, taking full advantage of any ongoing governmental review processes for any similar or associated projects and proposals, and using all existing or ongoing studies, reports, and assessments to satisfy review requirements.
The necessary grants, easements, permits, plan amendments and other approvals for the transmission line right-of-way shall be issued not later than 60 days after the completion of the administrative and environmental review under subsection (c) or March 31, 2004, whichever occurs first.
Preserving State Authority.--Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of the State of California in making any decision regarding the siting or public need for the transmission line described in subsection (a).
Other Terms and Conditions.--The transmission line right-of-way shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture consider necessary, as a result of the environmental review under subsection (c), to protect the value of historic, cultural, tribal, and natural resources under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior or the Department of Agriculture.