This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Facility Superfund Compliance Act of 1997''.
FEDERAL ENTITIES AND FACILITIES.
Section 120 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9620) is amended as follows: (1) By amending the heading to read as follows: ``SEC.
FEDERAL ENTITIES AND FACILITIES.''.
By amending paragraph (1) of subsection (a) to read as follows: ``(1)(A) Each department, agency, and instrumentality of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the United States shall be subject to, and comply with, all Federal, State, interstate and local requirements, both substantive and procedural (including any requirements for permits, reporting, or any provisions for injunctive relief and such sanctions as may be imposed by a court to enforce such relief), regarding response actions related to, or management of, hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants in the same manner, and to the same extent, as any nongovernmental entity is subject to such requirements, including enforcement and liability under sections 106 and 107 of this title and the payment of reasonable service charges.
The Federal, State, interstate, and local substantive and procedural requirements referred to in subparagraph (A) include, but are not limited to, all administrative orders and all civil and administrative penalties and fines, regardless of whether such penalties and fines are punitive or coercive in nature or are imposed for isolated, intermittent, or continuing violations.
The United States hereby expressly waives any immunity otherwise applicable to the United States with respect to any such substantive or procedural requirement (including, but not limited to, any injunctive relief, administrative order or civil or administrative penalty or fine referred to in the preceding sentence, or reasonable service charge).
The reasonable service charges referred to in this paragraph include, but are not limited to, fees or charges assessed in connection with the processing and issuance of permits, renewal of permits, amendments to permits, review of plans, studies, and other documents, and inspection and monitoring of facilities, as well as any other nondiscriminatory charges that are assessed in connection with a State, interstate, or local response program.
Neither the United States, nor any agent, employee, or officer thereof, shall be immune or exempt from any process or sanction of any State or Federal court with respect to the enforcement of any injunctive relief.
No agent, employee, or officer of the United States shall be personally liable for any civil penalty under any Federal or State response law with respect to any act or omission within the scope of their official duties.
An agent, employee, or officer of the United States shall be subject to any criminal sanction (including, but not limited to, any fine or imprisonment) under any Federal or State response law, but no department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the United States shall be subject to any such sanctions.
The waiver of sovereign immunity provided in this paragraph shall not apply to the extent a State law would apply any standard or requirement to such Federal department, agency, or instrumentality in a manner which is more stringent than such standard or requirement would be applied to any other person.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the liability of any person or entity other than a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States under sections 106 and 107 of this Act.
(i) The Administrator may issue an order under section 106 of this Act to any department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the United States.
The Administrator shall initiate an administrative enforcement action against such a department, agency, or instrumentality in the same manner and under the same circumstances as action would be initiated against any other person.
No administrative order issued to such department, agency, or instrumentality shall become final until such department, agency, or instrumentality has had the opportunity to confer with the Administrator.
Unless a State law in effect on the date of enactment of the Federal Facility Superfund Compliance Act of 1997, or a State Constitution, requires the funds to be used in a different manner, all funds collected by a State from the Federal Government from penalties and fines imposed for violation of any substantive or procedural requirement referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be used by the State only for projects designed to improve or protect the environment or to defray the costs of environmental protection or enforcement.
Each such department, agency, and instrumentality shall have the right to contribution protection set forth in section 113, when such department, agency, or instrumentality resolves its liability under this Act.''.
By striking paragraph (4) of subsection (a).
By inserting ``(other than the indemnification requirements of section 119)'' after ``responsibility'' in subsection (a)(3).
By adding at the end of subsection (e) the following new paragraph: ``(7) State requirements.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, an interagency agreement under this section shall in no way impair or diminish the authority of any State to enforce compliance with requirements of State law, unless such requirements have been specifically-- ``(A) addressed; or ``(B) waived; without objection from the State before or on the date on which the response action is selected.