This Act may be cited as the ``Hurricanes Katrina and Rita Environmental Justice Act''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Advisory committee.--The term ``Advisory Committee'' means the advisory committee established by section 6.
Environmental justice.-- (A) In general.--The term ``environmental justice'' means the fair treatment of people of all races, cultures, and socioeconomic groups with respect to the development, adoption, implementation, and enforcement of laws, regulations, and policies affecting the environment.
Fair treatment.--The term ``fair treatment'' means policies and practices that will minimize the likelihood that a minority, low-income community that is rural or urban will bear a disproportionate share of the adverse environmental consequences, or be denied reasonable access to the environmental benefits, resulting from implementation of a Federal program or policy in the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area.
Federal agency.--The term ``Federal agency'' means-- (A) each Federal entity represented on the Working Group; (B) any other entity that conducts any Federal program or activity that substantially affects human health or the environment; and (C) each Federal agency that implements any program, policy, or activity applicable to Native Americans.
Hurricanes katrina and rita affected area.--The term ``Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area'' means the area for which the President has declared the existence of a major disaster, in accordance with section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5170), as a consequence of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita (4) Working group.--The term ``Working Group'' means the interagency working group established by section 4.
HURRICANES KATRINA AND RITA ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE RESPONSIBILITIES OF FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita Environmental Justice Mission.--To the greatest extent practicable, the head of each Federal agency shall make achieving environmental justice part of its mission by identifying and addressing, as appropriate, disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects of its programs, policies, and activities on minority, low-income populations that are rural or urban in the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area.
Nondiscrimination.--Each Federal agency shall conduct its programs, policies, and activities in a manner that ensures that such programs, policies, and activities do not have the effect of excluding any person or group from participation in, denying any person or group the benefits of, or subjecting any person or group to discrimination under, such programs, policies, and activities, because of race, color, national origin, or income.
HURRICANES KATRINA AND RITA INTERAGENCY ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE WORKING GROUP.
Creation and Composition.--There is hereby established the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita Interagency Working Group on Environmental Justice, to be comprised the following: (1) The heads of the following executive agencies and offices (or their designees): (A) The Department of Defense.
The Department of Health and Human Services.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The Department of Homeland Security.
The Department of Labor.
The Department of Agriculture.
The Department of Transportation.
The Department of Justice.
The Department of the Interior.
The Department of Commerce.
The Department of Energy.
The Environmental Protection Agency.
The Office of Management and Budget.
Not more than 4 representatives of community-based and local nonprofit organizations, designated by the Governors of the States in the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area acting jointly.
Not more then 4 State and local civic leaders, designated by the Governors of the States in the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area acting jointly.
Not more than 4 elected officials, designated by the Governors of the States in the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area acting jointly.
Functions.--The Working Group shall-- (1) provide guidance to Federal and State agencies on criteria for identifying disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects on minority, low-income populations that are rural or urban; (2) coordinate with, provide guidance to, and serve as a clearinghouse for, Federal and State agencies as Federal agencies develop or revise an environmental justice strategy under section 5, in order to ensure that the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of programs, policies, and activities are undertaken in a consistent manner; (3) assist in coordinating research by, and stimulating cooperation among, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and other Federal agencies conducting research or other activities in accordance with strategies under section 5; (4) assist in coordinating data collection, maintenance, and analysis required by this Act; (5) examine existing data and studies on environmental justice within the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area; (6) hold public meetings and otherwise solicit public participation and consider complaints as required under subsection (c); and (7) develop interagency model projects on environmental justice that evidence cooperation among Federal and State agencies.
Public Participation.--The Working Group shall-- (1) hold public meetings and otherwise solicit public participation, as appropriate, for the purpose of fact-finding with regard to implementation of this Act, and prepare for public review a summary of the comments and recommendations provided; and (2) receive, consider, and in appropriate instances conduct inquiries concerning complaints regarding environmental justice and the implementation of this Act by Federal and State agencies.
Annual Reports.-- (1) In general.--Each fiscal year following enactment of this Act, the Working Group shall submit to the President, through the Office of the Deputy Assistant to the President for Environmental Policy and the Office of the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, a report that describes the implementation of this Act, including, but not limited to, a report on the final environmental justice strategies described in section 5 and annual progress made in implementing those strategies.
Copy of report.--The President shall transmit a copy of each report submitted to the President under paragraph (1) to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President of the Senate, and the Governor of each State in the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area.
Agency-Wide Strategies.--Each Federal agency shall develop an agency-wide environmental justice strategy that identifies and addresses disproportionally high and adverse human health or environmental effects or disproportionally low benefits of its programs, policies, and activities with respect to minority, low-income populations that are rural or urban.
Revisions.--Each strategy developed pursuant to subsection (a) shall identify programs, policies, planning, and public participation processes, rulemaking, and enforcement activities related to human health or the environment that should be revised to-- (1) promote enforcement of all health and environmental statutes in areas with minority, low-income populations that are rural or urban; (2) ensure greater public participation; (3) improve research and data collection relating to the health and environment of minority, low-income populations that are rural or urban; and (4) identify differential patterns of use of natural resources among minority, low-income populations that are rural or urban.
Timetables.--Each strategy developed pursuant to subsection (a) shall include a timetable for undertaking revisions identified pursuant to subsection (b).
FEDERAL HURRICANES KATRINA AND RITA ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
Establishment.--There is established a committee to be known as the Federal Hurricanes Katrina and Rita Environmental Justice Advisory Committee.
Duties.--The Advisory Committee shall provide independent advice and recommendations to the Environmental Protection Agency and the Working Group on areas relating to environmental justice, which may include any of the following: (1) Advice on Federal and State agencies' framework development for integrating socioeconomic programs into strategic planning, annual planning, and management accountability for achieving environmental justice results agency-wide.
Advice on measuring and evaluating agencies' progress, quality, and adequacy in planning, developing, and implementing environmental justice strategies, projects, and programs.
Advice on agencies' existing and future information management systems, technologies, and data collection, and the conduct of analyses that support and strengthen environmental justice programs in administrative and scientific areas.
Advice to help develop, facilitate, and conduct reviews of the direction, criteria, scope, and adequacy of the Federal agencies' scientific research and demonstration projects relating to environmental justice.
Advice for improving how the Environmental Protection Agency and others participate, cooperate, and communicate within that agency and between other Federal agencies, State and local governments, environmental justice leaders, interest groups, and the public.
Advice regarding the Environmental Protection Agency's administration of grant programs relating to environmental justice assistance (not to include the review or recommendations of individual grant proposals or awards).
Advice regarding agencies' awareness, education, training, and other outreach activities involving environmental justice.
Advisory Committee.--The Advisory Committee shall be considered an advisory committee within the meaning of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Advisory Committee shall be composed of 21 members to be appointed in accordance with paragraph (2).
Members shall include representatives of-- (A) community-based groups; (B) industry and business; (C) academic and educational institutions; (D) minority health organizations; (E) State and local governments, federally recognized tribes, and indigenous groups; and (F) nongovernmental and environmental groups.
Appointments.--Of the members of the Advisory Committee-- (A) three members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; (B) three members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate; (C) three members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (D) three members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; (E) two members shall be appointed by the President; and (F) for each State in the Hurricanes Katrina and Rita affected area, one member shall be appointed by the Governor of such State.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Advisory Committee shall meet at least twice annually.
Meetings shall occur as needed and approved by the Director of the Office of Environmental Justice of the Environmental Protection Agency, who shall serve as the officer required to be appointed under section 10(e) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
with respect to the Committee (in this subsection referred to as the ``Designated Federal Officer'').
Travel and per diem expenses.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency may pay travel and per diem expenses of members of the Advisory Committee when determined necessary and appropriate.
Agenda.--The Designated Federal Officer or a designee of such Officer shall be present at all meetings, and each meeting shall be conducted in accordance with an agenda approved in advance by such Officer.
Adjournment.--The Designated Federal Officer may adjourn any meeting when the Designated Federal Officer determines it is in the public interest to do so.
Open to public.--As required by the Federal Advisory Committee Act, meetings of the Advisory Committee shall be open to the public unless the President determines that a meeting or a portion of a meeting may be closed to the public in accordance with subsection (c) of section 552b of title 5, United States Code.
Comments.--Unless a meeting or portion thereof is closed to the public (in accordance with paragraph (5)), the Designated Federal Officer shall provide an opportunity for interested persons to file comments before or after such meeting or to make statements to the extent that time permits.