REDUCTION OF UNITED STATES MILITARY FORCES IN EUROPE.
End Strength Reductions for Military Personnel in Europe.-- Notwithstanding section 1002(c)(1) of the National Defense Authorization Act, 1985 (22 United States Code 1928 note), but subject to subsection (d), for each of the fiscal years 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999, the Secretary of Defense shall reduce the European end strength level of members of the Armed Forces in accordance with subsection (b).
Reduction Formula.-- (1) Application of formula.--If the allied contribution level determined under paragraph (2) for a fiscal year is below the goal specified in subsection (c) applicable to that fiscal year, the Secretary of Defense shall reduce the European end strength level of members of the Armed Forces by 10 percent in equal installments over the next four fiscal years.
The 10- percent reduction shall be made from the end strength level in effect pursuant to section 1002(c)(1) of the National Defense Authorization Act, 1985 (22 United States Code 1928 note), as modified by operation of this section, for the fiscal year in which the Secretary determines that such reduction is required.
Allied contribution level.--To determine the allied contribution level with respect to a fiscal year, the Secretary of Defense shall calculate the aggregate amount of nonpersonnel costs for United States military installations in European member nations of NATO that are assumed during that fiscal year by such nations, except that the Secretary may consider only those cash and in-kind contributions by such nations that replace expenditures that would otherwise be made by the Secretary using funds appropriated or otherwise made available in defense appropriations Acts.
Termination of reductions.-- The Secretary shall cease making the reduction required by paragraph (1) for a fiscal year if the allied contribution level is equal to or above the goal specified in subsection (c) applicable to that fiscal year.
Annual Goals for Force Reduction.--In continuing efforts to enter into revised host-nation agreements as described in section 1301(e) of National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1993 (Public Law 102-484; 106 United States Statutes at Large 2545) and section 1401(c) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994 (Public Law 103-160; 107 United States Statutes at Large 1824), the President is urged to seek to have European member nations of NATO assume an increased share of the nonpersonnel costs of United States military installations in those nations in accordance with the following timetable: (1) By September 30, 1995, 15 percent of such costs should be assumed by those nations.
By September 30, 1996, 30 percent of such costs should be assumed by those nations.
By September 30, 1997, 40 percent of such costs should be assumed by those nations.
By September 30, 1998, 50 percent of such costs should be assumed by those nations.
Exceptions.-- (1) Minimum end strength authority.--Notwithstanding reductions required pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense may maintain a European end strength level of members of the Armed Forces of at least 25,000 members of the Armed Forces.
Waiver authority.--The President or the Secretary of Defense may waive operation of this section in the case of a significant threat to national security, as determined by the President or the Secretary.
The President or the Secretary shall immediately inform Congress of the waiver and the reasons for the waiver.
Allocation of Force Reductions.--To the extent that there is a reduction in the European end strength level of members of the Armed Forces in a fiscal year pursuant to subsection (a)-- (1) half of the reduction shall be used to make a corresponding reduction in the authorized end strength level for active duty personnel for such Armed Force for that fiscal year; and (2) half of the reduction shall be used to make a corresponding increase in permanent assignments or deployments of forces in the United States or other nations (other than European member nations of NATO) for each such Armed Force for that fiscal year, as determined by the Secretary of Defense.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``European end strength level of members of the Armed Forces'' means the end strength level of members of the Armed Forces of the United States assigned to permanent duty ashore in European member nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The term ``nonpersonnel costs'', with respect to United States military installations in European member nations of NATO, means costs for those installations other than costs paid from military personnel accounts.