This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on Executive Organization Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on Executive Organization'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION; REPORT; IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS.
Functions.--The Commission shall examine and make recommendations with respect to an effective and practicable organization of the executive branch of the Federal Government, including recommendations regarding-- (1) criteria for use by the President and the Congress in evaluating proposals for changes in the structure of the executive branch of the Federal Government, including criteria for use by the President and the Congress in evaluating and overseeing Government-sponsored enterprises, Government corporations, and independent agencies; (2) the organization of the executive branch into not more than 8 departments, which shall include the Department of State, the Department of the Treasury, the Department of Justice, and the Department of Defense; (3) the reorganization of independent agencies and Government corporations; (4) the most effective and practicable structure of the Executive Office of the President for conducting oversight of the executive branch, and criteria for use by such Office in evaluating and overseeing the performance of the executive branch; and (5) functions being performed by Federal Government agencies as of the effective date of this Act that should be performed by State or local agencies or by the private sector.
The Commission shall seek to reduce the total number of individuals employed by the Federal Government by 5 percent within 5 years after the effective date of this Act.
Report.--The Commission, by not later than 6 months after the completion of appointment of the members of the Commission, shall submit a report to the President which contains a detailed statement of-- (1) its recommendations under subsection (a); and (2) legislative changes necessary to implement such recommendations.
Implementation of Recommendations.-- (1) Executive order.--The President, by as soon as practicable after the date of the receipt by the President of the Commission report under subsection (b), shall issue an Executive order which implements the recommendations made in the report.
Report to congress.--The President, by not later than the date the President issues an Executive order under paragraph (1), shall transmit to the Congress a report containing the recommendations for legislation submitted by the Commission under subsection (b)(2).
In General.--The Commission shall consist of 7 members, as follows: (1) The Secretary of State.
The Secretary of the Treasury.
The Attorney General of the United States.
The Secretary of Defense.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
2 members appointed by the President from among other officials in the executive branch of the Federal Government.
Completion of Appointments.--The President, by not later than 30 days after the effective date of this Act, shall complete appointment of members of the Commission pursuant to subsection (a)(6) and identify those appointees to the Congress.
Chairman.--The President shall designate a member of the Commission to be its Chairman.
RESTRICTION ON PAY, ALLOWANCES, AND BENEFITS.
A member of the Commission shall receive no pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of his or her service on the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this section, hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, as the Commission considers appropriate.
Rules.--The Commission may adopt such rules as may be necessary to establish procedures and to govern the manner of the operation, organization, and personnel of the Commission.
Assistance From Federal Agencies.-- (1) Information.--The Commission may request from the head of any department, agency, or other instrumentality of the Federal Government such information as the Commission may require for the purpose of carrying out this Act.
The head of such department, agency, or instrumentality shall, to the extent otherwise permitted by law, furnish such information to the Commission upon request made by the Chairman.
Facilities, services, and personnel.--Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of any department, agency, or other instrumentality of the Federal Government shall, to the extent possible and subject to the discretion of such head-- (A) make any of the facilities and services of such department, agency, or instrumentality available to the Commission; and (B) detail any of the personnel of such department, agency, or instrumentality to the Commission, on a non reimbursable basis, to assist the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission under this Act.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as the departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Contracts for Research and Surveys.--The Commission may, to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriations Acts, enter into contracts with State agencies, private firms, institutions, and individuals for the purpose of conducting research or surveys necessary to enable the Commission to discharge the duties of the Commission under this Act.
Executive Director and Staff.--Subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Commission, the Chairman of the Commission may appoint, terminate, and fix the pay of an Executive Director and of such additional staff as the Chairman considers appropriate to assist the Commission.
The Chairman may fix the pay of personnel appointed under this subsection without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code (relating to the number or classification of employees and to rates of pay), the provisions of such title governing appointments in the competitive service, and any other similar provision of law; except that no rate of pay fixed under this subsection may exceed a rate equal to the maximum rate of pay payable for a position above GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5108 of such title.
APPLICABILITY OF THE FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT.
The Commission shall be an advisory committee for purposes of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
The Commission shall cease to exist on the date that is 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits the report required under section 3(b).
PREPARATION FOR THE COMMISSION.
Not later than 90 days after the effective date of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States, the Director of the Congressional Research Service, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office, and the Director of the Office of Technology Assessment shall each submit to the Commission an index to, and synopses of, materials on executive organization that such official considers useful to the Commission.
Subject to laws governing the disclosure of classified or otherwise restricted information, such materials may include reports, analyses, recommendations, and results of research of such organizations.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission not more than $1,500,000 for carrying out this Act.
This Act shall take effect on February 1, 1994.