SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRAINING PROGRAM EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business-related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRAINING PROGRAM EXPENSES.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an employer, the information technology training program credit determined under this section is an amount equal to 20 percent of information technology training program expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Additional Credit Percentage for Certain Programs.--The percentage under subsection (a) shall be increased by 5 percentage points for information technology training program expenses paid or incurred-- ``(1) by the taxpayer with respect to a program operated in-- ``(A) an empowerment zone or enterprise community designated under part I of subchapter U, ``(B) a school district in which at least 50 percent of the students attending schools in such district are eligible for free or reduced-cost lunches under the school lunch program established under the National School Lunch Act, ``(C) an area designated as a disaster area by the Secretary of Agriculture or by the President under the Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in the taxable year or the 4 preceding taxable years, ``(D) a rural enterprise community designated under section 766 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999, or ``(E) an area designated by the Secretary of Agriculture as a Rural Economic Area Partnership Zone, or ``(2) by a small employer.
Limitation.--The amount of information technology training program expenses with respect to an individual which may be taken into account under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed $6,000.
Information Technology Training Program Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `information technology training program expenses' means expenses paid or incurred by reason of the participation of the employer in any information technology training program.
Information technology training program.--The term `information technology training program' means a program-- ``(A) for the training of computer programmers, systems analysts, and computer scientists or engineers (as such occupations are defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics), ``(B) involving a partnership of-- ``(i) employers, and ``(ii) State training programs, school districts, university systems, or certified commercial information technology training providers, and ``(C) at least 50 percent of the costs of which is paid or incurred by the employers.
Certified commercial information technology training provider.--The term `certified commercial information technology training providers' means a private sector provider of educational products and services utilized for training in information technology which is certified with respect to-- ``(A) the curriculum that is used for the training, or ``(B) the technical knowledge of the instructors of such provider, by 1 or more software publishers or hardware manufacturers the products of which are a subject of the training.
Small Employer.--For purposes of this section, the term `small employer' means, with respect to any calendar year, any employer if such employer employed 200 or fewer employees on each business day in each of 20 or more calendar weeks in such year or the preceding calendar year.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction or credit under any other provision of this chapter shall be allowed with respect to information technology training program expenses (determined without regard to the limitation under subsection (c)).
Certain rules made applicable.--For purposes of this section, rules similar to the rules of section 45A(e)(2) and subsections (c), (d), and (e) of section 52 shall apply.''
Credit To Be Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(13) the information technology training program credit determined under section 45D.''
No Carrybacks.--Subsection (d) of section 39 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to carryback and carryforward of unused credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(9) No carryback of section 45D credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the information technology training program credit determined under section 45D may be carried back to a taxable year ending before the date of the enactment of section 45D.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Information technology training program expenses.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of enactment of this Act in taxable years ending after such date.