This Act may be cited as the ``International Professional Exchange Act of 2010''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) According to the National Research Council's 2007 report titled ``International Education and Foreign Languages: Keys to Securing America's Future'', ``knowledge of foreign languages and cultures is increasingly critical for the nation's security and its ability to compete in the global marketplace.
Language skills and cultural expertise are needed for federal service, for business, for such professions as law, health care, and social work, and for an informed citizenry.''.
Exchange programs play an important role in learning about foreign cultures and languages and building bridges between societies.
Our Nation benefits from having people from all over the world study, work, and travel in the United States.
The Fulbright Programs are widely recognized and prestigious international exchange programs, with approximately 294,000 ``Fulbrighters'' from more than 155 countries participating in the academic exchange program since its inception more than 60 years ago.
In his June 4, 2009, speech in Cairo, Egypt, President Barack Obama stated-- (A) ``I have come here to seek a new beginning between the United States and Muslims around the world; one based on mutual interest and mutual respect.
''; (B) in discussing economic development and opportunity, ``we will expand exchange programs'' and ``we will create a new corps of business volunteers to partner with counterparts in Muslim-majority countries''; and (C) ``Indeed, faith should bring us together.
That is why we are forging service projects in America that bring together Christians, Muslims, and Jews.''
and ``Around the world, we can turn dialogue into Interfaith service, so bridges between peoples lead to action.''.
During the 2010 Presidential Summit on Entrepreneurship, President Obama emphasized the importance of partnering with global Muslim communities ``to expand economic prosperity .
and to deepen ties between business leaders, foundations, and entrepreneurs in the United States and Muslim communities around the world.''.
In her November 2009 speech at the ``Forum for the Future'' in Marrakech, Morocco, Secretary of State Clinton stated ``It is results, not rhetoric, that matter in the end.
Economic empowerment, education, healthcare, access to energy and to credit, these are the basics that all communities need to thrive.
We know that true progress comes from within a society and cannot be imposed from the outside, and we know that change does not happen overnight.
So we will not focus our energies on one-time projects, but we will seek to work with all of you in government and in civil society to try to build local capacity and empower local organizations and individuals to create sustainable change.''.
On January 28, 2010, Farah Pandith, Special Representative to Muslim Communities for the Department of State, stated, ``by working together in true partnership with Muslims around the world, we can build new relationships and partnerships that inspire and promote peace, prosperity, dignity, and hope.''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a pilot program-- (1) to help build professional capacity and contribute professional skills to local communities through a two-way exchange of fellows; (2) to address some of the long-term economic challenges facing the global economy by sharing and building professional expertise and building civil society capacity in the United States and in Muslim-majority countries, including minority populations in those countries; (3) to promote cross-cultural understanding between the people of the United States and the people in Muslim-majority countries, including minority populations in those countries; (4) to improve mutual understanding, change perceptions, and strengthen the people-to-people ties which unite Americans with people in Muslim-majority countries, including minority populations in those countries; and (5) to promote international cooperation and peace.
In this Act: (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (A) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate; (B) the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; (C) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and (D) the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
Fellow.--The term ``fellow'' means a college-educated professional who-- (A) is between 21 and 40 years of age; and (B) has been selected to participate in the Program.
Fellowship.--The term ``fellowship'' means the vehicle through which inbound and outbound fellows participate in the Program.
Inbound fellow.--The term ``inbound fellow'' means a fellow who is coming to the United States from a Muslim- majority country.
Muslim-majority country.--The term ``Muslim-majority country'' means-- (A) a country that is a Member State of the Organization of the Islamic Conference; and (B) the Republic of Kosovo.
Outbound fellow.--The term ``outbound fellow'' means a fellow who is going to a Muslim-majority country from the United States.
Program.--The term ``Program'' means the 3-year International Professional Exchange Pilot Program established under this Act.
INTERNATIONAL PROFESSIONAL EXCHANGE PILOT PROGRAM.
Authorization.--The Secretary of State is authorized to establish a 3-year international professional exchange pilot program for-- (1) young professionals in the United States to live and work in a Muslim-majority country; and (2) young professionals in Muslim-majority countries to live and work in the United States.
Fellowship Duration.--The fellowships under the Program should last between 3 and 6 months, during which-- (1) time should be allocated for professional training, community service, and cultural immersion activities, including site visits and domestic travel; and (2) the majority of time should be spent in a professional job setting that complements the fellow's professional background and builds relevant professional skill sets.
Community Service.--Each fellow shall be required to complete at least 40 hours of community service in the local community in which the fellow is placed to gain a better appreciation for-- (1) issues surrounding the local community; (2) the importance of civic engagement; and (3) in some cases, interfaith service, which involves service activities and projects for the common good that draw participants from more than 1 faith tradition, denomination, spiritual movement, or religion and often include secular participants and organizations.
Placement.--Each fellow shall be placed in a professional environment that complements his or her professional training and experience.
To the extent possible, outbound fellowship placement selections should target local companies and businesses in addition to placement opportunities with local governments and civil society organizations.
Travel Expenses; Stipend.--The Program shall cover all relevant travel, administrative, and health care costs for each fellow that are directly related to his or her participation in the Program.
Each fellow shall receive a stipend in an amount equal to the estimated costs to be incurred for housing, meals, and local transportation costs.
Fellows shall not be paid a salary by the Program for their fellowship.
To the extent available and consistent with local law, fellows may accept a stipend from the local company or organization connected to their fellowship.
Technology.--In administering the Program, the Secretary of State is encouraged to support and utilize communications technology to train fellows and provide networking opportunities for fellows, including-- (1) simultaneous orientations; (2) online educational and cultural trainings, including refresher language training; (3) classroom exchanges; (4) online networks of fellows; and (5) platforms for sharing experiences and creating alumni networks.
SELECTION OF INBOUND FELLOWS.
Country of Origin.--The selection of inbound fellows shall reflect geographic diversity to the extent possible.
The Secretary of State shall select not fewer than 4 and not more than 7 Muslim-majority countries from which the initial group of inbound fellows may be selected.
In making such selections, the Secretary shall select at least 1 country from each of the following geographic regions: (1) Middle East and North Africa.
Central Asia and South Asia.
Recruitment.--In recruiting inbound fellows for the Program, the Secretary should-- (1) build upon existing programs to engage Muslim communities, including efforts by the Department of State through the Office of the Special Representative to Muslim Communities and the Office of the Special Envoy to the Organization of the Islamic Conference; (2) reach out to graduates of English learning programs, such as the English Access Microscholarship Program; (3) work with local Chambers of Commerce and leading private sector industries to identify potential candidates; (4) engage with public service networks and leading public service and nonprofit organizations; (5) use online networking and media tools to reach potential fellows; and (6) use other creative outlets to reach a broad and diverse candidate pool.
Selection Process.--In selecting inbound fellows for the Program, the Secretary should-- (1) give preference to candidates who-- (A) have relevant professional and language qualifications; (B) are prepared for cultural immersion; and (C) have demonstrated leadership in their communities; (2) take into account the gender and geographic diversity of the candidates; (3) conduct in-person interviews with all of the finalists to test their character and personal commitment to the goals of the Program; and (4) select fellows from a variety of professional backgrounds with a preference for individuals who work in-- (A) the public sector, including teachers, urban/ city planners, public health workers, and public administrators; or (B) civil society, including journalists, faith- based leaders, interfaith leaders, and those working in nonprofit organizations.
Country of Placement.--The placement of outbound fellows shall reflect geographic diversity to the extent possible.
The Secretary of State shall select not fewer than 4 and not more than 7 Muslim-majority countries to which the initial group of outbound fellows may be placed.
This group of countries does not need to be the same group of countries from which inbound fellows are selected.
In making such selection, at least 1 country should be selected from each of the following geographic regions: (1) Middle East and North Africa.
Central Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia.
Recruitment.--In recruiting outbound fellows for the Program, the Secretary should identify a large selection of potential candidates by working closely with-- (1) Federal and State government agencies; (2) United States academic institutions, particularly graduate schools; (3) public and private sector professional networks; (4) private businesses; and (5) nongovernmental organizations.
Selection Process.--In selecting outbound fellows for the Program, the Secretary should-- (1) identify candidates who-- (A) have relevant professional and language qualifications; (B) are prepared for cultural immersion; and (C) have demonstrated leadership in their communities; (2) take into account the gender and geographic diversity of the candidates; (3) conduct in-person interviews with all of the finalists to test their character and personal commitment to the goals of the Program; and (4) select fellows from a variety of professional backgrounds, with a preference for individuals who work in-- (A) the public sector, including teachers, urban/ city planners, public health workers, and public administrators; and (B) civil society, including journalists, faith- based leaders, interfaith leaders, and those working in nonprofit organizations.
ORIENTATION, TRAINING, AND LANGUAGE.
Orientation.--At the beginning of each fellowship, the Program should include an orientation for each class of inbound fellows and outbound fellows.
Training.--The Program should provide, and require each fellow to complete, appropriate professional and cultural training before and during the fellowship.
Language.--The Program is not intended to teach fellows professional competency in the working language of the country in which fellows are placed.
Fellows should possess a working level knowledge of the language needed for professional placement before the placement is made.
The Program shall provide refresher language training for fellowship placement, as needed.
Certificate.--Upon successful completion of the fellowship, each fellow shall receive a certificate from the Department of State certifying such completion.
Alumni Networks.--The Program should include an alumni component that encourages former fellows to meet and build relationships and provides an opportunity for former fellows-- (1) to remain linked to the Program and the network of colleagues they met through the Program; (2) to share experiences with current and former fellows and participating professional organizations; (3) to build international professional networks; (4) to recruit candidates for future fellowships; (5) to identify placement opportunities for future fellows; and (6) to raise funds in support of alumni activities and future fellows.
Public-Private Partnership Funding.--The Secretary of State is strongly encouraged to defray the costs of the Program through public- private partnerships that seek in-kind contributions, financial assistance for travel and administrative costs, job placement, and recruitment assistance from-- (1) the private sector, including private foundations; (2) foreign governments; and (3) other interested parties.
In General.--Not later than 15 months, 27 months, and 39 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees that describes the administration and outcomes of the Program.
Contents.--The reports submitted under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) the administrative costs of the Program; (2) recommendations for improving cost-sharing; (3) the country selection process for the Program; (4) the qualifications, overhead, and achievements of any partners involved in the implementation of the Program; (5) the program models used by grantees to promote cross- learning; (6) recruitment practices and outcomes; (7) the number of candidates per country; (8) selection criteria used to choose fellows, including issues that arose during selection and recommendations for improved selection; (9) the placement process, including issues that arose during selection and recommendations for improved placement; (10) the training offered, including recommendations for improved training; (11) the alumni networks created, including recommendations for improving alumni activity; and (12) other recommendations for improving the administration and funding of the overall program.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of State such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2011 through 2014, which shall be expended to carry out the Program in accordance with this Act.