This Act may be cited as the ``National Police Training Commission Act of 1999''.
There is established, subject to the availability of appropriations, a commission to be known as the ``National Police Training Commission'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 5 members appointed as follows: (1) The majority and minority leaders of the Senate shall each appoint 1 member.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives and the minority leader of the House shall each appoint 1 member.
The 4 members appointed under paragraphs (1) and (2) shall then select 1 member.
Eligibility and Qualifications.-- (1) Eligibility.--The members of the Commission shall be individuals who have knowledge or expertise, whether by experience or training, in matters to be studied by the Commission under this Act.
The members may be from the public or private sector, and may include Federal, State, or local officers or employees (other than those holding elective office), members of academia, non-profit organizations, or other interested individuals.
Qualifications.--The members of the Commission shall be individuals who possess relevant backgrounds, credentials, and experience in some or all of the following: (A) Civil and criminal litigation.
Administrative and management functions of law enforcement in major cities and smaller communities.
Term.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Length of Commission.--The Commission shall cease to exist 1 year after the initial appointment of the 4 members described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a).
The initial appointment of the 4 members so described shall not take effect until the later of October 1, 1999 or the date on which appropriations are made available for the expenses of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made, and shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
If any of the original appointments are not made by the day that is 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, any members already appointed shall fill any vacancy existing on that date.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members.
Study.--The Commission shall conduct a study of the effectiveness of training, recruiting, hiring, oversight, and funding policies and practices in law enforcement, including the following: (1) Training: policies, practices, and organizational strategies of law enforcement, and training and instruction in the use of force, the use of non lethal force, tactical and defensive tactical; arrests, searches and handcuffing; verbal communication; vehicle use; initial and continuing cultural diversity training; community relations and sensitivity training of law enforcement vis a vis the community and the community vis a vis law enforcement.
Recruitment and Hiring: policies and practices in hiring and recruiting law enforcement officers and identifying and setting standards for hiring regarding educational and psychological backgrounds; diversity; lengths of probationary periods.
Oversight: complaint procedures regarding police officers, including screening, organization, and training of investigatory staff; the availability and fairness of due process requirements for members of the public and law enforcement officers, and obstacles to ensuring objective and timely investigations; discrimination and harassment, including the relationship between police and prosecutors; perjury, including the ``code of silence''.
Funding: the effectiveness of the use of funding for programs relating to matters described in paragraphs (1) through (3) of this subsection, whether derived from the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 or otherwise, by cities listed in section 210501 of such Act.''.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the initial appointment of the 4 members described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 3(a), the Commission shall submit a report to Congress of the results of its study, including any recommendations the Commission may make with regard to the matters studied including best practices.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out its duties under section 4.
Upon the request of the Commission, the head of such department or agency may furnish such information to the Commission.
Service Not Compensated.--Each member of the Commission shall serve without compensation, and members who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of service for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment and termination of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the Commission.
Compensation.--The executive director shall be compensated at a rate not to exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
The Chairman may fix the compensation of other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for such personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee, with the approval of the head of the appropriate Federal agency, may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status, benefits, or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum; Voting; Rules.--Two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum to conduct business.
Each member of the Commission shall have one vote, and the vote of each member shall be accorded the same weight.
The Commission may establish by vote of a majority of its members any other rules for the conduct of the Commission's business, if such rules are not inconsistent with this Act or other applicable law.
Use of Information Acquired by the Commission.--Information acquired by the Commission for its study shall be used only for research, statistical, and reporting purposes.
Information to be Kept Confidential.--Information the Commission determines is confidential, including the identity of law enforcement officers and members of the public, shall not be disclosed to the public, nor made a part of any public findings, nor made a part of any report published by the Commission.
Applicability of Federal Tort Claims Provisions.--For purposes of sections 1346(b) and 2401(b) and chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, the Commission is a Federal agency and each of the members and personnel of the Commission is an employee of the Government.
This subsection shall not be construed to imply that any commission is not a Federal agency or that any of the members or personnel of a commission is not an employee of the Government for purposes of sections 1346(b) and 2401(b) and chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code.
Hearings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, administer such oaths, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out its duties under section 4.
Witness expenses.--Witnesses requested to appear before the Commission shall be paid the same fees as are paid to witnesses under section 1821 of title 28, United States Code.
The per diem and mileage allowances for witnesses shall be paid from funds appropriated to the Commission.
Section 210501 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)(A), by inserting ``, and provide, under paragraph (4), training, recruitment, hiring, and oversight assistance'' before the semicolon; and (2) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following: ``(4) The training, recruitment, hiring, and oversight assistance under paragraph (1)(A) shall be given to the following cities: New York, New York, Chicago, Illinois, Los Angeles, California, Washington, District of Columbia, and Charlotte, North Carolina, and to one police department from each of the 4 geographical regions of the country (northeast, south, midwest, and west) 2 of which have less than 100 police officers and 2 of which have less than 300 police officers, as determined by the National Police Training Commission The assistance may include funding for equipment, not to exceed 10 percent of the amount of the grant made to each city.
The money appropriated for such assistance shall be distributed to those locations in proportion to the size of their police departments and upon receipt of written assurances from the police department that the department will provide access to its operations to the Commission.
There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2000 for the purposes of such assistance the sum of $3,000,000.''.
DATA ON DEATHS WHILE IN CUSTODY.
Section 20101(b) of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (6) through (9) as paragraphs (7) through (10), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following: ``(6) assurances that the State will follow the guidelines established by the Attorney General in reporting, on a quarterly basis, information regarding death of any person who is in the process of arrest, has been incarcerated or is en route to be incarcerated at any municipal or county jail, State prison, or other local or State correctional facility (including any juvenile facility) that, at a minimum, includes-- ``(A) the name, gender, ethnicity, and age of the deceased; ``(B) the date, time, and location of death; and ``(C) a brief description of the circumstances surrounding the death.