This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Havens for Children Act of 1997''.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to protect children from the trauma of witnessing or experiencing violence, sexual abuse, neglect, abduction, rape, or death during parent-child visitation and visitation exchanges; (2) to protect victims of domestic violence from experiencing further violence during child visitation and visitation exchanges; and (3) to provide safe havens for parents and children during visitation and visitation exchanges, to promote continuity and stability.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Family violence does not necessarily cease when family victims are legally separated by divorce or otherwise not sharing a household.
According to a 1996 report by the American Psychological Association, custody and visitation disputes are more frequent when there is a history of domestic violence.
Family violence often escalates following separation and divorce, and child custody and visitation arrangements become the new forum for the continuation of abuse.
According to a 1996 report by the American Psychological Association, fathers who batter mothers are twice as likely to seek sole custody of their children.
In these circumstances, if the abusive father loses custody he is more likely to continue the threats to the mother through other legal actions.
Some perpetrators of violence use the children as pawns to control the abused party and to commit more violence during separation or divorce.
In one study, 34 percent of women in shelters and callers to hotlines reported threats of kidnapping, 11 percent reported that the batterer had kidnapped the child for some period, and 21 percent reported that threats of kidnapping forced the victim to return to the batterer.
Approximately 90 percent of children in homes in which their mothers are abused witness the abuse.
Children who witness domestic violence may themselves become victims and exhibit more aggressive, antisocial, fearful, and inhibited behaviors.
Such children display more anxiety, aggression and temperamental problems.
Women and children are at an elevated risk of violence during the process of separation or divorce.
Fifty to 70 percent of men who abuse their spouses or partners also abuse their children.
Up to 75 percent of all domestic assaults reported to law enforcement agencies were inflicted after the separation of the couple.
In one study of spousal homicide, over \1/2\ of the male defendants were separated from their victims.
Seventy-three percent of battered women seeking emergency medical services do so after separation.
The National Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges includes the option of visitation centers in their Model Code on Domestic and Family Violence.
GRANTS TO STATES TO PROVIDE FOR SUPERVISED VISITATION CENTERS (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') is authorized to award grants to States to enable States to enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with public or private nonprofit entities to assist such entities in establishing and operating supervised visitation centers for the purposes of facilitating supervised visitation and visitation exchange.
Considerations.--In awarding such grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements under subsection (a), the Secretary shall take into account-- (1) the number of families to be served by the proposed visitation center to be established under the grant, contract, or agreement; (2) the extent to which the proposed supervised visitation centers serve underserved populations; and (3) the extent to which the applicant demonstrates cooperation and collaboration with advocates in the local community served, including the State domestic violence coalition, State sexual assault coalition, local shelters, and programs for domestic violence and sexual assault victims.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Amounts provided under a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement awarded under this section shall be used to establish supervised visitation centers and for the purposes described in section 2.
Individuals shall be permitted to use the services provided by the center on a sliding fee basis.
Applicant requirements.--The Secretary shall award grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements under this Act in accordance with such regulations as the Secretary may promulgate.
The Secretary shall give priority in awarding grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements under this Act to States that consider domestic violence in making a custody decision.
An applicant awarded such a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement shall-- (A) demonstrate recognized expertise in the area of family violence and a record of high quality service to victims of domestic violence and sexual assault; (B) demonstrate collaboration with and support of the State domestic violence coalition, sexual assault coalition and local domestic violence and sexual assault shelter or program in the locality in which the supervised visitation center will be operated; and (C) provide long-term supervised visitation and visitation exchange services to promote continuity and stability.
Reporting and Evaluation.-- (1) Reporting.--Not later than 60 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that includes information concerning-- (A) the number of individuals served and the number of individuals turned away from services categorized by State and the type of presenting problems that underlie the need for supervised visitation or visitation exchange, such as domestic violence, child abuse, sexual assault, emotional or other physical abuse, or a combination of such factors; (B) the numbers of supervised visitations or visitation exchanges ordered during custody determinations under a separation or divorce decree or protection order, through child protection services, or through other social services agencies; (C) the process by which children or abused partners are protected during visitations, temporary custody transfers and other activities for which the supervised visitation centers are created; (D) safety and security problems occurring during the reporting period during supervised visitations or at visitation centers including the number of parental abduction cases; (E) the number of parental abduction cases in a judicial district using supervised visitation services, both as identified in criminal prosecution and custody violations; and (F) any other appropriate information designated in regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
Evaluation.--In addition to submitting the reports required under paragraph (1), an entity receiving a grant, contract or cooperative agreement under this Act shall have a collateral agreement with the court, the child protection social services division of the State, and local domestic violence agencies or State and local domestic violence coalitions to evaluate the supervised visitation center operated under the grant, contract or agreement.
The entities conducting such evaluations shall submit a narrative evaluation of the center to both the center and the grantee.
Funding.-- (1) In general.--There shall be made available from amounts contained in the Violent Crime Reduction Trust Fund established under title XXXI of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 14211 et sequentes), $65,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2000 for the purpose of awarding grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements under this Act.
Distribution.--Of the amounts made available to carry out this Act for each fiscal year, not less than 90 percent of such amount shall be used to award grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements.
Disbursement.--Amounts made available under this Act shall be disbursed as categorical grants through the 10 regional offices of the Department of Health and Human Services.