This Act may be cited as the ``Choice in Welfare Tax Credit Act of 1995''.
CREDIT FOR CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS TO CERTAIN PRIVATE CHARITIES PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO THE POOR.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
23. CREDIT FOR CERTAIN CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the qualified charitable contributions which are paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limitation.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed $100 ($200 in the case of a joint return).
Qualified Charitable Contribution.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified charitable contribution' means any charitable contribution (as defined in section 170(c)) made in cash to a qualified charity but only if the amount of each such contribution, and the recipient thereof, are identified on the return for the taxable year during which such contribution is made.
Qualified Charity.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified charity' means, with respect to the taxpayer, any organization described in section 501(c)(3) and exempt from tax under section 501(a)-- ``(A) which is certified by the Secretary as meeting the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3), ``(B) which is organized under the laws of the United States or of any State in which the organization is qualified to operate, and ``(C) which is required, or elects to be treated as being required, to file returns under section 6033.
Charity must primarily assist the poor.--An organization meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the predominant activity of such organization is the provision of services to individuals whose annual incomes generally do not exceed 150 percent of the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget).
Minimum expenditure requirement.-- ``(A) In general.--An organization meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the Secretary reasonably expects that the annual exempt purpose expenditures of such organization will not be less than 70 percent of the annual aggregate expenditures of such organization.
Exempt purpose expenditure.--For purposes of subparagraph (A)-- ``(i) In general.--The term `exempt purpose expenditure' means any expenditure to carry out the activity referred to in paragraph (2).
Exceptions.--Such term shall not include-- ``(I) any administrative expense, ``(II) any expense for the purpose of influencing legislation (as defined in section 4911(d)), ``(III) any expense primarily for the purpose of fundraising, and ``(IV) any expense for litigation on behalf of any individual referred to in paragraph (2).
Time When Contributions Deemed Made.--For purposes of this section, at the election of the taxpayer, a contribution which is made not later than the time prescribed by law for filing the return for the taxable year (not including extensions thereof) shall be treated as made on the last day of such taxable year.
Coordination With Deduction for Charitable Contributions.-- ``(1) Credit in lieu of deduction.--The credit provided by subsection (a) for any qualified charitable contribution shall be in lieu of any deduction otherwise allowable under this chapter for such contribution.
Election to have section not apply.--A taxpayer may elect for any taxable year to have this section not apply.''
Qualified Charities Required To Provide Copies of Annual Return.--Subsection (e) of section 6104 of such Code (relating to public inspection of certain annual returns and applications for exemption) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Charities receiving creditable contributions required to provide copies of annual return.-- ``(A) In general.--Every qualified charity (as defined in section 23(d)) shall, upon request of an individual made at an office where such organization's annual return filed under section 6033 is required under paragraph (1) to be available for inspection, provide a copy of such return to such individual without charge other than a reasonable fee for any reproduction and mailing costs.
If the request is made in person, such copies shall be provided immediately and, if made other than in person, shall be provided within 30 days.
Period of availability.--Subparagraph (A) shall apply only during the 3-year period beginning on the filing date (as defined in paragraph (1)(D) of the return requested).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
23. Credit for certain charitable contributions.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made after the 90th day after the date of the enactment of this Act in taxable years ending after such date.