This Act may be cited as the ``Victim Restitution Enhancement Act of 1995''.
Section 3663 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (f)-- (A) by striking paragraphs (1) through (3); (B) by inserting the following new paragraph: ``(1)(A) The order of restitution shall require the defendant to-- ``(i) submit a sworn statement listing all assets owned or controlled by the defendant; and ``(ii) make payment immediately, unless, in the interest of justice, the court provides for payment on a date certain or in installments.
If the court provides for payment in installments, the installments shall be in equal monthly payments over a payment period prescribed by the court unless the court establishes another schedule.
If the order of restitution permits other than immediate payment, the payment period shall not exceed 5 years, excluding any term of imprisonment served by the defendant for the offense.
''; (C) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (2); and (D) by amending paragraph (2), as so redesignated, by striking ``under this section,'' and all that follows through the end of the paragraph and inserting ``under this section.
''; (2) in subsection (h)-- (A) by striking ``(h) An order'' and inserting ``(h)(1) Subject to paragraph (2), an order''; (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1)(A), (1)(B), and (2) as subparagraphs (A)(i), (A)(ii), and (B), respectively; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Notwithstanding any other law that applies a shorter time limitation, a victim may bring an action to enforce an order of restitution on or until the date that is 20 years after the date of the order.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(j) No discharge of debt pursuant to a bankruptcy proceeding shall render an order of restitution under this section unenforceable or discharge liability to pay restitution.
(1) An order of restitution imposed pursuant to this section or by any State court is a lien in favor of the designated agent for a victim of crime entitled to restitution by reason of any Federal or State law, or if such victim cannot be identified, in favor of the United States or any State agency charged with providing restitution to victims of crime, upon all property belonging to the person against whom restitution is ordered.
The lien arises at the time of the entry of the order and continues until the liability is satisfied, remitted, or set aside.
The court ordering restitution shall notify all potential claimants entitled to restitution.
On application of the person against whom restitution is ordered, the Attorney General or any other person or entity holding a lien pursuant to this section, shall-- ``(A) issue a certificate of release, as described in section 6325 of the Internal Revenue Code, of any lien imposed pursuant to this section, upon his acceptance of a bond described in section 6325(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code; or ``(B) issue a certificate of discharge, as described in section 6325 of the Internal Revenue Code, of any part of the person's property subject to a lien imposed pursuant to this subsection, upon his determination that the fair market value of that part of such property remaining subject to and available to satisfy the lien is at least three times the amount of the restitution ordered.
The provisions of sections 6323, 6331, 6332, 6334 through 6336, 6337(a), 6338 through 6343, 6901, 7402, 7403, 7424 through 7426, 7505(a), 7506, 7701, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and of section 513 of the Act of October 17, 1940 (54 United States Statutes at Large 1190), apply to an order of restitution and to the lien imposed by paragraph (1) as if the liability of the person against whom restitution is ordered were for an internal revenue tax assessment where the Attorney General is the lienholder, except to the extent that the application of such statutes is modified by regulations issued by the Attorney General to accord with differences in the nature of the liabilities.
For the purposes of this paragraph references in the preceding sections of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to `the Secretary' shall be construed to mean `the Attorney General' and references in those sections to `tax' shall be construed to mean `order of restitution'.
A notice of the lien imposed by paragraph (1) shall be considered a notice of lien for taxes payable to the United States for the purposes of any State or local law providing for the filing of a notice of a tax lien.
The registration, recording, docketing, or indexing, in accordance with section 1962 of title 28, United States Code, of the judgment under which an order of restitution is imposed shall be considered for all purposes as the filing prescribed by section 6323(f)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, an order of restitution may be enforced by execution against the property of the person against whom it is ordered in like manner as judgments in civil cases.
No discharge of debts pursuant to a bankruptcy proceeding shall render a lien under this section unenforceable.
(A) If a person against whom restitution is ordered and whose assets are subject to a lien under this subsection files any civil action seeking money damages, including an action filed during a period of incarceration, such person shall serve notice, at the expense of that person, of the filing of the action upon each person entitled to receive restitution, or the designated agent of such person, and the Attorney General.
Failure to timely provide actual notice shall be grounds for dismissal of the underlying civil action.
A person entitled to receive restitution under this section, the Office of Victims of Crime of the Department of Justice, or any agency or instrumentality of any State charged with providing restitution to victims of crime, may intervene in the civil action described in subparagraph (A) if the court determines that such intervention would be in the interests of justice.''.
Section 1918(b) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, including any amount advanced to purchase contraband in a sting operation during the investigation resulting in the conviction''.