This Act may be cited as the ``SCORE Program Improvement Act of 2012''.
In this Act-- (1) the terms ``Administration'' and ``Administrator'' mean the Small Business Administration and the Administrator thereof, respectively; (2) the term ``SCORE'' means the Service Corps of Retired Executives established under section 8(b)(1) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(b)(1)); (3) the term ``SCORE Advisory Board'' means the SCORE Advisory Board established under section 101 of this Act; (4) the term ``SCORE chapter'' means a chapter of the Service Corps of Retired Executives; and (5) the term ``small business concern'' has the meaning given that term under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632).
TITLE I--SCORE ADVISORY BOARD SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF ADVISORY BOARD.
Establishment.--There is established the SCORE Advisory Board.
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The SCORE Advisory Board shall be composed of 6 members, who shall be appointed from among individuals having outstanding qualifications and known to be familiar with and sympathetic to the needs and problems of small business concerns.
Limitations.--Of the individuals appointed under paragraph (1)-- (A) not more than 3 may be members of a SCORE chapter; and (B) 3 shall be owners or employees of small business concerns or members of an association that represents small business concerns.
Prohibition.--The members of the SCORE Advisory Board may not be employees of the Federal Government.
Date.--The appointments of the members of the SCORE Advisory Board shall be made not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a member of the SCORE Advisory Board shall be appointed for a term of 3 years.
First members.--Of the members first appointed to the SCORE Advisory Board-- (A) 2 shall be appointed for a term of 4 years, of whom 1 shall be a member described in subsection (b)(2)(A) and 1 shall be a member described in subsection (b)(2)(B); (B) 2 shall be appointed for a term of 3 years, of whom 1 shall be a member described in subsection (b)(2)(A) and 1 shall be a member described in subsection (b)(2)(B); and (C) 2 shall be appointed for a term of 2 years, of whom 1 shall be a member described in subsection (b)(2)(A) and 1 shall be a member described in subsection (b)(2)(B).
Vacancies.-- (1) In general.--A vacancy on the SCORE Advisory Board shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made and shall be subject to any conditions which applied with respect to the original appointment.
Filling unexpired term.--An individual chosen to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the unexpired term of the member replaced.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 60 days after the date on which all members of the SCORE Advisory Board have been appointed, the SCORE Advisory Board shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The SCORE Advisory Board shall meet-- (1) not less frequently than semiannually; and (2) at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the SCORE Advisory Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairman.--The SCORE Advisory Board shall select a Chairman from among its members.
DUTIES OF THE SCORE ADVISORY BOARD.
Duties.--The SCORE Advisory Board shall-- (1) review and monitor plans and programs developed in the public and private sector which affect SCORE chapters; (2) provide advice on improving coordination between plans and programs described in paragraph (1); (3) advise SCORE chapters on the use of Federal funds allocated to SCORE; (4) develop and promote initiatives, policies, programs, and plans designed to assist with the mentoring services offered by SCORE chapters throughout the United States; and (5) advise the Administrator on the development and implementation of an annual comprehensive plan under subsection (b).
Development of Plan.--The Administrator shall develop and implement an annual comprehensive plan for joint efforts by the public and private sectors to facilitate the formation and development of mentoring by SCORE volunteers.
Annual Report.--Not later than 30 days after the end of each fiscal year, the SCORE Advisory Board shall submit to the President, the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate, and the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives a report that contains-- (1) the minutes of each meeting of the SCORE Advisory Board during the fiscal year to which the report relates; (2) a detailed description of the activities of the SCORE Advisory Board during the fiscal year to which the report relates, including how the SCORE Advisory Board carried out the duties described in subsection (a); (3) recommendations for promoting SCORE chapters and mentoring services; and (4) any concurring or dissenting views of the Administrator.
POWERS OF THE SCORE ADVISORY BOARD.
Hearings.--The SCORE Advisory Board may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the SCORE Advisory Board considers advisable to carry out this Act.
Task Groups.--The SCORE Advisory Board may establish a temporary task group to carry out any duty of the SCORE Advisory Board described in section 4.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The SCORE Advisory Board may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the SCORE Advisory Board considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the SCORE Advisory Board, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the SCORE Advisory Board.
Postal Services.--The SCORE Advisory Board may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The SCORE Advisory Board may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
SCORE ADVISORY BOARD PERSONNEL MATTERS.
Compensation.--Members of the SCORE Advisory Board shall not be compensated for services performed on behalf of the SCORE Advisory Board.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the SCORE Advisory Board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the SCORE Advisory Board.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the SCORE Advisory Board without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
INAPPLICABILITY OF THE FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT TO THE SCORE ADVISORY BOARD.
Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply with respect to the SCORE Advisory Board.
The expenses of the SCORE Advisory Board, including expenses relating to personnel, as described in section 104, shall be paid by SCORE, from amounts made available to SCORE to carry out section 8(b)(1)(B) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(b)(1)(B)).
TITLE II--FINANCIAL REFORMS SEC.
Section 20 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 631 note) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (j) as subsection (f); and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(g) SCORE Program.--The Administrator may make grants and enter into cooperative agreements to carry out the SCORE program authorized by section 8(b)(1) in a total amount that does not exceed $7,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015.''.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF SCORE.
Limitation on Amount of Salary.--The rate of basic pay of the chief executive officer of SCORE may not exceed the maximum rate of basic pay established under section 5382 of title 5, United States Code, for a position in the Senior Executive Service.
Federal Share of Salary.--For any year during which the chief executive officer of SCORE serves in a leadership capacity on a foundation affiliated with SCORE, the Federal share of the basic pay of the chief executive officer of SCORE may not exceed 80 percent.
Establishment.--SCORE shall establish a committee to determine the amount allocated each year to each SCORE chapter.
Members.--The members of the committee established under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) 1 member of the staff of SCORE who is not the chief executive officer of SCORE; and (2) not fewer than 4 members of the SCORE Advisory Board.
SCORE shall establish a method for allocating amounts received by SCORE from the Federal Government, which shall-- (1) ensure that not less than 50 percent of the amounts are allocated to SCORE chapters; and (2) be subject to the approval of the Administrator and the committee established under section 203.
GAO STUDY AND REPORT.
Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study of the technology activities of SCORE that includes an examination of each expenditure by SCORE for technology activities and the result of each such expenditure.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress and the Administrator a report that contains-- (1) a detailed description of the amounts SCORE has expended for technology activities, including how SCORE expended Federal funds to carry out and sustain technology initiatives during the 4-year period ending on the date of enactment of this Act; (2) a determination of whether SCORE has expended Federal funds efficiently and effectively to carry out technology activities; (3) an evaluation of-- (A) how well SCORE has met objectives relating to technology spending; and (B) the policy that resulted in the establishment of objectives relating to technology spending; and (4) recommendations for actions by SCORE to achieve objectives relating to technology spending while safeguarding Federal funds.