This Act may be cited as the ``Public Safety Employer-Employee Relations Act of 1995''.
DECLARATION OF PURPOSE AND POLICY.
The Congress declares that the following is the policy of the United States: (1) Labor-management relationships and partnerships are based on trust, mutual respect, open communications, bilateral and consensual problem solving, and shared accountability.
Dispute resolution procedures are fair, determinative, simple, fast and inexpensive, and effectively and swiftly deal with issues.
Labor-management cooperation fully utilizes the strengths of both parties to best serve the interests of the public, operating as a team to carry out the public safety mission in a quality work environment.
In many public safety agencies it is the union that provides the institutional stability as elected leaders and appointees come and go.
The health and safety of the Nation and the best interest of public safety employers and employees can be best protected by the settlement of issues through the processes of collective bargaining.
The Federal Government shall make available governmental facilities for conciliation, mediation, and voluntary arbitration to aid and encourage employers and the representatives of their employees to reach and maintain agreements concerning rates of pay, hours, and working conditions, and to make all reasonable efforts to settle their differences by mutual agreement reached through collective bargaining or by such methods as may be provided for in any applicable agreement for the settlement of disputes.
Certain controversies which arise involving collective bargaining agreements may be avoided or minimized through mediations and conciliation.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
The term ``firefighter'' means an employee who-- (A) primarily performs work directly related to the control and extinguishment of fires; (B) works for fire departments and is responsible for the maintenance and use of firefighting apparatus and equipment, prevention and investigation, communications and dispatch; or (C) provides emergency medical care.
The term includes an employee engaged in such activity who is transferred to a supervisory or administrative position, but does not include a management or supervisory employee.
The term ``law enforcement officer'' means a member of a law enforcement agency serving in a law enforcement position, which is usually indicated by formal training (regardless of whether the officer has completed or been assigned to such training) and usually accompanied by the power to make arrests.
The term includes an employee engaged in such activity who is transferred to a supervisory or administrative position, but does not include a management or supervisory employee.
The term ``law enforcement agency'' means a State or local public agency that is charged by law with the duty to prevent or investigate crimes or apprehend or hold in custody persons charged with or convicted of crimes.
The term ``management or supervisory employee'' includes any public safety personnel exempted from the provisions of chapter 8 of title 29, United States Code.
The terms ``employer'' and ``public safety employer'' mean any State, political subdivision of a State, the District of Columbia, or any territory or possession of the United States.
RIGHT OF FIREFIGHTERS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TO ORGANIZE AND BARGAIN COLLECTIVELY.
In General.--Firefighters and law enforcement officers have the right to self-organize, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection.
Application to Existing Laws of States and Political Subdivisions.-- (1) Applicability.--This Act shall be applicable to any State and its political subdivisions if such entity does not have a law or ordinance that provides greater or equal protection for the rights of firefighters and law enforcement officers as established under sections 4(a) and 4(e)(3) under this Act.
Right to petition.--Any employer or employee labor organization shall have the right to petition the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to determine that a State or political subdivision ordinance is in compliance with paragraph (1).
The Director shall issue a determination not later than 30 days after receipt of such a petition.
The power of enforcement shall be the same as cited in subsection (f).
Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director shall issue regulations to carry out this Act in accordance with the administrative procedures described in subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
Existing Collective Bargaining Units and Agreements.--No certification, recognition, election-held, collective bargaining agreement or memorandum of understanding which has been issued, approved, or ratified by any public employee relations board or commission or by any State or political subdivision or their agents (management officials) shall be invalidated by enactment of this Act.
Conciliation of Labor Disputes Involving Firefighters and Law Enforcement Officers.-- (1) Establishment of board of inquiry.-- (A) When an impasse is certified by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, the Director shall assist on the resolution of the impasse by establishing within 30 days after the notice to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, an impartial Board of Inquiry to investigate the issues involved in the dispute and to make a written report thereon to the parties not later than 15 days after the establishment of such a board unless an extension is requested by such board and approved by the Director.
The written report shall contain the findings of fact together with the Board's recommendations for settling the dispute, with the objective of achieving a prompt, peaceful, and just settlement of the dispute.
Each board shall be composed of such number of individuals as the director may deem desirable.
No member appointed under this section shall have pecuniary interest or involvement in firefighting or law enforcement or in the employee organizations involved in the dispute.
Compensation of members of boards of inquiry.-- (A) Members of any board established under this section who are otherwise employed by the Federal Government shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in carrying out its duties under this section.
Members of any board established under this section who are not subject to subparagraph (A) shall receive compensation at a rate prescribed by the Director but not to exceed the daily rate prescribed for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, including travel for each day they are entitled to reimbursement for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in carrying out their duties under this section.
Maintenance of status quo.--After the certification of an impasse under paragraph (1) of this section and for 15 days after the Board of Inquiry has issued its report, no change in the status quo in effect prior to the expiration of the contract in the case of negotiations for a contract renewal, or in effect prior to the time of the impasse in the case of an initial bargaining negotiation, except by agreement of the parties, shall be made by the parties to the controversy.
Enforcement.--After completion of the investigation in subsection (e) the Director may request the Attorney General to petition any United States District Court having jurisdiction of the parties to enforce the provisions of this Act.
State Immunity.--A State shall not be immune from an action in Federal or State court of competent jurisdiction for a violation of this Act.
In any action against a State for a violation of the requirements of this Act, remedies (including remedies both at law and in equity) are available for such violation to the same extent as such remedies are available for such a violation in an action against any public or private entity other than a State.
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS PROHIBITED.
Public safety employers and employees may not engage in lockouts or strikes.
SUITS BY AND AGAINST LABOR ORGANIZATIONS.
Venue, Amount, and Citizenship.--Suits for violation of contracts between an employer and a labor organization representing public safety employees, or between any such labor organizations, may be brought in any district court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties, without respect to the amount in controversy or without regard to the citizenship of the parties.
Responsibility for Acts of Agent; Entity for Purpose of Suit; Enforcement of Money Judgments.--Any labor organization which represents public safety employees and any employer shall be bound by the acts of its agents.
Any such labor organization may sue or be sued as an entity and on behalf of the employees whom it represents in the courts of the United States.
Any money judgment against a labor organization in a district court of the United States shall be enforceable only against the organization as an entity and against its assets, and shall not be enforceable against any individual member or the assets of the individual.
Jurisdiction.--For the purpose of actions and proceedings by or against labor organizations in the district courts of the United States, district courts shall be deemed to have jurisdiction of a labor organization-- (1) in the district in which such organization maintains its principal office; or (2) in any district in which its duly authorized officers or agents are engaged in representing or acting for employee members.
Service of Process.--The service of summons, subpoena, or other legal process of any court of the United States upon an officer or agent (acting in such capacity) of a labor organization shall constitute service upon the labor organization.
Determination of Question of Agency.--For the purpose of this section, in determining whether any person is acting as an ``agent'' of another person so as to make such other person responsible for such actions, the question of whether the specific acts performed were actually authorized or subsequently ratified shall not be controlling.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
This Act shall take effect 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.