This Act may be cited as the ``Endangered Species Relisting Act of 1995''.
REQUIREMENT TO REVIEW SPECIES.
Requirement.--Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Petition and Review Required for Certain Species To Be Listed.-- ``(1) In general.--After the end of the 12-month period beginning on the date of enactment of the Endangered Species Relisting Act of 1995, a covered species shall not be considered to be an endangered species or threatened species for purposes of this Act and shall not be included or considered to be included in any list published under subsection (c) unless before the end of such 12-month period either-- ``(A) in the case of a species described in paragraph (4)(A), a petition is filed under section 553(e) of title 5, United States Code, to relist that species on such list and the review of such petition is completed by the Secretary according to the criteria set forth in subsection (k); or ``(B) in response to a petition or on the Secretary's own initiative, the Secretary determines in accordance with paragraph (2) that the species is certain to become extinct, or will be placed on an irreversible course to extinction, over the 24-month period beginning on the date of the determination.
Emergency listing requirements.-- ``(A) A determination under paragraph (1)(B) must be based on the best scientific and commercial data available, and must be subject to comment, after publication in the Federal Register, for a period of 60 days, prior to taking effect.
The Secretary may utilize information contained in a recovery plan developed prior to the date of the enactment of the Endangered Species Relisting Act of 1995 with respect to a species, in making a determination under paragraph (1)(B).
A determination of the Secretary under paragraph (1)(B)-- ``(i) shall be published in the Federal Register; ``(ii) shall contain a response to all comments filed under subparagraph (B); and ``(iii) shall be subject to judicial review.
After the end of the 24-month period beginning on the date the Secretary publishes a determination under paragraph (1)(B) for a species, the species shall not be considered to be an endangered species or threatened species for purposes of this Act and shall not be included or considered to be included in any list published under subsection (c), unless before the end of that period the Secretary determines in accordance with subsections (a), (b), and (c) to add the species to such a list.
Annual reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of the Endangered Species Relisting Act of 1995 and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Congress on the implementation of this subsection, including on progress made in considering petitions referred to in paragraph (1) (A) and (B).
Covered species defined.--In this subsection the term `covered species' means a species-- ``(A) which on the date of enactment of the Endangered Species Relisting Act of 1995 is included in a list published under subsection (c); or ``(B) for which a notice is published under subsection (b)(5)(A)(i) before that date of enactment.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 4(b)(3)(A) of such Act (16 United States Code 1533(b)(3)(A)) is amended in the first sentence by inserting ``, to relist a species on,'' after ``add a species to,''.
Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533) is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Peer Review Requirements.-- ``(1) Requirements.--The Secretary-- ``(A) may not take any action described in paragraph (2) based on any data, result, or determination unless the data, result, or determination has undergone peer review in accordance with subparagraph (B); and ``(B) shall submit to peer review, by at least 3 independent reviewers selected by the Secretary from among individuals recommended by the National Academy of Sciences-- ``(i) all data, results, and determinations that are the basis of an action described in paragraph (2), and ``(ii) all data that is timely submitted to the Secretary by any person likely to be affected by an action described in paragraph (2), and that the Secretary determines to be of substantial scientific value.
Actions described.--The actions referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: ``(A) The inclusion of a species in, retention of a species on, or removal of a species from a list published under subsection (c).
The development, revision, approval, or implementation of a recovery plan under subsection (f).
Publication.--The Secretary shall publish-- ``(A) the results of any peer review conducted under paragraph (1); and ``(B) in the case of peer review conducted under paragraph (1) for an action described in paragraph (2), all other materials that are relevant to the decision to take the action.
Obtaining recommendations.--The Secretary shall-- ``(A) take appropriate action to obtain from the National Academy of Sciences recommendations of individuals to perform peer review under paragraph (1)(B); and ``(B) in the case of economic analyses, consult with appropriate scientific board to obtain recommendations of individuals with economic expertise to perform peer review under paragraph (1)(B).''.
DEADLINE FOR DEVELOPMENT OF RECOVERY PLANS.
Section 4(f) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533(f)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) The Secretary shall-- ``(A) begin developing a recovery plan required for a species under paragraph (1) and publish notice of the intent of the Secretary to develop such a plan, before the end of the 30-day period beginning on the date the Secretary publishes notice of the listing of the species under subsection (c); and ``(B) issue such a plan in final form, or submit to the appropriate committees of the Congress the reasons why such a plan has not been issued, before the end of the 12-month period beginning on the date of publication of such notice.
(A) Any person affected by the listing of a species under subsection (c) may submit a proposed recovery plan for the species to the Secretary.
The Secretary, in the notice required under paragraph (6)(A), shall encourage submission of such proposed recovery plans.
For any species for which one or more proposed recovery plans are submitted under subparagraph (A) that would adequately promote the conservation and survival of a species, the Secretary shall adopt as the final recovery plan required for the species under this subsection the proposed plan that, among all proposed plans submitted, would-- ``(i) impose the lowest costs on persons affected by the plan; ``(ii) to the greatest extent possible, apply to more than one species; and ``(iii) not result in a prohibition of use of the land or water for other purposes.''.
5 INCIDENTAL TAKE IN COURSE OF NORMAL ACTIVITIES.
Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533) is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(l) Incidental Take.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding the provisions of section 9(a), a taking that occurs in the course of an activity described in paragraph (2) is not prohibited by this Act if the taking is de minimis in nature and merely incidental to the activity.
Covered activities.--The activities referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: ``(A) Any action by a State or local government agency to respond to, prevent, or mitigate an emergency.
Operation, repair, or minor alteration of an existing facility.
Construction of a minor structure adjacent to an existing facility.
Clearing of land adjacent to an existing structure to comply with a fire code, or to reasonably protect property.
Use of land for agricultural production, or, if previously zoned for agricultural production, for any use not more intensive than agricultural activity.
Any action reasonably needed to protect a human from injury or death.
Any other lawful activity that is approved by a State or local government.