This Act may be cited as the ``Law Enforcement Officers Death Penalty Act of 1993''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF DEATH PENALTY FOR KILLING FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
Section 1114 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting after ``except that any such person'' the following: ``who is found guilty of first degree murder shall also be subject to the penalty of death in accordance with chapter 228 of this title and any such person''; and (2) by adding at the end ``Whoever kills a State or local law enforcement officer, while such officer is in the course of duty assisting a Federal law enforcement officer whose killing is a violation of this section, shall be subject to the same punishment as is provided under this section for the killing of such Federal law enforcement officer in the same circumstances.''.
In General.--Title 18 of the United States Code is amended by inserting after chapter 227 the following: ``CHAPTER 228--DEATH PENALTY PROCEDURES ``Sec.
Factors to be considered in determining whether a sentence of death is justified.
Special hearing to determine whether a sentence of death is justified.
Imposition of a sentence of death.
``3595. Review of a sentence of death.
Implementation of a sentence of death.
Use of State facilities.
Sentence of death ``A defendant who commits an offense under section 1114 of this title for which the death penalty may be imposed shall be sentenced to death if, after consideration of the factors set forth in section 3592 of this title in the course of a hearing held pursuant to section 3593 of this title, it is determined that imposition of a sentence of death is justified.
However, no person may be sentenced to death who was less than 18 years of age at the time of the offense.
Factors to be considered in determining whether a sentence of death is justified ``(a) Mitigating Factors.--In determining whether a sentence of death is justified for any offense, the jury, or if there is no jury, the court, shall consider each of the following mitigating factors and determine which, if any, exist: ``(1) Mental capacity.--The defendant's mental capacity was significantly impaired, although the impairment was not such as to constitute a defense to prosecution.
Duress.--The defendant was under unusual and substantial duress, although not such duress as would constitute a defense to prosecution.
Participation in offense minor.--The defendant was an accomplice whose participation in the offense was relatively minor.
The jury, or if there is no jury, the court, shall consider whether any other mitigating factor exists.
Aggravating Factors.--In determining whether a sentence of death is justified the jury, or if there is no jury, the court, shall consider each of the following aggravating factors and determine which, if any, exist: ``(1) Previous conviction of offense for which a sentence of death or life imprisonment was authorized.--The defendant has previously been convicted of another Federal or State offense resulting in the death of a person, for which a sentence of life imprisonment or death was authorized by statute.
Previous conviction of other serious offenses.--The defendant has previously been convicted of two or more Federal or State offenses, each punishable by a term of imprisonment of more than one year, committed on different occasions, involving controlled substances or the infliction of, or attempted infliction of, serious bodily injury or death upon another person.
Grave risk of death to additional persons.--The defendant, in the commission of the offense, knowingly created a grave risk of death to one or more persons in addition to the victim of the offense.
Heinous, cruel, or depraved manner of commission.-- The defendant committed the offense in an especially heinous, cruel, or depraved manner.
Procurement of the offense by payment.--The defendant procured the commission of the offense by payment, or promise of payment, of anything of pecuniary value.
Commission of the offense for payment.--The defendant committed the offense as consideration for the receipt, or in the expectation of the receipt, of anything of pecuniary value.
Substantial planning and premeditation.--The defendant committed the offense after substantial planning and premeditation.
Vulnerability of victim.--The victim was particularly vulnerable due to old age, youth, or infirmity.
The jury, or if there is no jury, the court, may consider whether any other aggravating factor exists.
Special hearing to determine whether a sentence of death is justified ``(a) Notice by the Government.--If, in a case involving an offense described in section 3591 of this title, the attorney for the Government believes that the circumstances of the offense are such that a sentence of death is justified under this chapter, such attorney shall, a reasonable time before the trial, or before acceptance by the court of a plea of guilty, or at such time thereafter as the court may permit upon a showing of good cause, sign and file with the court, and serve on the defendant, a notice-- ``(1) stating that the Government believes that the circumstances of the offense are such that, if the defendant is convicted, a sentence of death is justified under this chapter; and ``(2) setting forth the aggravating factor or factors, including a factor or factors not specifically enumerated in section 3592, that the Government, if the defendant is convicted, proposes to prove as justifying a sentence of death.
The court may permit the attorney for the Government to amend the notice upon a showing of good cause.
Hearing Before a Court or Jury.--If the attorney for the Government has filed a notice as required under subsection (a) of this section and the defendant is found guilty of an offense described in section 3591 of this title, the judge who presided at the trial or before whom the guilty plea was entered, or another judge if that judge is unavailable, shall conduct a separate sentencing hearing to determine the punishment to be imposed.
Before such a hearing, no presentence report shall be prepared by the United States Probation Service, notwithstanding the provisions of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.
The hearing shall be conducted-- ``(1) before the jury that determined the defendant's guilt; ``(2) before a jury impaneled for the purpose of the hearing if-- ``(A) the defendant was convicted upon a plea of guilty; ``(B) the defendant was convicted after a trial before the court sitting without a jury; ``(C) the jury that determined the defendant's guilt was discharged for good cause; or ``(D) after initial imposition of a sentence under this section, reconsideration of the sentence under the section is necessary; or ``(3) before the court alone, upon motion of the defendant and with the approval of the attorney for the Government.
A jury impaneled pursuant to paragraph (2) shall consist of 12 members, unless, at any time before the conclusion of the hearing, the parties stipulate, with the approval of the court, that it shall consist of a lesser number.
Proof of Mitigating and Aggravating Factors.--At the hearing, information may be presented as to any matter relevant to the sentence, including any mitigating or aggravating factor permitted or required to be considered under section 3592 of this title.
Information presented may include the trial transcript and exhibits if the hearing is held before a jury or judge not present during the trial.
Any other information relevant to a mitigating or aggravating factor may be presented by either the attorney for the Government or the defendant, regardless of its admissibility under the rules governing admission of evidence at criminal trials, except that information may be excluded if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of creating unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, or misleading the jury.
The attorney for the Government and for the defendant shall be permitted to rebut any information received at the hearing, and shall be given fair opportunity to present argument as to the adequacy of the information to establish the existence of any aggravating or mitigating factor, and as to the appropriateness of imposing a sentence of death in the case.
The attorney for the Government shall open the argument.
The defendant shall be permitted to reply.
The attorney for the Government shall then be permitted to reply in rebuttal.
The burden of establishing the existence of an aggravating factor is on the Government, and is not satisfied unless the existence of such a factor is established beyond a reasonable doubt.
The burden of establishing the existence of any mitigating factor is on the defendant, and is not satisfied unless the existence of such a factor is established by a preponderance of the information.
Return of Special Findings.--The jury, or if there is no jury, the court, shall consider all the information received during the hearing.
It shall return special findings with respect to the mitigating and aggravating factors concerning which information is received at the hearing, stating-- ``(1) whether some mitigating factor required to be considered under section 3592 exists; ``(2) whether some aggravating factor required to be considered under section 3592 exists; and ``(3) which specific mitigating or aggravating factor or factors exist.
A finding under paragraph (1) or (2) that some mitigating or aggravating factor exists must be unanimous.
A finding under paragraph (3) that a specific mitigating or aggravating factor exists may be made by a majority of at least nine members of the jury.
Return of a Finding Concerning a Sentence of Death.--If, in the case of an offense described in section 3591, an aggravating factor required to be considered under section 3592 is found to exist, the jury, or if there is no jury, the court, shall then consider whether the aggravating factor or factors found to exist sufficiently outweigh all the mitigating factors found to exist to justify a sentence of death, or, in the absence of a mitigating factor, whether the aggravating factor or factors alone are sufficient to justify a sentence of death.
Based upon this consideration, the jury by unanimous vote, or if there is no jury, the court, shall return a finding as to whether a sentence of death is justified.
The jury or the court, regardless of its findings with respect to aggravating and mitigating factors, is never required to impose a death sentence and the jury shall be so instructed.
Special Precaution to Assure Against Discrimination.--In a hearing held before a jury, the court, before the return of a finding under subsection (e) of this section, shall instruct the jury that, in considering whether a sentence of death is justified, it shall not consider the race, color, national origin, creed, or sex of the defendant or of any victim.
The jury, upon return of a finding under subsection (e) of this section, shall also return to the court a certificate, signed by each juror, that consideration of the race, color, national origin, creed, or sex of the defendant or any victim was not involved in reaching the juror's individual decision.
Imposition of a sentence of death ``Upon a finding under section 3593(e) of this title that a sentence of death is justified, the court shall sentence the defendant to death.
Upon finding under section 3593(e) of this title that no aggravating factor required to be found exists or that a sentence of death is not justified, the court shall impose any sentence other than death that is authorized by law.
3595. Review of a sentence of death ``(a) Appeal.--In a case in which a sentence of death is imposed, the sentence shall be subject to review by the court of appeals upon appeal by the defendant.
Notice of appeal must be filed within the time specified for the filing of a notice of appeal.
An appeal under this section may be consolidated with an appeal of the judgment of conviction and shall have priority over all other cases.
Review.--The court of appeals shall review the entire record in the case, including-- ``(1) the evidence submitted during the trial; ``(2) the information submitted during the sentencing hearing; ``(3) the procedure employed in the sentencing hearing; and ``(4) the special findings returned under section 3593(d) of this title.
Decision and Disposition.-- ``(1) If the court of appeals determines that-- ``(A) the sentence of death was not imposed under the influence of passion, prejudice, or any other arbitrary factor; and ``(B) the information supports the special findings of the existence of an aggravating factor or factors; it shall affirm the sentence.
In any other case, the court of appeals shall remand the case for reconsideration under section 3593 or for imposition of another authorized sentence as appropriate.
The court of appeals shall state in writing the reasons for its disposition of an appeal of sentence of death under this section.
Implementation of sentence of death ``A person who has been sentenced to death pursuant to this chapter shall be committed to the custody of the Attorney General until exhaustion of the procedures for appeal of the judgment of conviction and for review of the sentence.
When the sentence is to be implemented, the Attorney General shall release the person sentenced to death to the custody of a United States marshal, who shall supervise implementation of the sentence in the manner prescribed by law of the State in which the sentence is imposed.
If the law of such State does not provide for implementation of a sentence of death, the court shall designate another State, the law of which does so provide, and the sentence shall be implemented in the manner prescribed by such law.
A sentence of death shall not be carried out upon a person who lacks the mental capacity to understand the death penalty and why it was imposed on that person, or upon a woman while she is pregnant.
Use of State facilities ``A United States marshal charged with supervising the implementation of a sentence of death may use appropriate State or local facilities for the purpose, may use the services of an appropriate State or local official or of a person such as an official employed for the purpose, and shall pay the costs thereof in the amount approved by the Attorney General.''.
Clerical Amendment to Chapter Analysis.--Title 18, United States Code, is amended in the chapter analysis of part II, by adding the following new item after the item relating to chapter 227: ``228.
Death penalty procedures............................. 3591''.