FORMULA FOR DETERMINING OFFICIAL MAIL ALLOWANCE.
Section 311(e)(2)(B)(i) of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1991 (2 United States Code 59e(e)(2)(B)(i)) is amended by striking ``3'' and inserting ``1.5''.
TRANSFER OF CERTAIN FUNDS PROHIBITED.
Section 101(c)(2) of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1993 (2 United States Code 95b(c)(2)) is amended by striking `` ``official mail costs'',''.
Paragraph (6) of section 3210(a) of title 39, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(6)(A) It is the intent of Congress-- ``(i) that a Member of, or Member-elect to, Congress may not send any unsolicited franked mail postmarked fewer than 60 days immediately before the date of any primary election or general election (whether regular, special, or runoff) in which the Member is a candidate for reelection; and ``(ii) that a Member of, or Member-elect to, the House of Representatives who is a candidate for any other public office may not send-- ``(I) any unsolicited franked mail for delivery within any portion of the jurisdiction of or the area covered by the public office which is outside the area constituting the congressional district from which the Member or Member-elect was elected; or ``(II) any unsolicited franked mail postmarked fewer than 60 days immediately before the date of any primary election or general election (whether regular, special, or runoff) in which the Member or Member-elect is a candidate for such office.
No Senator may send any unsolicited franked mail postmarked fewer than 60 days immediately before the date of any primary election or general election (whether regular, special, or runoff) for any national, State or local office in which such Senator is a candidate for election.
For purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B), if mail matter is of a type which is not customarily postmarked, the date on which such matter would have been postmarked if it were of a type customarily postmarked shall apply.
The Select Committee on Ethics of the Senate and the House Commission on Congressional Mailing Standards shall prescribe for their respective Houses rules and regulations, and shall take such other action as the Committee or the Commission considers necessary and proper for Members of, and Members-elect to, Congress to comply with the provisions of this paragraph.
The rules and regulations shall include provisions prescribing the time within which mailings shall be mailed at or delivered to any postal facility and the time when the mailings shall be deemed to have been mailed or delivered to comply with the provisions of this paragraph.
As used in this section, the term `mass mailing' means, with respect to a session of Congress, any mailing of newsletters or other pieces of mail with substantially identical content (whether such mail is deposited singly or in bulk, or at the same time or different times), totaling more than 500 pieces in that session, except that such term does not include any mailing-- ``(i) of matter in direct response to a communication from a person to whom the matter is mailed; ``(ii) from a Member of Congress to other Members of Congress, or to Federal, State, or local government officials; or ``(iii) of a news release to the communications media.
Subparagraphs (A) through (D) shall not apply with respect to any mailing which would satisfy clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of subparagraph (E) (determined without consideration as to the number of pieces in such mailing), except that for purposes of this subparagraph, subparagraph (E)(i) shall not be considered satisfied if the mailing is postmarked later than 60 days after the communication (or latest communication) to which it responds.''.
Subparagraph (H) of section 3210(a)(3) of title 39, United States Code, is repealed.
RETURN OF EXCESS AMOUNTS FROM OFFICIAL ALLOWANCES OF MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES TO THE TREASURY FOR DEFICIT REDUCTION.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other law, or any rule or other authority, any amount remaining in an official allowance of a Member of the House of Representatives at the end of the session of Congress or other period for which the allowance is made available shall be returned to the Treasury, to be used for deficit reduction.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``Member of the House of Representatives'' means a Representative in, or a Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress; and (2) the term ``official allowance'' means, with respect to a Member of the House of Representatives, the Official Mail Allowance.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect as of the beginning of the first Congress beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.