This Act may be cited as the ``Restoring Authority to Schools Act of 2004''.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to restore authority to the public schools to conduct education as a human enterprise; (2) to limit Federal court oversight of public schools to that which is reasonable and necessary to implement Federal law; and (3) to allow State and local education officials to bring new insights and solutions to problems of allocating revenues and resources for the common good in keeping with their designated legislative and executive powers.
APPROPRIATE REMEDIES WITH RESPECT TO VIOLATIONS OF FEDERAL LAW IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
Requirements for Relief.-- (1) Prospective relief.-- (A) Prospective relief in any civil action with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools shall extend no further than necessary to correct the violation of the Federal right of a particular plaintiff or plaintiffs.
The court shall not grant or approve any prospective relief unless the court finds that such relief is narrowly drawn, extends no further than necessary to correct the violation of the Federal right, and is the least intrusive means necessary to correct the violation of the Federal right.
The court shall give substantial weight to any adverse impact on other students or the school community as a whole caused by the relief.
The court shall not order any prospective relief that requires or permits a government official to exceed his or her authority under State or local law or otherwise violates State or local law, unless-- (i) Federal law requires such relief to be ordered in violation of State or local law; (ii) the relief is necessary to correct the violation of a Federal right; and (iii) no other relief will correct the violation of the Federal right.
Preliminary injunctive relief.--In any civil action with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools, to the extent otherwise authorized by law, the court may enter a temporary restraining order or an order for preliminary injunctive relief.
Preliminary injunctive relief must be narrowly drawn, extend no further than necessary to correct the harm the court finds requires preliminary relief, and be the least intrusive means necessary to correct that harm.
The court shall give substantial weight to any adverse impact on other students or the school community as a whole caused by the preliminary relief and shall respect the principles of comity set out in paragraph (1)(B) in tailoring any preliminary relief.
Preliminary injunctive relief shall automatically expire on the date that is 90 days after its entry, unless the court makes the findings required under subsection (a)(1) for the entry of prospective relief and makes the order final before the expiration of the 90-day period.
Termination of Relief.-- (1) Termination of prospective relief.-- (A) In any civil action with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools in which prospective relief is ordered, such relief shall be terminable upon the motion of any party or intervener-- (i) 2 years after the date the court granted or approved the prospective relief; (ii) 1 year after the date the court has entered an order denying termination of prospective relief under this paragraph; or (iii) in the case of an order issued on or before the date of enactment of the Restoring Authority to Schools Act (enacted ____ __, 2004), 2 years after such date of enactment.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the parties from agreeing to terminate or modify relief before the relief is terminated under subparagraph (A).
Immediate termination of prospective relief.--In any civil action with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools, a defendant or intervener shall be entitled to the immediate termination of any prospective relief if the relief was approved or granted in the absence of a finding by the court that the relief is narrowly drawn, extends no further than necessary to correct the violation of the Federal right, and is the least intrusive means necessary to correct the violation of the Federal right.
Limitation.--Prospective relief shall not terminate if the court makes written findings based on the record that prospective relief remains necessary to correct a current and ongoing violation of the Federal right, extends no further than necessary to correct the violation of the Federal right, and that the prospective relief is narrowly drawn and the least intrusive means to correct the violation.
Termination or modification of relief.--Nothing in this section shall prevent any party or intervener from seeking modification or termination before the relief is terminable under paragraph (1) or (2), to the extent that modification or termination would otherwise be legally permissible.
Settlements.-- (1) Consent decrees.--In any civil action with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools, the court shall not enter or approve a consent decree unless it complies with the limitations on relief set forth in subsection (a).
Private settlement agreements.-- (A) Nothing in this section shall preclude parties from entering into a private settlement agreement that does not comply with the limitations on relief set forth in subsection (a), if the terms of that agreement are not subject to court enforcement other than the reinstatement of the civil proceeding that the agreement settled.
Nothing in this section shall preclude any party claiming that a private settlement agreement has been breached from seeking in State court any remedy available under State law.
State Law Remedies.--The limitations on remedies in this section shall not apply to relief entered by a State court based solely upon claims arising under State law.
Procedure for Motions Affecting Prospective Relief.-- (1) Generally.--The court shall promptly rule on any motion to modify or terminate prospective relief in a civil action with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools.
Mandamus shall lie to remedy any failure to issue a prompt ruling on such a motion.
Automatic stay.--Any motion to modify or terminate prospective relief made under subsection (b) shall operate as a stay during the period-- (A)(i) beginning on the 30th day after such motion is filed, in the case of a motion made under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b); or (ii) beginning on the 180th day after such motion is filed, in the case of a motion made under any other law; and (B) ending on the date the court enters a final order ruling on the motion.
Postponement of automatic stay.--The court may postpone the effective date of an automatic stay specified in subsection (e)(2)(A) for not more than 60 days for good cause.
No postponement shall be permissible because of general congestion of the court's calendar.
Order blocking the automatic stay.--Any order staying, suspending, delaying, or barring the operation of the automatic stay described in paragraph (2) (other than an order to postpone the effective date of the automatic stay under paragraph (3)) shall be treated as an order refusing to dissolve or modify an injunction and shall be appealable pursuant to section 1292(a)(1) of title 28, United States Code, regardless of how the order is styled or whether the order is termed a preliminary or a final ruling.
Special Masters.-- (1) In general.-- (A) In any civil action in a Federal court with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools, the court may appoint a special master who shall be disinterested and objective and who will give due regard to balancing the needs of the school community as a whole against the requested relief, to conduct hearings on the record and prepare proposed findings of fact.
The court shall appoint a special master under this subsection during the remedial phase of the action only upon a finding that the remedial phase will be sufficiently complex to warrant the appointment.
Appointment.-- (A) If the court determines that the appointment of a special master is necessary, the court shall request that the defendant State officials and the plaintiff each submit a list of not more than 5 persons to serve as a special master.
Each party shall have the opportunity to remove up to 3 persons from the opposing party's list.
The court shall select the master from the persons remaining on the list after the operation of subparagraph (B).
Interlocutory appeal.--Any party shall have the right to an interlocutory appeal of the judge's selection of the special master under this subsection, on the ground of partiality.
Compensation.--The compensation to be allowed to a special master under this section shall be based on an hourly rate not greater than the hourly rate established under section 3006A for payment of court-appointed counsel, plus costs reasonably incurred by the special master.
Such compensation and costs shall be paid with funds appropriated to the Judiciary.
Regular review of appointment.--In any civil action with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools in which a special master is appointed under this subsection, the court shall review the appointment of the special master every 6 months to determine whether the services of the special master continue to be required under paragraph (1).
In no event shall the appointment of a special master extend beyond the termination of the relief.
Limitations on powers and duties.--A special master appointed under this subsection-- (A) may be authorized by a court to conduct hearings and prepare proposed findings of fact, which shall be made on the record; (B) shall not make any findings or communications ex parte; (C) may be authorized by a court to assist in the development of remedial plans; and (D) may be removed at any time, but shall be relieved of the appointment upon the termination of relief.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``consent decree'' means any relief entered by the court that is based in whole or in part upon the consent or acquiescence of the parties, but does not include private settlements; (2) the term ``civil action with respect to violations of Federal law in the public schools'' means any civil proceeding arising under Federal law with respect to any aspect of operation of the public schools or the provision of public education, including extra curricular and ancillary activities, but does not include civil proceedings relating to desegregation of the public schools; (3) the term ``public schools'' means a public elementary or secondary school as such terms are defined in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code Sec.
7801); (4) the term ``private settlement agreement'' means an agreement entered into among the parties that is not subject to judicial enforcement other than the reinstatement of the civil proceeding that the agreement settled; (5) the term ``prospective relief'' means all relief other than compensatory monetary damages; (6) the term ``special master'' means any person appointed by a Federal court pursuant to Rule 53 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure or pursuant to any inherent power of the court to exercise the powers of a master, regardless of the title or description given by the court; and (7) the term ``relief'' means all relief in any form that may be granted or approved by the court, and includes consent decrees but does not include private settlement agreements.