SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Higher Education and Learning Promotion Act''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
In General.--Part VIII of subchapter F of chapter 1 (relating to qualified State tuition programs) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
General Rule.--An education investment account (hereafter in this section referred to as an `education investment account') shall be exempt from taxation under this subtitle.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the education investment account shall be subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable organizations).
Limitations on Accounts.-- ``(1) Account may not be established for benefit of more than 1 individual.--An education investment account may not be established for the benefit of more than 1 individual.
Special rule where more than 1 account.--If, at any time during a calendar year, 2 or more education investment accounts are maintained for the benefit of an individual, only the account first established shall be treated as an education investment account for purposes of this section.
This paragraph shall not apply to the extent more than 1 account exists solely by reason of a rollover contribution.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Education investment account.--The term `education investment account' means a trust created or organized in the United States exclusively for the purpose of paying the qualified higher education expenses of the account holder, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted-- ``(i) unless it is in cash or in securities for which (as of the date of the contribution) market quotations are readily available on an established securities market, ``(ii) except in the case of rollover contributions from another education investment account, in excess of $1,500 for any calendar year, and ``(iii) after the date on which the account holder attains age 18.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which that person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts (other than contracts the beneficiary of which is the trust and the face amount of which does not exceed the amount by which the maximum amount which can be contributed to the education investment account exceeds the sum of the amounts contributed to the account for all taxable years).
The assets of the trust shall not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
Any balance in the education investment account on the day after the date on which the individual for whose benefit the trust is established attains age 30 (or, if earlier, the date on which such individual dies) shall be distributed within 30 days of such date to the account holder (or in the case of death, the beneficiary).
Time when contributions deemed made.--A taxpayer shall be deemed to have made a contribution on the last day of the preceding taxable year if the contribution is made on account of such taxable year and is made not later than the time prescribed by law for filing the return for such taxable year (including extensions thereof).
Qualified higher education expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified higher education expenses' has the same meaning given such term by section 529(e)(3), except that such expenses shall be reduced by any amount described in section 135(d)(1) (relating to certain scholarships and veterans benefits).
State tuition plans.--Such term shall include amounts paid or incurred to purchase tuition credits or certificates, or to make contributions to an account, under a qualified State tuition program (as defined in section 529(b)).
Eligible educational institution.--The term `eligible educational institution' has the meaning given such term by section 135(c)(3).
Account holder.--The term `account holder' means the individual for whose benefit the education investment account is established.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any amount paid or distributed out of an education investment account shall be included in gross income of the payee or distributee for the taxable year in the manner prescribed by section 72.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, rules similar to the rules of section 408(d)(2) shall apply.
Distribution used to pay educational expenses.-- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any payment or distribution out of an education investment account to the extent such payment or distribution is used exclusively to pay the qualified higher education expenses of the account holder.
Special rule for applying section 2503.--If any payment or distribution from an education investment account is used exclusively for the payment to an eligible educational institution of the qualified higher education expenses of the account holder, such payment shall be treated as a qualified transfer for purposes of section 2503(e).
Additional tax for distributions not used for educational expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The tax imposed by this chapter for any taxable year on any taxpayer who receives a payment or distribution from an education investment account which is includible in gross income under paragraph (1) shall be increased by 10 percent of the amount which is so includible.
Exception for disability, death, or scholarship.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply if the payment or distribution is-- ``(i) made on account of the death or disability of the account holder, or ``(ii) made on account of a scholarship (or allowance or payment described in section 135(d)(1) (B) or (C)) received by the account holder to the extent the amount of the payment or distribution does exceed the amount of the scholarship, allowance, or payment.
Excess contributions returned before due date of return.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to the distribution to a contributor of any contribution paid during a taxable year to an education investment account to the extent that such contribution, when added to previous contributions to the account during the taxable year, exceeds $1,000 if-- ``(i) such distribution is received on or before the day prescribed by law (including extensions of time) for filing such contributor's return for such taxable year, and ``(ii) such distribution is accompanied by the amount of net income attributable to such excess contribution.
Any net income described in clause (ii) shall be included in the gross income of the contributor for the taxable year in which such excess contribution was made.
Rollover contributions.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount paid or distributed from an education investment account to the extent that the amount received is paid into another education investment account for the benefit of the account holder not later than the 60th day after the day on which the holder receives the payment or distribution.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any payment or distribution if it applied to any prior payment or distribution during the 12-month period ending on the date of the payment or distribution.
Special rules for death and divorce.--Rules similar to the rules of section 220(f) (7) and (8) shall apply.
Tax Treatment of Accounts.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2) and (4) of section 408(e) shall apply to any education investment account, and any amount treated as distributed under such rules shall be treated as not used to pay qualified higher education expenses.
Community Property Laws.--This section shall be applied without regard to any community property laws.
Custodial Accounts.--For purposes of this section, a custodial account shall be treated as a trust if the assets of such account are held by a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that the manner in which he will administer the account will be consistent with the requirements of this section, and if the custodial account would, except for the fact that it is not a trust, constitute an account described in subsection (b)(1).
For purposes of this title, in the case of a custodial account treated as a trust by reason of the preceding sentence, the custodian of such account shall be treated as the trustee thereof.
Reports.--The trustee of an education investment account shall make such reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the account holder with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require under regulations.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by those regulations.''
Tax on Prohibited Transactions.--Section 4975 (relating to prohibited transactions) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of subsection (c) the following new paragraph: ``(5) Special rule for education investment accounts.--An individual for whose benefit an education investment account is established and any contributor to such account shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if, with respect to such transaction, the account ceases to be an education investment account by reason of the application of section 530 to such account.
''; and (2) in subsection (e)(1), by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F), and by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) a education investment account described in section 530, or''.
Failure To Provide Reports on Education Investment Accounts.-- Section 6693 (relating to failure to provide reports on individual retirement accounts or annuities) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or on education investment accounts'' after ``annuities'' in the heading of such section, and (2) in subsection (a)(2), by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) section 530(h) (relating to education investment accounts).''
Coordination With Savings Bond Exclusion.--Section 135(d)(1) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting ``, or'', and by inserting at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) a payment or distribution from an education investment account (as defined in section 530).''
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of sections for part VIII of subchapter F of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
(A) The heading for part VIII of subchapter F of chapter 1 is amended to read as follows: ``PART VIII--HIGHER EDUCATION SAVINGS ENTITIES''.
The table of parts for subchapter F of chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to part VIII and inserting: ``Part VIII.
Higher education savings entities.''
The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended by striking the item relating to section 6693 and inserting the following new item: ``Sec.
Failure to provide reports on individual retirement accounts or annuities or on education investment accounts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
EMPLOYER-PROVIDED EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS.
Permanent Extension.--Section 127 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exclusion for educational assistance programs) is amended by striking subsection (d) and by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (d).
Effective Dates.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
MODIFICATIONS OF TAX TREATMENT OF QUALIFIED STATE TUITION PROGRAMS.
Exclusion of Distributions Used for Educational Purposes.-- Subparagraph (B) of section 529(c)(3) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) Distributions for qualified higher education expenses.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any distribution to the extent-- ``(i) the distribution is used exclusively to pay qualified higher education expenses of the distributee, or ``(ii) the distribution consists of providing a benefit to the distributee which, if paid for by the distributee, would constitute payment of a qualified higher education expense.''
Qualified Higher Education Expenses To Include Room and Board.--Section 529(e)(3) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Qualified higher education expenses.--The term `qualified higher education expenses' means the cost of attendance (within the meaning of section 472 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1087ll), as in effect on the date of the enactment of the Higher Education Learning and Promotion Act) of a designated beneficiary at an eligible educational institution (as defined in section 135(c)(3)).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.