This Act may be cited as the ``Police Accountability Act of 1993''.
PATTERN OR PRACTICE CASES.
Cause of Action.-- (1) Unlawful conduct.--It shall be unlawful for any governmental authority, or any agent thereof, or any person acting on behalf of a governmental authority, to engage in a pattern or practice of conduct by law enforcement officers that deprives persons of rights, privileges, or immunities, secured or protected by the Constitution or laws of the United States.
Civil action by attorney general.--Whenever the Attorney General has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of paragraph (1) has occurred, the Attorney General, for or in the name of the United States, may in a civil action obtain appropriate equitable and declaratory relief to eliminate the pattern or practice.
Civil action by injured person.--Any person injured by a violation of paragraph (1) may in a civil action obtain appropriate equitable and declaratory relief to eliminate the pattern or practice.
In any civil action under this paragraph, the court may allow the prevailing plaintiff reasonable attorneys' fees and other litigation fees and costs (including expert's fees).
A governmental body shall be liable for such fees and costs to the same extent as a private individual.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``law enforcement officer'' means an official empowered by law to conduct investigations of, to make arrests for, or to detain individuals suspected or convicted of, criminal offenses.
In General.--Chapter 13 (relating to civil rights) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Offense.--Whoever, being a law enforcement officer and under color of law, subjects any person to force exceeding that which is reasonably necessary to carry out a law enforcement duty, shall be punished under subsection (b).
Punishment.--(1) The punishment for an offense under this section is a fine under this title, or imprisonment under paragraph (2), or both.
The imprisonment for an offense under this section shall-- ``(A) if death results, be for any term of years or for life; ``(B) if bodily injury other than death results, be for not more than 10 years; and ``(C) in any other case, not exceed one year.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term `law enforcement officer' means an official empowered by law to conduct investigations of, to make arrests for, or to detain individuals suspected or convicted of, criminal offenses.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 13 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``248.
DATA ON USE OF EXCESSIVE FORCE.
Attorney General to Collect.--The Attorney General shall acquire and annually publish data about complaints to criminal justice authorities about the use of excessive force by law enforcement officers.
The Attorney General shall submit to Congress a report analyzing complaints of excessive force by local law enforcement authorities made to federal enforcement authorities with a breakdown-- (1) of the racial composition of complainants, (2) the race of officers accused of excessive use of force, and (3) whether federal law enforcement authorities investigated, prosecuted or obtained convictions in each case.
Guidelines and Procedures.--The Attorney General shall establish-- (1) guidelines for the submission of such data; and (2) procedures for carrying out this section.
Limitation on Use of Data.--Data acquired under this section shall be used only for research or statistical purposes and may not contain any information that may reveal the identity of the complainant or any individual involved in the incident giving rise to the complaint.
Annual Summary.--The Attorney General shall publish an annual summary of the data acquired under this section.
Criminal Justice Assistance Funds.-- (1) Section 503 of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3753) is amended by inserting at the end of subsection (a) the following: ``(12) A certification that the State and its units of local government are providing information to the Attorney General that the Attorney General is obligated to acquire under section 4 of the Police Accountability Act of 1991 regarding complaints to criminal justice authorities about the use of excessive force by law enforcement officers.''.
Section 503(a)(12) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (as added by paragraph (1)), shall apply to applications submitted on or after the date that is one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.