This Act may be cited as the ``Constitutional Rights Oversight Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR FEDERAL COUNTERTERRORISM ACTIVITIES.
Establishment as Independent Agency.--There is established as an independent agency in the executive branch of the Government an agency which shall be known as the ``Office of the Inspector General for Counterterrorism Activities''.
Purpose.--The purpose of the Office shall be to assure that counterterrorism activities of Federal agencies are carried out in a manner fully consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and in particular with the constitutional rights of individuals or groups of individuals who may be the subject of such counterterrorism activities or who are members of a group that may be the subject of such counterterrorism activities.
Rule of Construction.--This Act shall be construed to ensure the fullest protection of constitutional rights.
INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR COUNTERTERRORISM ACTIVITIES.
In General.--The Office shall be under the direction and control of the Inspector General for Counterterrorism Activities.
Appointment.--The Inspector General shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and shall report solely to the President.
The term of the Inspector General shall be 6 years.
General Functions.--The Inspector General shall-- (1) protect against abuses of constitutional rights and civil liberties in the conduct of Federal counterterrorism activities, as provided in this Act; and (2) with respect to counterterrorism agencies, perform all functions that are performed under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
with respect to establishments by Inspectors General of establishments, without regard to section 8E of that Act.
Powers.--For the purpose of performing any function authorized under this Act, the Inspector General may exercise any power that is available under the Inspector General Act of 1978 to an Inspector General of an establishment, except that section 8E of that Act does not apply to the Inspector General.
FUNCTIONS RELATING TO PROTECTION OF CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS.
Documents Related to Surveillance and Other Activities.--Each Federal official submitting to a court or another official any request for authorization for a search, wiretap, or other surveillance activity to be conducted for counterterrorism purposes or for deportation of any individual for reasons related to counterterrorism purposes shall as soon as practicable provide to the Inspector General a copy of the request together with all documents submitted to such court or official in support of such request.
Actions To Protect Constitutional Rights.--The Inspector General may provide to any court or another official receiving a request under subsection (a) a response to such request and may propose that such court or official take such action in response to such request as the Inspector General finds appropriate in order to assure the protection of the constitutional rights of any person likely to be affected by the granting of such request.
Public Involvement.--(1) The Inspector General shall provide for receipt and review of suggestions or complaints regarding the consistency with constitutional requirements of the conduct of counterterrorism activities by Federal agencies.
The Inspector General may refer any suggestion or complaint described in paragraph (1) to the appropriate Federal agency or agencies.
Any agency to which such a suggestion or complaint is referred shall provide the Inspector General with a full and timely response to such suggestion or complaint.
Reports.--(1) The Inspector General shall submit to the Congress and the President annual reports reviewing compliance by counterterrorism agencies with protection of constitutional rights.
The Inspector General shall also submit such special reports as the Inspector considers appropriate to promote full protection of constitutional rights with respect to counterterrorism activities of Federal agencies.
The Inspector General shall submit, with any report under this subsection that contains classified information, an unclassified summary.
RELATIONSHIP TO LAWS REQUIRING SECURITY CLEARANCE.
This Act shall not be considered or construed to affect any Federal law that requires the Inspector General or any personnel of the Office to obtain security clearance.
The President shall take all steps necessary to assure that the Inspector General and any personnel of the Office are authorized, in accordance with those laws, to obtain all information appropriate for full implementation of this Act and the protection of constitutional rights.
REFERENCES TO HEAD OF ESTABLISHMENT IN INSPECTOR GENERAL ACT OF 1978.
For purposes of sections 2 and 3(a), a reference in the Inspector General Act of 1978 to the head of an establishment shall be treated as a reference to the President.
In this Act: (1) The term ``counterterrorism agency'' means any Federal agency involved in counterterrorism activities.
The term ``establishment'' has the meaning given that term in section 11 of the Inspector General Act of 1978.
Except to the extent the context indicates otherwise, the term ``Inspector General'' means the Inspector General for Counterterrorism Activities appointed under this Act.
The term ``Office'' means the Office of the Inspector General for Counterterrorism Activities established by this Act.
There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.