This Act may be cited as the ``USERRA Amendments Act of 1998''.
ENFORCEMENT OF RIGHTS WITH RESPECT TO A STATE AS AN EMPLOYER.
In General.--Section 4323 of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Enforcement of rights with respect to a State or private employer ``(a) Action for Relief.--(1) A person who receives from the Secretary a notification pursuant to section 4322(e) of this title of an unsuccessful effort to resolve a complaint relating to a State (as an employer) or a private employer may request that the Secretary refer the complaint to the Attorney General.
If the Attorney General is reasonably satisfied that the person on whose behalf the complaint is referred is entitled to the rights or benefits sought, the Attorney General may appear on behalf of, and act as attorney for, the person on whose behalf the complaint is submitted and commence an action for relief under this chapter for such person.
In the case of such an action against a State (as an employer), the action shall be brought in the name of the United States as the plaintiff in the action.
A person may commence an action for relief with respect to a complaint against a State (as an employer) or a private employer if the person-- ``(A) has chosen not to apply to the Secretary for assistance under section 4322(a) of this title; ``(B) has chosen not to request that the Secretary refer the complaint to the Attorney General under paragraph (1); or ``(C) has been refused representation by the Attorney General with respect to the complaint under such paragraph.
Jurisdiction.--(1) In the case of an action against a State (as an employer) or a private employer commenced by the United States, the district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction over the action.
In the case of an action against a State (as an employer) by a person, the action may be brought in a State court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the laws of the State.
In the case of an action against a private employer by a person, the district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction of the action.
Venue.--(1) In the case of an action by the United States against a State (as an employer), the action may proceed in the United States district court for any district in which the State exercises any authority or carries out any function.
In the case of an action against a private employer, the action may proceed in the United States district court for any district in which the private employer of the person maintains a place of business.
Remedies.--(1) In any action under this section, the court may award relief as follows: ``(A) The court may require the employer to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
The court may require the employer to compensate the person for any loss of wages or benefits suffered by reason of such employer's failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
The court may require the employer to pay the person an amount equal to the amount referred to in subparagraph (B) as liquidated damages, if the court determines that the employer's failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter was willful.
(A) Any compensation awarded under subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (1) shall be in addition to, and shall not diminish, any of the other rights and benefits provided for under this chapter.
In the case of an action commenced in the name of the United States for which the relief includes compensation awarded under subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (1), such compensation shall be held in a special deposit account and shall be paid, on order of the Attorney General, directly to the person.
If the compensation is not paid to the person because of inability to do so within a period of three years, the compensation shall be covered into the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts.
A State shall be subject to the same remedies, including prejudgment interest, as may be imposed upon any private employer under this section.
Equity Powers.--The court may use its full equity powers, including temporary or permanent injunctions, temporary restraining orders, and contempt orders, to vindicate fully the rights or benefits of persons under this chapter.
Standing.--An action under this chapter may be initiated only by a person claiming rights or benefits under this chapter under subsection (a) or by the United States under subsection (a)(1).
Respondent.--In any action under this chapter, only an employer or a potential employer, as the case may be, shall be a necessary party respondent.
Fees, Court Costs.--(1) No fees or court costs may be charged or taxed against any person claiming rights under this chapter.
In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this chapter by a person under subsection (a)(2) who obtained private counsel for such action or proceeding, the court may award any such person who prevails in such action or proceeding reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, and other litigation expenses.
Inapplicability of State Statute of Limitations.--No State statute of limitations shall apply to any proceeding under this chapter.
Definition.--In this section, the term `private employer' includes a political subdivision of a State.''.
Effective Date.--(1) Section 4323 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a), shall apply to actions commenced under chapter 43 of such title on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall apply to actions commenced under such chapter before the date of the enactment of this Act that are not final on the date of the enactment of this Act, without regard to when the cause of action accrued.
In the case of any such action against a State (as an employer) in which a person, on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act, is represented by the Attorney General under section 4323(a)(1) of such title as in effect on such day, the court shall upon motion of the Attorney General, substitute the United States as the plaintiff in the action pursuant to such section as amended by subsection (a).
PROTECTION OF EXTRATERRITORIAL EMPLOYMENT AND REEMPLOYMENT RIGHTS OF MEMBERS OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.
Definition of Employee.--Section 4303(3) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Such term includes any person who is a citizen, national, or permanent resident alien of the United States employed in a workplace in a foreign country by an employer that is an entity incorporated or otherwise organized in the United States or that is controlled by an entity organized in the United States, within the meaning of section 4319(c) of this title.''.
Foreign Countries.--Subchapter II of chapter 43 of such title is amended by inserting after section 4318 the following new section: ``Sec.
Employment and reemployment rights in foreign countries ``(a) Liability of Controlling United States Employer of Foreign Entity.--If an employer controls an entity that is incorporated or otherwise organized in a foreign country, any denial of employment, reemployment, or benefit by such entity shall be presumed to be by such employer.
Inapplicability to Foreign Employer.--This subchapter does not apply to foreign operations of an employer that is a foreign person not controlled by an United States employer.
Determination of Controlling Employer.--For the purpose of this section, the determination of whether an employer controls an entity shall be based upon the interrelations of operations, common management, centralized control of labor relations, and common ownership or financial control of the employer and the entity.
Exemption.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, an employer, or an entity controlled by an employer, may-- ``(1) discriminate within the meaning of section 4311 of this title; ``(2) deny reemployment rights within the meaning of section 4312, 4313, 4314, or 4315 of this title; or ``(3) deny benefits within the meaning of section 4316, 4317, or 4318 of this title, with respect to an employee in a workplace in a foreign country, if compliance with any such section would cause such employer, or such entity controlled by an employer, to violate the law of the foreign country in which the workplace is located.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 43 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 4318 the following new item: ``4319.
Employment and reemployment rights in foreign countries.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply only with respect to conduct occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act.
COMPLAINTS RELATING TO REEMPLOYMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES IN FEDERAL SERVICE.
In General.--The first sentence of paragraph (1) of section 4324(c) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, without regard as to whether the complaint accrued before, on, or after October 13, 1994''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to all complaints filed with the Merit Systems Protection Board on or after October 13, 1994.
Passed the House of Representatives March 24, 1998.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.