This Act may be cited as the ``Foreign Language Economic Enhancement Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Foreign language proficiency will help Americans to understand other customs and cultures, conduct effective foreign policy, expand international trade, ensure the integrity of national defense and security, and develop a truly broad-based education for all citizens.
The business community suffers from United States educational deficiencies, including inadequate foreign language instruction.
To compete, Americans must know more about their economic partners and competitors.
To do business overseas, Americans must understand the customer's language and customs.
Of the world's 10 most populous languages, representing potential markets, 6 of them, Malay-Indonesian, Bengali, Hindi, Portuguese, and some dialects of Arabic and Chinese, are not widely taught in the United States.
In Europe, there are dozens of universities with schools of practical interpretation and translation.
In the United States, very few institutions of higher education offer training in translation and interpretation, and only one offers an undergraduate degree program.
Most professional interpreters and translators working in the United States are foreign-born or received their professional training in other countries.
Only 8 percent of our universities require foreign languages for admission, and only 5 percent of our college graduates are fluent in any language other than English.
American colleges and universities must place a new emphasis on improving the teaching of foreign languages, regional studies, and international studies to help meet such challenges.
Many teachers lack adequate international preparation.
Only 5 percent of current elementary and secondary teachers ever took international relations, or geography courses while in school.
Fewer than 5 percent of the elementary school students in this country receive foreign language instruction, and only 17 percent of United States public elementary schools offer any form of language instruction.
As new and increased language instruction becomes necessary, educators to teach these languages are becoming increasingly difficult to find.
35 States are currently reporting a shortage in foreign language teachers.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``institution of higher education'' has meaning provided by section 1201 of the Higher Education Act of 1965; (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education; (3) the term ``State education agency'' has the meaning provided by section 1201 of the Higher Education Act of 1965; and (4) the term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning provided by section 1201 of such Act.
TITLE I--FOREIGN LANGUAGE TEACHER RECRUITMENT SEC.
It is the purpose of this title to establish a grant program that will assist States in recruiting individuals with a demonstrated competence in a foreign language and providing those individuals with the training required to qualify those individuals to teach.
General Authority.--The Secretary shall, in accordance with the requirements of this title, establish a program to provide grants to State educational agencies to recruit and train qualified individuals as elementary and secondary school teachers.
Allotment of Funds.--The Secretary shall periodically assess the needs for foreign language teachers in each State.
The Secretary shall establish by regulation, procedures based on the results of such assessment, for the allotment of funds provided under this title among those States that have submitted applications that meet the requirements of section 203.
Such procedures shall provide that no State shall receive a grant of less than $500,000 or more than $2,000,000.
Any State desiring to receive a grant under this title shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such form, and containing or accompanied by such information and assurances as the Secretary may require by regulation.
Such application shall-- (1) contain assurances that 50 percent of the funds made available under the grant for each fiscal year will be used to provide grants of not more than $5,000 per year to qualified individuals to cover the costs of instruction required to obtain certification to teach; (2) provide that the State educational agency will allocate funds provided under the grant on the basis of the following factors; (A) the local educational agencies need for qualified teachers of foreign languages; (B) the extent to which the local educational agency has established model programs to address foreign language instruction in effective ways; (C) the need for development of new programs to recruit and train qualified foreign language teachers; and (D) such additional factors as the State educational agency considers appropriate; (3) contain assurances that the State educational agency will not provide funds under the grant to any institution of higher education unless the institution of higher education requires 2 years of foreign language instruction as a condition of admission or graduation; and (4) specify the procedures by which the State educational agency will select the institutions or organizations to provide the training required for teacher certification, which may include an institution of higher education, local educational agency, or consortia of institutions of higher education and local educational agencies.
Definition.--For purposes of this title, an individual is qualified if such individual has competence in a foreign language at a level consistent with the standards established by the Secretary under subsection (b).
Selection.--In selecting individuals for receipt for assistance under this title, a State educational agency shall include qualified individuals who are-- (1) retired or returning Government employees who served abroad; (2) retired or returning business persons or professionals who served abroad; (3) foreign-born nationals with a degree from a domestic or overseas institution of higher education; and (4) individuals with a baccalaureate degree whose major or minor was in a foreign language or international studies.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and each of the 3 succeeding fiscal years.
TITLE II--GRANTS TO INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION FOR TRANSLATORS AND INTERPRETERS SEC.
Program Authority.--The Department of State shall establish a Translation and Interpretation Needs Assessment Council.
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The Council shall be composed of the following individuals or the designated representatives of such individuals: (A) The Secretary of State, or a designee, who shall serve as the chairperson of the Board.
The Secretary of Education.
The Secretary of Defense.
The Secretary of Commerce.
The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
The Director of the United States Information Agency.
The Director of the National Security Council.
6 individuals appointed by the President, who have the expertise in the fields of translation and interpretation, language and linguistics, international studies, business, and area studies education.
Special rule.--Individuals appointed to the Board pursuant to paragraph (1)(H) shall be appointed for a period not to exceed 4 years.
Such individuals shall receive no compensation for service on the Council, but may receive reimbursement for travel and other necessary expenses.
Functions.--The Council shall-- (1) establish qualifications for students and institutions of higher education desiring fellowships and grants for institutional support under this title; (2) coordinate and determine the translation and interpretation needs of the Government for the purposes of economic competitiveness and cooperation, diplomacy, and national security; and (3) after determining these needs, make grants to institutions of higher education for training translation and interpretation specialists and personnel.
PROCEDURES FOR THE SELECTION OF GRANT AND FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.
Grants.--The Council shall award grants under this title to institutions of higher education or consortia of institutions of higher education (in conjunction with nonprofit or Federal agencies, or both) that provide evidence that they are developing a degree or certificate program in translation and interpretation.
Fellowships.--The Council shall award fellowships under this title to individuals who are enrolled in a degree or certificate program and agree to enter government or public service for 2 years for each year of study for which a fellowship under this title is received.
ESTABLISHMENT OF GRANT AND FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.
Institutional Support.--Funds provided by a grant under this title may be used for the purposes of-- (1) developing physical plant and interpretation facilities, (2) instructor training, (3) materials, (4) curriculum development, (5) internships, (6) faculty development and support in translation and interpretation, (7) certificate and degree programs, and (8) the development and enhancement of graduate programs.
Fellowships.--Fellowships under this title shall be awarded to individuals who are United States citizens or resident aliens to enable such students to pursue education in the United States in the areas of practical interpretation and translation.
There are authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, of which no less than $10,000,000 shall be available for section 202(a), and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997 to carry out the provisions of this title.
TITLE III--LESSER KNOWN AND STUDIED LANGUAGES SEC.
LESSER KNOWN AND STUDIED LANGUAGES GRANTS AND FELLOWSHIPS.
Effective October 1, 1993, the Soviet-Eastern European Research and Training Act of 1983 (22 United States Code 4501) is amended by adding after section 809 the following new section: ``SEC.
LESSER KNOWN AND STUDIED LANGUAGES GRANTS AND FELLOWSHIPS.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to promote the teaching and study of lesser known and studied languages.
Definition.--For the purposes of this section, the term `lesser known and studied languages' means languages considered important to the national interest, national security, and economic competitiveness which have less than 1,000 students engaged in study at institutions of higher education in the United States.
Program Authority.-- ``(1) List of lesser known and studied languages.--The Secretary of State, in consultation with other appropriate agencies, shall develop a list of the lesser known and studied languages.
Grants.--The Secretary of State shall award grants under this section to institutions of higher education or consortia of institutions of higher education (in conjunction with nonprofit or Federal agencies, or both) that provide evidence that they are developing programs, classes, curriculum material, and faculty for study in the lesser known and studied languages.
No such grant may exceed $1,000,000.
Fellowships.--The Secretary of State shall award fellowships under this section to individuals who are enrolled at an accredited institution of higher education in a degree or certificate program in a lesser known and studied language leading to proficiency in such language.
Fellowships under this section shall be $5,000 for each semester of study.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) Grants.--There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 to carry out subsection (c)(2).
Fellowships.--There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 to carry out subsection (c)(3).''.
TITLE IV--EXPORT EDUCATION SEC.
It is the purpose of this title to assist American companies to develop and expand into export markets by providing education and support services necessary for domestic businesses to succeed in international markets by increasing their basic knowledge of world markets, foreign cultures and languages.
Grants by Secretary.--The Secretary of Commerce shall, in accordance with this title, make grants to States to carry out the purpose described in section 401.
Selection of Grants.--The State shall submit to the Secretary a proposal indicating the qualifications of the eligible entity for carrying out the provisions of section 403.
Distribution of Funds by States.--Each State that receives a grant under this title shall determine the eligibility of an appropriate State-based entity according to the needs of the State's primary trade and economic development agency and model programs serving such needs or for the development of such programs.
Funds provided under this title may be used for the purpose of, but are not limited to-- (1) education, support and referral services in developing marketing materials in foreign languages and appropriate to other cultures, (2) assisting companies in trade missions, (3) holding seminars and classes for companies on topics such as export regulations, trading techniques, working in foreign cultures and foreign languages, (4) providing consulting services with experts to assist companies in export and marketing planning, and (5) acting as a clearinghouse in supplying companies with information and updates to assist them in identifying international and trade opportunities.
There are authorized to be appropriated $12,500,000 in fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997 to carry out the provisions of this title.