SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR PAYMENTS OR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CERTAIN COOPERATIVE RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS.
Allowance of Research Credit.--Section 41(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit for increasing research activities) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) 50 percent of the qualified cooperative research expenditures (as defined in subsection (h)) for the taxable year.
Qualified Cooperative Research Expenditures Defined.--Section 41 of such Code is amended by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i) and by adding after subsection (g) the following new subsection: ``(h) Qualified Cooperative Research Expenditures.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified cooperative research expenditures' means the aggregate amount of qualified contributions to qualified cooperative research consortia for qualified research.
Qualified contributions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to the limitations of subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D), the term `qualified contributions' means all contributions to qualified cooperative research consortia for qualified research with respect to which the taxpayer elects to have this subsection apply.
Private source funding limitation.-- ``(i) In general.--Qualified contributions of a taxpayer shall not exceed the amount which bears the same ratio to qualified contributions (determined without regard to this subparagraph) as the private source funding ratio.
Private source funding ratio.--For purposes of clause (i), the private source funding ratio is the sum of-- ``(I) 50 percent of the ratio which the gross receipts of the organization (not including the amount of any governmental support) for the preceding taxable year bears to the total gross receipts of the organization for such taxable year, plus ``(II) 30 percent of such ratio for the second preceding taxable year, plus ``(III) 20 percent of such ratio for the third preceding taxable year.
Limitations.--For purposes of this subsection, the following shall not be taken into account in determining qualified contributions: ``(i) Contributions representing costs allocated to services performed by a taxpayer's employees to the extent they exceed cash contributions.
Contributions representing overhead allocated to services performed by a taxpayer's employees to the extent such overhead exceeds 25 percent of the salary and benefit amounts allocated to such services.
Contributions by a taxpayer to a qualified cooperative research consortium to the extent they exceed one-third of the consortium's total nongovernmental support for the consortium's taxable year with or within which the taxpayer's taxable year ends.
Consortium with fewer than 5 participants.-- If a qualified cooperative research consortium has less than 5 persons making nongovernmental contributions, the qualified contributions of each such person (determined without regard to this subparagraph or subparagraph (B)) shall be reduced-- ``(i) by 20 percent if there are 4 such persons, or ``(ii) by 40 percent if there are 3 such persons.
Qualified cooperative research consortium.--The term `qualified cooperative research consortium' means any organization-- ``(A) which is registered under the National Cooperative Research Act of 1984, but only if such registration has been published (and is in effect) on the last day of the organization's taxable year with or within which the taxpayer's taxable year ends, and ``(B) which during such taxable year-- ``(i) had at least 5 contributors, but only if-- ``(I) no 3 members contributed more than 80 percent of total nongovernmental contributions, and ``(II) no single member contributed more than 50 percent of total nongovernmental contributions, or ``(ii) had either 3 or 4 contributors, but only if-- ``(I) no single member contributed more than 50 percent (and no 2 members contributed more than 85 percent) of the total nongovernmental contributions, and ``(II) the contributors are engaged in the same trade or business.
Special rules.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Noncash contributions.--Qualified contributions other than cash (including services provided by a taxpayer's employees) shall be taken into account at their cost (or such other basis determined under regulations).
Overhead.--The cost of services provided by a taxpayer's employees shall include overhead properly allocable to such services.
No double benefit.--Amounts taken into account under this subsection in computing qualified cooperative research expenditures shall not be taken into account under subsection (a) (1) or (2).
Prepaid amounts.--If any contributions paid or incurred during the taxable year to qualified cooperative research consortia are attributable to qualified research to be conducted after the close of the taxable year, such amount shall be treated as paid or incurred during the period which the qualified research is conducted.
Reports.--Each qualified cooperative research consortium shall provide to the Secretary a report containing-- ``(A) its certification as such an organization, ``(B) its private source funding ratio, and ``(C) such other information as the Secretary may require.
Each consortium shall provide a copy of the report to each contributor.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.