This Act may be cited as the ``Assistant United States Attorneys Retirement Benefit Equity Act of 1998''.
TREATMENT OF ASSISTANT UNITED STATES ATTORNEYS.
Civil Service Retirement System.-- (1) Inclusion in definition of a law enforcement officer.-- Paragraph (20) of section 8331 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``such term includes an Assistant United States Attorney;''.
Definition of an assistant united states attorney.-- Section 8331 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (25), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (26) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding after paragraph (26) the following: ``(27) `Assistant United States Attorney' means an assistant United States attorney appointed under section 542 of title 28.''.
Federal Employees' Retirement System.-- (1) Inclusion in definition of a law enforcement officer.-- Paragraph (17) of section 8401 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by adding ``and'' after the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (D), and by adding after subparagraph (D) the following: ``(E) an Assistant United States Attorney;''.
Definition of an assistant united states attorney.-- Section 8401 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (31), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (32) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding after paragraph (32) the following: ``(33) `Assistant United States Attorney' means an assistant United States attorney appointed under section 542 of title 28.''.
Effective Date.--Except as otherwise provided in section 3, this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning after the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO INCUMBENTS.
Incumbent Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``incumbent'' means an individual first appointed as an Assistant United States Attorney before the effective date of this Act who is serving in that capacity on such effective date.
Notice Requirement.--Not later than 6 months after the effective date of this Act, the Department of Justice shall take measures reasonably designed to provide notice to incumbents as to their election rights under this Act, and the consequences of making or not making a timely election.
Election Available to Incumbents.-- (1) In general.--An incumbent may elect, for all purposes, either-- (A) to be treated in accordance with the amendments made by this Act; or (B) to be treated in the same way as if this Act had never been enacted.
Failure to make a timely election under this subsection shall be treated in the same way as an election under subparagraph (A) made on the last day allowable under paragraph (2).
Deadline.--An election under this subsection shall not be effective unless it is made before the 90th day after the date on which the notice under subsection (b) is provided or the date on which the incumbent involved separates from service, whichever is earlier.
Interim status.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no change in the retirement coverage of any incumbent shall occur, by reason of the enactment of this Act, before the date on which an election under paragraph (1)(A) is made (or deemed to have been made).
Retroactive Effect.--In the case of any incumbent who elects (or is deemed to have elected) the option under subsection (c)(1)(A), all service performed by such individual as an Assistant United States Attorney shall-- (1) to the extent performed on or after the effective date of that election, be treated in accordance with applicable provisions of chapter 83 or 84 of title 5, United States Code, as amended by this Act; and (2) to the extent performed before the effective date of that election, be treated in accordance with applicable provisions of chapter 83 or 84 of such title, as if the amendments made by this Act had then been in effect.
Makeup Contributions.-- (1) In general.--In addition to any other payment that it is required to make under subchapter III of chapter 83 or chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code-- (A) the Department of Justice shall remit to the Office of Personnel Management, in such time, form, and manner as the Office may require, the amount described in paragraph (2); and (B) any amount so remitted shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund.
Amount to be remitted.--The amount described in this paragraph is the total amount of additional individual and Government contributions to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund that would have been required (for all incumbents described in subsection (d), for all service performed by them as an Assistant United States Attorney before the effective date of their election under subsection (c)), if the amendments made by this Act had then been in effect, plus interest.
No individual liability.--Nothing in this Act or in chapter 83 or 84 of title 5, United States Code (as amended by this Act) shall be considered to create any individual liability for any shortfall in any contributions required to be made up in the manner provided for under this subsection.
Regulations.--The Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe any regulations necessary to carry out this Act, including provisions under which any interest due on the amount described in subsection (e) shall be determined.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Assistant United States Attorney'' means an assistant United States attorney appointed under section 542 of title 28, United States Code.