This Act may be cited as the ``International Television Broadcasting Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Voice of America (VoA) is now implementing the NewsNow format, which broadcasts news repetitively in a continuous cycle.
The NewsNow format forces most VoA coverage of American thought and institutions, as required by the VoA Charter, to be accommodated within that structured news cycle.
The NewsNow format is insufficient to present fully the policies of the United States as clearly and effectively as the VoA Charter mandate anticipates.
The implementation of the VoA Charter's mandate to present United States policies has traditionally and appropriately been fulfilled by airing editorials.
Editorials offer the prudential and principled rationales for United States policy to radio listeners and television viewers and should not be marginalized in any VoA programming format.
The television program ``On the Line'' produced by the VoA is an example of a suitable vehicle for fulfilling the VoA Charter's mandate to present United States policies.
Television is an increasing important form of United States Government-sponsored broadcasting worldwide.
The Broadcasting Board of Governors plans to complete soon a merger of the Worldnet television broadcasting into VoA.
Explicit treatment of American thought, institutions, and policies needs to be sustained in United States Government- sponsored television broadcasting.
The purpose of this Act is to-- (1) require the establishment of a new international television service under the Broadcasting Board of Governors to replace Worldnet and VOA-TV; and (2) ensure that international television broadcasts of the United States effectively and accurately represent the United States and its policies.
In this Act: (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Broadcasting Board of Governors.
Bureau.--The term ``Bureau'' means the International Broadcasting Bureau under the Board.
Director.--Except as otherwise provided, the term ``Director'' means the Director of the Bureau.
Television service.--The term ``Television Service'' means the International Television Service established under section 5.
VOA-TV.--The term ``VOA-TV'' means the television operations of the Voice of America within the Bureau.
Worldnet.--The term ``Worldnet'' means the WORLDNET Television and Film Service within the Bureau.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW INTERNATIONAL TELEVISION SERVICE.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--Upon the effective date of this Act, there is established within the Bureau the International Television Service.
Director of international television.--The Television Service shall be headed by a Director of International Television, who shall be appointed by the Director and who shall report directly to the Director.
Implementation Plan.--Sixty days after the effective date of this Act, the Board shall submit a report to Congress setting forth the Board's plans for the Television Service, including-- (1) a programming plan, or strategy, or both; (2) a staffing plan to implement the Television Service; (3) a budget; and (4) a reporting relationship to the Board through the Bureau.
Termination of Programs.--Upon the effective date of this Act, Worldnet and VOA-TV shall terminate.
Prohibition.--Upon the effective date of this Act, no funds available to the Board may be obligated or expended for Worldnet or VOA-TV.
Broadcasting Principles.-- (1) In general.--The Television Service shall conduct all programming activities in accordance with the broadcasting principles expressed in paragraphs (1) through (3) of section 302(b) of the United States International Broadcasting Act of 1994 (22 United States Code 6202(b)).
Allocation of resources.--The Director of International Television shall give equal weight to the implementation of each of those paragraphs in allocating budget, personnel, and other resources, in determining program schedules, and in undertaking affiliate and other placement efforts.
Programming.-- (1) In general.--In addition to other programs carried by the Television Service, the regular programming of the Television Service shall consist of-- (A) those programs which were produced by the Office of Policy of the Bureau before the date of enactment of this Act and which are being carried as of that date; and (B) such additional programs relating to United States policies as the Director of Policy of the Bureau, in consultation with the Director of International Television and the Director may develop.
Frequency of programming.--The Director, in consultation with the Director of Policy of the Bureau, shall determine the frequency with which the programs described in paragraph (1) shall be carried by the Television Service.
Statutory construction.--Nothing in this subsection prohibits the Director from-- (A) requiring that the programs described in paragraph (1) shall also be carried by VOA Radio and Internet; or (B) determining the frequency of such programming.
Transfers From VOA-TV and Worldnet.--Upon the effective date of this Act, the personnel employed in connection with, and the assets, liabilities, contracts, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds employed, used, held, arising from, available to, or to be made available in connection with Worldnet and VOA-TV shall be transferred to the Television Service.
Savings Provision.--Until the effective date of this Act, Worldnet shall continue to be funded at the same level as Worldnet was funded during fiscal year 2001.
References.--Any reference in any Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, or delegation of authority, or any document of or relating to Worldnet or VOA-TV before the effective date of this Act shall, on and after such date, be deemed to refer to the Television Service.
The effective date of this Act is January 1, 2001.