PLACEMENT OF MADE IN AMERICA LABELS ON PRODUCTS.
Requirements for Use of Labels.--No product may bear a label which states or suggests that the product was made in America unless-- (1) the product has been registered with the Department of Commerce under subsection (b); and (2) the Secretary of Commerce has determined that-- (A) not less than 60 percent of the product was manufactured in the United States; and (B) final assembly of the product took place in the United States.
Registry of American-Made Products.--Not later than 12 months after the Secretary has promulgated regulations regarding the registration of products with the Department of Commerce under this section, a person shall register with the Department of Commerce any product on which there is or will be affixed a label which states or suggests that the product was made in America.
Penalties for Fraudulent Use of Labels.-- (1) Civil fine.--Any person who, with an intent to defraud or mislead, places on a product a label which states or suggests that the product was ``made in America'' in violation of this section may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary of not more than $100,000.
The Secretary may issue an order assessing such civil penalty only after notice and an opportunity for an agency hearing on the record.
The validity of such order may not be reviewed in an action to collect such civil penalty.
Injunctive relief.--The Secretary may bring an action to enjoin the violation of, or to compel compliance with, this section, whenever the Secretary believes that such a violation has occurred or is about to occur.
Regulations.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations establishing procedures under which a person shall register a product under this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Label.--The term ``label'' means any written, printed, or graphic matter on, or attached to, a product or any of its containers or wrappers.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO CONSUMERS REGARDING FOREIGN CONTENT OF IMPORTED ARTICLES.
In General.--Section 304 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1304) is amended as follows: (1) Subsections (f), (g), and (h) are redesignated as subsections (g), (h), and (i), respectively.
The following new subsection is inserted after subsection (e): ``(f) Additional Foreign Content Marking.--If an article of foreign origin is required to be marked under subsection (a), or its container is required to be marked under subsection (b), and such article is assembled, in whole or part, from parts that are the product of one or more foreign countries that are not the country of origin for purposes of subsection (a) or (b), the article or container shall be marked in such manner as to indicate, or shall be accompanied by such written, printed, or graphic matter that indicates, in English to the ultimate purchaser in the United States the proportion of the customs value of such article that is accounted for by the parts from each such foreign country.''.
Subsection (g) (as redesignated by paragraph (1)) is amended by striking out ``section,'' and inserting ``section (including the requirements relating to parts valuation under subsection (f)),''.
Subsection (h) (as redesignated by paragraph (1)) is amended by striking out ``subsection (f)'' and inserting ``subsection (g)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) apply with respect to articles entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, on or after the 15th day after the date of the enactment of this Act.
LABELING OF DOMESTIC PRODUCTS WITH FOREIGN PARTS.
Requirements for Use of Labels.--Any product which is manufactured in the United States and which is assembled, in whole or in part, from any part that is the product of a foreign country shall, in its labeling for the ultimate purchaser in the United States-- (1) disclose the country of origin of such part, and (2) state the proportion of the cost of such product which is accounted for by such part.
Penalties for Violations of Subsection (a).-- (1) Civil fine.--Any person who, with an intent to defraud or mislead, fails to label a product in accordance with subsection (a) may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary of not more than $100,000.
The Secretary may issue an order assessing such civil penalty only after notice and an opportunity for an agency hearing on the record.
The validity of such order may not be reviewed in an action to collect such civil penalty.
Injunctive relief.--The Secretary may bring an action to enjoin the violation of, or to compel compliance with, subsection (a), whenever the Secretary believes that such a violation has occurred or is about to occur.
Regulations.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations respecting labeling of products under subsection (a).
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.