This Act may be cited as the ``Civil Service Long-Term Care Insurance Benefit Act''.
In General.--Subpart G of part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``CHAPTER 90--LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE ``Sec.
Coordination with State laws.
Definitions ``For purposes of this chapter: ``(1) Employee.--The term `employee' has the meaning given such term by section 8901, but does not include an individual employed by the government of the District of Columbia.
Annuitant.--The term `annuitant' means-- ``(A) a former employee who, based on the service of that individual, receives an annuity under subchapter III of chapter 83, chapter 84, or another retirement system for employees of the Government (disregarding title XVIII of the Social Security Act and any retirement system established for employees described in section 2105(c)); and ``(B) any individual who receives an annuity under any retirement system referred to in subparagraph (A) (disregarding those described parenthetically) as the surviving spouse of an employee (including an amount under section 8442(b)(1)(A), whether or not an annuity under section 8442(b)(1)(B) is also payable) or of a former employee under subparagraph (A); but does not include a former employee of a Government corporation excluded by regulation of the Office of Personnel Management or the spouse of such a former employee.
Eligible relative.--The term `eligible relative', as used with respect to an employee or annuitant, means each of the following: ``(A) The spouse of the employee or annuitant.
The father or mother of the employee or annuitant, or an ancestor of either.
A stepfather or stepmother of the employee or annuitant.
The father-in-law or mother-in-law of the employee or annuitant.
A son or daughter of the employee or annuitant who is at least 18 years of age.
A stepson or stepdaughter of the employee or annuitant who is at least 18 years of age.
Government.--The term `Government' means the Government of the United States, including an agency or instrumentality thereof.
Group long-term care insurance.--The term `group long-term care insurance' means group long-term care insurance purchased by the Office of Personnel Management under this chapter.
Individual long-term care insurance.--The term `individual long-term care insurance' means any long-term care insurance offered under this chapter which is not group long- term care insurance.
Qualified carrier.--A carrier shall be considered to be a `qualified carrier', with respect to a State, if it is licensed to issue group or individual long-term care insurance (as the case may be) under the laws of such State.
Qualified long-term care insurance contract.--The term `qualified long-term care insurance contract' has the meaning given such term by section 7702B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
State.--The term `State' means a State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
Availability of insurance ``(a) In General.--The Office of Personnel Management shall establish and administer a program through which employees and annuitants may obtain group or individual long-term care insurance for themselves, a spouse, or, to the extent permitted under the terms of the contract of insurance involved, any other eligible relative.
General Requirements.--Long-term care insurance may not be offered under this chapter unless-- ``(1) the only insurance protection provided is coverage under qualified long-term care insurance contracts; and ``(2) the insurance contract under which such coverage is provided is issued by a qualified carrier.
Requirement That Contract Be Fully Insured.--In addition to the requirements otherwise applicable under section 9001(8), in order to be considered a qualified long-term care insurance contract for purposes of this chapter, a contract must be fully insured, whether through reinsurance with other companies or otherwise.
Coverage Not Required for Individuals Who Would Be Immediately Benefit Eligible.--Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to require that long-term care insurance coverage be made available in the case of any individual who would be immediately benefit eligible.
Participating carriers ``(a) Identification of Participating Carriers.--The Office of Personnel Management shall, before the start of each year-- ``(1) identify each carrier through whom any long-term care insurance may be obtained under this chapter during such year; and ``(2) prepare a list of the carriers identified under paragraph (1), and a summary description of the insurance obtainable under this chapter from each.
Application Requirements, Etc.--In order to carry out its responsibilities under subsection (a), the Office shall annually specify the timetable (including any application deadlines) and other procedures that must be followed by carriers seeking to be allowed to offer long-term care insurance under this chapter during the following year.
Information To Permit Informed Decisionmaking.--The Office shall in a timely manner before the start of each year-- ``(1) publish in the Federal Register the list (and summary description) prepared under subsection (a) for such year; and ``(2) make available to each individual eligible to obtain long-term care insurance under this chapter such information, in a form acceptable to the Office after consultation with the carrier, as may be necessary to enable the individual to exercise an informed choice among the various options available under this chapter.
Policy or Benefit Certificate.--The Office shall arrange to have the appropriate individual or individuals receive a copy of any policy of insurance obtained under this chapter or, in the case of group long-term care insurance, a certificate setting forth the benefits to which an individual is entitled, to whom the benefits are payable, and the procedures for obtaining benefits, and summarizing the provisions of the policy principally affecting the individual or individuals involved.
Any such certificate shall be issued instead of the certificate which the insurance company would otherwise be required to issue.
Administrative functions ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in section 9003, the sole functions of the Office of Personnel Management under this chapter shall be as follows: ``(1) Enrollment periods.--To provide reasonable opportunity (consisting of not less than one continuous 30-day period each year) for eligible employees and annuitants to obtain long-term care insurance coverage under this chapter.
Withholdings.--To provide for a means by which the cost of any long-term care insurance coverage obtained under this chapter may be paid for through withholdings from the pay or annuity of the employee or annuitant involved.
Contract authority relating to group long-term care insurance.--To contract for a qualified long-term care insurance contract (in the case of group long-term care insurance) with each qualified carrier that offers such insurance, so long as such carrier submits a timely application under section 9003(b) and complies with such other procedural rules as the Office may prescribe.
Limitations on Authority.--Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to permit or require the Office-- ``(1) to prevent from being offered under this chapter any individual long-term care insurance under a qualified contract therefor; or ``(2) to prescribe or negotiate over the benefits to be offered, or any of the terms or conditions under which any such benefits shall be offered, under this chapter.
Coordination with State laws ``(a) In General.--The provisions of any contract under this chapter for group long-term care insurance may include provisions to supersede and preempt any provisions of State or local law described in subsection (b), or any regulation issued thereunder.
Description.--This subsection applies with respect to any provision of law which in effect carries out the same policy as section 5 of the long-term care insurance model Act, promulgated by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (as adopted as of September 1997).
Commercial items ``For purposes of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act, a long-term care insurance contract under this chapter shall be considered a commercial item, as defined by section 4(12) of such Act.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end of subpart G the following: ``90.
Long-Term Care Insurance............................. 9001''.
The Office of Personnel Management shall take such measures as may be necessary to ensure that long-term care insurance coverage under title 5, United States Code, as amended by this Act, may be obtained in time to take effect beginning on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2000.