Such regulations shall also grant the option to deduct as expenses intangible drilling and development costs in the case of wells drilled for any geothermal deposit (as defined in section 613(e)(2)) to the same extent and in the same manner as such expenses are deductible in the case of oil and gas wells.
This subsection shall not apply with respect to any costs to which any deduction is allowed under section 59(e) or 291.
Exclusion.-- ``(A) In general.--This subsection shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer in any taxable year in which such taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)).
Amortization of amounts not allowable as deductions under subparagraph (a).--The amount not allowable as a deduction for any taxable year by reason of subparagraph (A) shall be allowable as a deduction ratably over the 60-month period beginning with the month in which the costs are paid or incurred.
For purposes of section 1254, any deduction under this subparagraph shall be treated as a deduction under this subsection.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
LIMITATION ON PERCENTAGE DEPLETION ALLOWANCE FOR OIL AND GAS WELLS.
In General.--Section 613A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Application With Respect to Major Integrated Oil Companies.-- In the case of any taxable year in which the taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)), the allowance for percentage depletion shall be zero.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
LIMITATION ON DEDUCTION FOR TERTIARY INJECTANTS.
In General.--Section 193 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Application With Respect to Major Integrated Oil Companies.-- ``(1) In general.--This section shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer in any taxable year in which such taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)).
Amortization of amounts not allowable as deductions under paragraph (1).--The amount not allowable as a deduction for any taxable year by reason of paragraph (1) shall be allowable as a deduction ratably over the 60-month period beginning with the month in which the costs are paid or incurred.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
MODIFICATION OF DEFINITION OF MAJOR INTEGRATED OIL COMPANY.
In General.--Paragraph (5) of section 167(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Certain successors in interest.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `major integrated oil company' includes any successor in interest of a company that was described in subparagraph (B) in any taxable year, if such successor controls more than 50 percent of the crude oil production or natural gas production of such company.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (B) of section 167(h)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``except as provided in subparagraph (C),'' after ``For purposes of this paragraph,''.
Taxable years tested.--Clause (iii) of section 167(h)(5)(B) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``does not apply by reason of paragraph (4) of section 613A(d)'' and inserting ``did not apply by reason of paragraph (4) of section 613A(d) for any taxable year after 2004'', and (B) by striking ``does not apply'' in subclause (II) and inserting ``did not apply for the taxable year''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
REPEAL OF OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF DEEP WATER AND DEEP GAS ROYALTY RELIEF.
In General.--Sections 344 and 345 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 15904, 15905) are repealed.
Administration.--The Secretary of the Interior shall not be required to provide for royalty relief in the lease sale terms beginning with the first lease sale held on or after the date of enactment of this Act for which a final notice of sale has not been published.
COORDINATION OF AMERICAN OPPORTUNITY CREDIT AND LIFETIME LEARNING CREDIT WITH PELL GRANTS NOT USED FOR QUALIFIED TUITION AND RELATED EXPENSES.
In General.--Section 25A(g)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Adjustment for certain scholarships, etc.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount of qualified tuition and related expenses otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to an individual for an academic period shall be reduced (before the application of subsections (b), (c), and (d)) by the sum of any amounts paid for the benefit of such individual which are allocable to such period as-- ``(i) a qualified scholarship which is excludable from gross income under section 117, ``(ii) an educational assistance allowance under chapter 30, 31, 32, 34, or 35 of title 38, United States Code, or under chapter 1606 of title 10, United States Code, and ``(iii) a payment (other than a gift, bequest, devise, or inheritance within the meaning of section 102(a)) for such individual's educational expenses, or attributable to such individual's enrollment at an eligible educational institution, which is excludable from gross income under any law of the United States.
Coordination with pell grants not used for qualified tuition and related expenses.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the amount of any Federal Pell Grant under section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070a) shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount of expenses (other than qualified tuition and related expenses) which are taken into account in determining the cost of attendance (as defined in section 472 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this subparagraph) of such individual at an eligible educational institution for the academic period for which the credit under this section is being determined.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
EXPANSION OF PELL GRANT EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 117(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (1) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, or'', (2) by striking ``received by an individual as a scholarship'' and inserting the following: ``received by an individual-- ``(A) as a scholarship'', and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(B) as a Federal Pell Grant under section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070a).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.