SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``California Catastrophic Wildfire Prevention and Community Protection Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Project authority consistent with community wildfire protection plan.
Elements of eligible projects.
Administrative and judicial review.
Acceptance and use of funds or in-kind services.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Forested lands under the jurisdiction of the Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management in California have grown into a state of unnatural density and structure.
Overgrown forest conditions, in combination with continued drought and other climatic circumstances, have left these forests at extreme risk to insects, disease, and catastrophic wildfire.
The risk of catastrophic wildfire presents a very real threat to the health and safety of individuals and communities in the wildland-urban interface as well as to the property of adjacent private landowners.
The catastrophic, stand-replacing fires that are occurring with increasing frequency as a result of the forest conditions described in paragraph (2), pose a threat to the health of lands, watersheds, wildlife, air quality and the environment.
Local communities and interests are willing to work collaboratively to assure seamless protection from catastrophic wildfire and to improve forest health across public and private lands.
The Federal Government, particularly the Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management, must address these conditions at the appropriate annual pace and scale needed across the landscape to have a substantial impact in reducing natural disturbances.
In this Act: (1) At-risk community.--The term ``at-risk community'' has the meaning given that term in Section 101 of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (16 United States Code 6511).
At-risk watershed.--The term ``at-risk watershed'' means a watershed-- (A) where there exists a high risk of losing key ecosystem, wildlife, and watershed components to severe fire, including post-fire disturbances, as documented by the Secretary concerned; and (B) where there are-- (i) Federal lands in condition class II or III, as developed by the Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station in the general technical report titled ``Development of Coarse-Scale Spatial Data for Wildland Fire and Fuel Management'' (RMRS-87) and dated April 2000 (including any subsequent revision to the report); or (ii) private lands that are located in a ``Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone'', as determined by the California State Fire Marshal.
Community wildfire protection plan.--The term ``community wildfire protection plan'' has the meaning given that term in Section 101 of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (16 United States Code 6511).
County fire plan.--The term ``county fire plan'' means a plan developed similarly to a community wildfire protection plan with an annual mitigation strategy developed through a collaborative effort and formally adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the county in which the forest lands covered by the plan are located.
Covered forest lands.-- (A) Included lands.--The term ``covered forest lands'' means-- (i) National Forest System lands in California; and (ii) Public land in California administered by the Secretary of the Interior through the Bureau of Land Management.
Excluded land.--The term does not include land that is a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System or other Federal land (other than inventoried roadless areas and wilderness study areas) in which the removal of vegetation is specifically prohibited by Federal law.
Eligible project.--The term ``eligible project'' means the measures and methods included in a project carried out on covered forest lands by the Secretary concerned for hazardous fuels reduction, forest health, and forest restoration.
Secretary concerned.--The term ``Secretary concerned'' means-- (A) The Secretary of Agriculture, in the case of National Forest System lands; and (B) The Secretary of the Interior, in the case of public land administered by the Secretary of the Interior through the Bureau of Land Management.
PROJECT AUTHORITY CONSISTENT WITH COMMUNITY WILDFIRE PROTECTION PLAN.
The Secretary concerned shall carry out eligible projects on covered forest lands that are within or adjacent to an at-risk community or an at-risk watershed if the eligible project is consistent with the applicable community wildfire protection plan or county fire plan.
ELEMENTS OF ELIGIBLE PROJECTS.
Eligible projects on covered forest lands shall be carried out in a cost-effective manner that-- (1) focuses on surface, ladder, and canopy fuels reduction activities; or (2) implements forest restoration activities in response to severe fire, insect, or disease infestation, windthrow, or other extreme weather events or natural disasters.
General Rule of Proposed Action and No Action Alternative.--The Secretary concerned shall prepare an environmental assessment or an environmental impact statement pursuant to section 102(2) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4332(2)) for each proposed eligible project.
The Secretary concerned shall study, develop, and describe the proposed action and the alternative of no action.
Except as provided in subsection (b), the Secretary concerned is not required to study, develop, or describe any alternative actions to the proposed agency action.
Consideration of Alternative Recommendation.--The Secretary concerned shall evaluate and consider an alternative recommendation submitted by the county in which a proposed eligible project is to be carried out if the county determines that the proposed eligible project is or may be inconsistent with its community wildfire protection plan.
The Secretary shall publish the evaluation and consideration of the alternative recommendation in the environmental assessment or environmental impact statement prepared pursuant to section 102(2) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4332(2)) for the proposed eligible project.
Effect of County Emergency.-- (1) Council on environmental quality.--Pursuant to Section 1506.11 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, the Secretary concerned shall request the Council on Environmental Quality to develop and approve alternative arrangements for a proposed eligible project if the county in which the proposed eligible project is to be carried out, in consultation with the Director of the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, declares-- (A) a state of emergency; or (B) the existence of a dangerous nuisance to public safety, welfare, infrastructure, watersheds, wildlife habitat, or other vital assets due to the accumulation of forest fuels and the associated risk of extreme fire on covered forest lands.
Mandatory information.--When requesting alternative arrangements under paragraph (1), the Secretary concerned shall transmit to the Council on Environmental Quality the following information: (A) A description of the proposed eligible project.
The condition of forest fuels within or near the proposed eligible project.
The threat to public safety, welfare, infrastructure, watersheds, wildlife habitat, or other vital assets due to the accumulation of forest fuels and the associated risk of extreme fire that the proposed eligible project is to relieve.
The degree to which delaying the implementation of the proposed eligible project will increase the risk of serious harm to public safety, welfare, infrastructure, watersheds, wildlife habitat, or other vital assets due to the accumulation of forest fuels and the associated risk of extreme fire.
Any other information the Secretary concerned determines relevant.
Further information.--At the request of either the county in which the eligible project is to be carried out or the Director of the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, the Secretary concerned shall transmit to the Council on Environmental Quality information provided to the Secretary concerned by the State or county concerning the threat to public safety, welfare, infrastructure, watersheds, wildlife habitat, or other vital assets due to the accumulation of forest fuels and the associated risk of extreme fire that the proposed eligible project is to relieve.
Deadline for alternative arrangements.--Not later than 15 days after receipt of a request under paragraph (1) for approval of alternative arrangements for a proposed eligible project, the Council on Environmental Quality shall submit to the Secretary concerned either the alternative arrangements for the eligible project or a statement explaining why the alternative arrangements are denied.
If the Council on Environmental Quality fails to comply with such deadline or denies alternative arrangements, the Secretary concerned shall proceed immediately and to completion on the proposed eligible project notwithstanding any other provision of law including, but not limited to, the National Environmental Policy Act and the National Forest Management Act (16 United States Code 1601 et sequentes).
Such actions shall also not be subject to the notice, comment, and appeal requirements of the Appeals Reform Act, (16 United States Code 1612 (note), Pub.
Any action authorized by this subsection shall not be subject to judicial review by any court of the United States.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REVIEW.
Administrative Review.--Administrative review of eligible projects shall occur in accordance with the special administrative review process established under section 105 of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (16 United States Code 6515).
Judicial Review.--Judicial review of eligible projects shall occur in accordance with section 106 of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (16 United States Code 6516).
ACCEPTANCE AND USE OF FUNDS OR IN-KIND SERVICES.
The Secretary concerned may accept and use funds or in-kind services from any public or private entity to assist carrying out eligible projects under this Act.
The Secretary concerned shall submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate an annual report describing all eligible projects conducted under this Act.