This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Diamonds Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Diamonds are being used by rebels and dictators to finance military activities, overthrow legitimate governments, subvert international efforts to promote peace and stability, and commit horrifying atrocities against unarmed civilians.
During the past decade, more than 6,500,000 people from Sierra Leone, Angola, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been driven from their homes by wars waged in large part for control of diamond mining areas.
A million of these are refugees eking out a miserable existence in neighboring countries, and tens of thousands have fled to the United States.
Approximately 2,400,000 people have died in the fighting.
The countries caught in this fighting are home to nearly 70,000,000 people whose societies have been torn apart not only by fighting, but by the thousands of children forced to become soldiers, by the tens of thousands of women and girls raped and forced into sexual slavery, and by a campaign of forced amputations that has maimed and killed even more men, women, and children.
In the past decade, the United States Government has sent more than $2,000,000,000 in humanitarian aid to the people caught up in the wars.
Over the same period, approximately $10,000,000,000 in diamonds were smuggled out of these same countries.
Much of this money was used to continue and spread the wars.
The United States Government and human rights advocates recently began working to block the trade in conflict diamonds.
Their efforts have helped to build a consensus that action is urgently needed, and they have persuaded the legitimate diamond industry that its own interests demand a comprehensive effort to end the diamond smuggling that fuels these conflicts.
The United Nations Security Council, acting under chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, has prohibited all states from importing diamonds from, and exporting weapons to, certain countries affected by diamond- related conflicts.
Unfortunately, diamond smugglers continue funding rebel movements, and the sanctions have not been sufficiently effective to achieve their goals.
In turn, this illicit trade has facilitated trade in narcotics, arms proliferation, regional destabilization, money laundering, and other criminal enterprises.
This has severely hampered efforts by the United States to safeguard its citizens from drugs, terrorism, and other threats to the security of the American people.
Without effective action to prohibit trade in conflict diamonds, the trade in legitimate diamonds faces the threat of a consumer backlash that could damage the economies of countries not involved in the trade in conflict diamonds and penalize members of the legitimate trade and the people they employ.
To prevent that, South Africa and more than 20 other countries are involved in working, through the ``Kimberley Process'', toward devising a solution to this problem.
As the consumer of two-thirds of the world's supply of diamonds, the United States has an obligation to help sever the link between diamonds and conflict and press for implementation of an effective solution.
RESTRICTIONS ON IMPORTATION OF DIAMONDS.
Restrictions.-- (1) Requirements for imported diamonds.--Diamonds may not be imported into the United States unless the country exporting the diamonds to the United States is implementing a system of controls on the export and import of rough diamonds that meets the requirements of paragraph (2), consistent with United Nations General Assembly Resolution 55/56 adopted on December 1, 2000, or a future international agreement which implements such controls and to which the United States is a signatory.
Requirements for system of controls.--The system of controls referred to in paragraph (1) shall include the following: (A) Rough diamonds, when exported from the country in which they were extracted, shall be sealed in a secure, transparent container or bag by appropriate government officials of that country.
The sealed container or bag described in subparagraph (A) shall include a fully visible document that-- (i) certifies the country from which the rough diamonds were extracted; (ii) records a unique export registration number for, and the total carat weight and number of, the rough diamonds in the container or bag; and (iii) is issued by the government of that country.
The country from whose territory the rough diamonds are exported shall establish a database containing at least the information on exports of rough diamonds described in subparagraph (B).
Any country into whose territory the rough diamonds are first imported prior to polishing or other processing-- (i) shall permit importation of the rough diamonds only in a container or bag described in subparagraphs (A) and (B); and (ii) can verify, on the basis of documentation provided to it by electronic or other reliable means, the legitimacy of the export document included in the sealed container or bag in which the rough diamonds were shipped, using the database maintained in the country of export.
Appropriate government authorities shall conduct physical inspections of the sealed containers and bags of rough diamonds to ensure compliance with the requirements of this paragraph.
Monitoring.--The President shall ensure that the system of controls described in subsection (a) is monitored by appropriate agencies of the United States.
Presidential Advisory Commission.-- (1) Purposes.--The President shall appoint an advisory commission, the purposes of which shall be-- (A) to make recommendations to the President on the effectiveness of the monitoring under subsection (b), and on ways to improve such monitoring; and (B) to develop a labeling system, that could be used by diamond and jewelry vendors, that would certify to consumers that a diamond imported into the United States has been subject to a system of controls on rough diamonds described in subsection (a).
Membership.--The advisory commission shall be composed of 11 members, 3 of whom shall be representatives of private voluntary organizations, and 2 of whom shall be representatives of the diamond industry.
The remaining members may be appointed from appropriate agencies of the United States and other interested parties.
In General.--Violations of section 3 are subject to civil and criminal penalties under the laws of the United States to the same extent as any other violation of the customs laws of the United States.
Blocking Assets and Prohibiting Transactions.--The President may exercise the authorities he has under the International Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1701 et sequentes), without regard to section 202 of that Act, to block, and prohibit transactions in, property owned or controlled by any person who exports diamonds to the United States from a country that fails to meet the requirements of section 3(a) of this Act.
The penalties provided in section 206 of the International Economic Powers Act shall apply to violations of licenses, orders, or regulations issued under this subsection to the same extent as such penalties apply with respect to violations under that Act.
Proceeds From Fines and Forfeited Goods.--The proceeds derived from fines imposed for violations of section 3(a), and from the seizure and forfeiture of goods imported in violation of section 3(a), shall, in addition to amounts otherwise available for such purposes, be available only for-- (1) the War Victims Fund administered by the Agency for International Development or any successor program to assist victims of foreign wars; and (2) grants under section 131 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2152a).
RESTRICTIONS ON OPIC AND EXPORT-IMPORT BANK.
OPIC.--The Overseas Private Investment Corporation may not insure, reinsure, guarantee, or finance any investment in connection with a project involving the mining, polishing or other processing, or sale of diamonds in a country that fails to meet the requirements of section 3(a).
Export-Import Bank.--The Export-Import Bank of the United States may not guarantee, insure, extend credit, or participate in an extension of credit in connection with the export of any goods to a country for use in an enterprise involving the mining, polishing or other processing, or sale of diamonds in a country that fails to meet the requirements of section 3(a).
The President shall transmit to the Congress, not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and not later than September 30 of each subsequent calendar year, a report-- (1) describing and evaluating the effectiveness of the system of controls on trade in diamonds described in section 3(a); (2) identifying those countries that are implementing those controls; (3) identifying those countries that are not implementing those controls, and describing the effects of that failure on the trade in diamonds used to support conflict in the country or regions in which the diamonds are extracted; and (4) describing in detail technological developments that allow-- (A) the determination of where a diamond was mined; and (B) the marking and tracking of rough and polished diamonds.
Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall report to the Congress on the effectiveness of the provisions of this Act in preventing the importation of diamonds traded in violation of the system of controls described in section 3(a).
The Comptroller General shall include in the report any recommendations on any modifications to this Act that may be necessary.
NEGOTIATION OF INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT.
It is the sense of the Congress that the President should take the necessary steps to negotiate an international agreement, working in concert with the Kimberley Process referred to in section 2(6), to eliminate the trade in diamonds used to support conflict in the country or regions in which the diamonds are extracted.
Such an agreement should create an effective global certification system covering diamond exporting and importing countries, and should include those elements described in section 3(a)(2).
In this Act: (1) Diamonds.--The term ``diamonds'' includes any diamonds or diamond jewelry, classified under heading 7102 or 7113 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, other than diamond jewelry not exceeding $25,000 in value imported by or on account of a person for personal use and accompanying that person upon entry into the United States.
Rough diamonds.--The term ``rough diamonds'' means diamonds that are unworked, or simply sawn, cleaved, or bruted, classified under heading 7102 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
United states.--The term ``United States'', when used in the geographic sense, means the several States, the District of Columbia, and any commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.
EFFECTIVE DATE AND WAIVERS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act shall take effect on the date that is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Waiver Authority.--The President may waive the applicability of this Act with respect to a country for a period of not more than 6 months if the President, before granting the waiver-- (1) determines that the country is making significant progress toward concluding an international agreement described in section 8 or is implementing the system of controls on the export and import of rough diamonds described in section 3(a); and (2) transmits that determination, with the reasons therefor, to the Congress.