This Act may be cited as the ``Silvio O. Conte Disabilities Prevention Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SILVIO O. CONTE DISABILITIES PREVENTION PROGRAM.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 314 the following new section: ``silvio o. conte disabilities prevention program ``Sec.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may make grants to and enter into contracts with public and nonprofit private entities for the purpose of carrying out programs for the prevention of disabilities and the prevention of secondary conditions resulting from disabilities.
Certain Authorized Activities.--With respect to the prevention of disabilities and conditions described in subsection (a), activities for which the Secretary may provide financial assistance under such subsection include-- ``(1) coordinating prevention activities; ``(2) conducting demonstrations and interventions; ``(3) conducting surveillances and studies; ``(4) educating the public; and ``(5) educating and training health professionals (including allied health professionals) and conducting activities to improve the clinical skills of such professionals.
Priorities.--The Secretary, in consultation with the National Council on Disabilities, shall establish priorities among the activities that are to be carried out under subsection (a).
Reports to Secretary.--The Secretary may provide financial assistance under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees to submit to the Secretary such reports as the Secretary may require with respect to such assistance.
Application for Assistance.--The Secretary may provide financial assistance under subsection (a) only if an application for such assistance is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Limitation Regarding Education of Health Professionals.--In providing financial assistance under subsection (a), the Secretary may not, for activities described in subsection (b)(5), obligated more than 10 percent of the amounts appropriated under subsection (k) for any fiscal year.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may provide training, technical assistance, and consultations with respect to the planning, development, and operation of any program for the prevention of disabilities or the prevention of secondary conditions resulting from disabilities.
Provision of Supplies and Services in Lieu of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--Upon the request of a recipient of financial assistance under subsection (a), the Secretary may, subject to paragraph (2), provide supplies, equipment, and services for the purpose of aiding the recipient in carrying out such subsection and, for such purpose, may detail to the recipient any officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Corresponding reduction in payments.--With respect to a request by a recipient for purposes of paragraph (1), the Secretary shall reduce the amount of payments under subsection (a) to the recipient by an amount equal to the costs of detailing personnel (including pay, allowances, and travel expenses) and the fair market value of any supplies, equipment, or services provided by the Secretary.
The Secretary shall, for the payment of expenses incurred in complying with such request, expend the amounts withheld.
Evaluations and Reports.-- ``(1) Evaluations.--The Secretary shall, directly or through contracts with public or private entities, provide for evaluations of programs carried out pursuant to subsection (a).
Reports.--Not later than January 31 of 1995 and of every second year thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate, a report summarizing evaluations carried out pursuant to paragraph (1).
The Secretary shall provide a copy of each such report to the National Council on Disability.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `financial assistance' means a grant or contract.
The term `prevention' means activities that address the causes of disabilities and secondary conditions resulting from disabilities, and activities that address the functional limitations involved and the exacerbation of such limitations, including activities that-- ``(A) eliminate or reduce the factors that cause or predispose an individual to disabilities or that increase the prevalence of disabilities; ``(B) increase the early identification of existing problems to eliminate circumstances that create or increase functional limitations; and ``(C) mitigate against the effects of disabilities throughout the life of the individual.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of providing financial assistance under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1997 and 1998.''.
Passed the House of Representatives June 14, 1993.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.