This Act may be cited as the ``Internet Tax Reform and Reduction Act of 2000''.
MORATORIUM AMENDMENT TO THE INTERNET TAX FREEDOM ACT.
Moratorium Amendment.--Section 1101(a) of title XI of division C of Public Law 105-277 (112 United States Statutes at Large 2681-719; 47 United States Code 151 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Moratoria on State and Local Taxes on the Internet.--No State or political subdivision thereof shall impose any of the following taxes: ``(1) Taxes on Internet access.
During the period beginning on October 1, 1998, and ending on October 21, 2006, multiple or discriminatory taxes on electronic commerce.
During the period beginning on the date of the enactment of the Internet Tax Reform and Reduction Act of 2000 and ending on October 21, 2006, taxes on sales of digitized goods and products (and their counterparts).''.
Technical Amendments.--Section 1101 of title XI of division C of Public Law 105-277 (112 United States Statutes at Large 2681-719; 47 United States Code 151 note) is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (b); and (2) by redesignating subsections (c) through (h) as subsections (b) through (g), respectively.
Liabilities and Pending Cases.--Nothing in the amendments made by this section affects-- (1) liability for taxes accrued and enforced before the date of enactment of this Act; or (2) ongoing litigation relating to such taxes.
OTHER AMENDMENTS TO THE TAX FREEDOM ACT.
Title XI of division C of Public Law 105-277 (112 United States Statutes at Large 2681-719; 47 United States Code 151 note) is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 1104 as section 1107; and (2) by inserting after section 1103 the following: ``SEC.
DETERMINATION OF JURISDICTIONAL NEXUS.
Collecting Taxes.--The following factors shall not be sufficient, separately or collectively, to empower a State to impose on a seller that is not physically present in such State an obligation to collect a tax payable to such State by a purchaser that is physically present in such State: ``(1) The use by such seller of an Internet service provider that is physically present in such State.
The placement of digital data by such seller on a server located in such State.
The use of telecommunications service provided to such seller by a telecommunications provider that is physically present in such State.
The use or presence in such State of intangible property owned by such seller.
The presence in such State of persons that purchase from such seller.
The affiliation of such seller with a person that is physically present in such State and that pays any tax imposed by such State or by a political subdivision of such State.
The performance of repair or warranty services in such State by or on behalf of such seller with respect to property sold by such seller if such seller is not physically present in such State except to perform such services.
The existence of a contract between such seller and a person that is physically present in such State to the extent that such contract provides for the return to such person of goods purchased from such seller by means of the Internet or of a nonelectronic catalog.
The advertisement of the business location, telephone number, or Internet address of such seller.
Payment of Income Taxes.--The following factors shall not be sufficient, separately or collectively, to empower a State to require a seller to meet the business activity and income tax reporting and payment obligations of such State: ``(1) Any of the factors specified in paragraphs (1) through (9) of subsection (a).
The registration relating to sales or use taxes in effect in such State, by such seller with such State.
The collection or remittance of use taxes by such seller to such State.
DEVELOPMENT OF UNIFORM SALES AND USE TAX ACT.
``It is the sense of the Congress that, not later than October 21, 2004, States and political subdivisions of States should work cooperatively with the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (in this section referred to as the `Conference') to develop and draft a Uniform Sales and Use Tax Act that-- ``(1) reflects a simplified synthesis of the sales and use tax policies of States and political subdivisions of States, applicable to sellers described in paragraph (2); ``(2) creates and maintains parity of collection costs (net of vendor discounts) between-- ``(A) sellers that are not physically present in a State and that sell goods to purchasers that are physically present in such State; and ``(B) sellers that are physically present in a State and that sell goods to purchasers that are physically present in such State; and ``(3) contains, among other matters-- ``(A) uniform tax base definitions; ``(B) a uniform vendor discount; ``(C) uniform and simple sourcing rules; ``(D) a single sale and use tax rate per State and a uniform limitation on any change in such rate; ``(E) uniform audit procedures; ``(F) uniform forms for preparation by sellers to determine and report the amount of tax payable or remittable to a State; ``(G) uniform electronic filing and remittance methods; ``(H) uniform rules for the determination of the exempt status of sellers, and for the creation, distribution, and maintenance of a database containing the identities of sellers that have such status); ``(I) a methodology for approving computer software that sellers may rely on to determine State sales and use tax rates; and ``(J) a methodology for maintaining revenue neutrality in overall sales and use tax collections within each State (such as reducing the Statewide sales tax rate) to account for any increase in revenue that is payable (on a voluntary basis or otherwise) with respect to sales to purchasers that are physically present in such State made by sellers that are not physically present in such State.
ADVISORY COMMISSION ON UNIFORM SALES AND USE TAX.
Establishment.--There is established the Advisory Commission on Uniform Sales and Use Tax (in this section referred to as the `Commission').
The Commission shall-- ``(1) be composed of 19 members appointed in accordance with subsection (b), including the chairperson who shall be selected by the members of the Commission from among themselves; and ``(2) conduct its business in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commissioners shall serve for the life of the Commission.
The membership of the Commission shall be as follows: ``(A) 3 representatives from the Federal Government, comprised of the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the United States Trade Representative (or their respective delegates).
8 representatives from State and local governments (1 such representative shall be from a State or local government that does not impose a sales tax and 1 representative shall be from a State that does not impose an income tax).
8 representatives of the electronic commerce industry (including small business), telecommunications carriers, local retail businesses, and consumer groups, comprised of-- ``(i) 3 individuals appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate; ``(ii) 1 individual appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate; ``(iii) 3 individuals appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; and ``(iv) 1 individual appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Appointments.--Appointments to the Commission shall be made not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of the Internet Tax Reform and Reduction Act of 2000.
The chairperson shall be selected not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of the Internet Tax Reform and Reduction Act of 2000.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Acceptance of Gifts and Grants.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or grants of services or property, both real and personal, for purposes of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts or grants not used at the expiration of the Commission shall be returned to the donor or grantor.
Other Resources.--The Commission shall have reasonable access to materials, resources, data, and other information from the Department of Justice, the Department of Commerce, the Department of State, the Department of the Treasury, and the Office of the United States Trade Representative.
The Commission shall also have reasonable access to use the facilities of any such Department or Office for purposes of conducting meetings.
Sunset.--The Commission shall terminate 60 days after the Commission submits the report required by subsection (g).
Rules of the Commission.-- ``(1) Quorum.--Nine members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the Commission.
Meetings.--Any meetings held by the Commission shall be duly noticed at least 14 days in advance and shall be open to the public.
Opportunities to testify.--The Commission shall provide opportunities for representatives of the general public, taxpayer groups, consumer groups, and State and local government officials to testify.
Additional rules.--The Commission may adopt other rules as needed.
No finding or recommendation shall be included in the report required by subsection (g) unless agreed to by at least two-thirds of the members of the Commission serving at the time the finding or recommendation is made.
Duties of the Commission.--The duties are-- ``(1) to monitor the progress of the Conference in carrying out the activities described in section 1105; and ``(2) not later than 180 days after the Conference carries out the activities described in section 1105, submit to the Congress a report containing the following: ``(A) The findings of the Commission regarding-- ``(i) the growth of electronic commerce; ``(ii) the impact of electronic commerce on traditional retailers; and ``(iii) the impact of sales to purchasers that are physically present in a State made by sellers that are not physically present in such State, on the revenue of States and political subdivisions of States; during the 5-year period ending on December 31, 2004.
An assessment of whether the Uniform Sales and Use Tax Act drafted by the Conference, as provided in section 1105, contains the matters described in section 1105(3).
An assessment of whether the enactment by States of such Uniform Sales and Use Tax Act would result in equal tax collection burdens (net of vendor discounts)-- ``(i) for sellers that are not physically present in a State and that sell goods to purchasers that are physically present in such State; and ``(ii) sellers that are physically present in a State and that sell goods to purchasers that are physically present in such State.
An assessment of whether requiring sellers that are not physically present in a State to collect and remit sales and use taxes to any such State that has not enacted such Uniform Sales and Use Tax Act, would impose any unreasonable burden on interstate commerce or would have any other adverse impact on economic growth and activity through remote electronic channels.
A recommendation regarding whether any State that enacts such Uniform Sales and Use Tax Act should be permitted by the Congress to collect sales and use taxes from all sellers that are not physically present in such State and that sell goods to purchasers that are physically present in such State.
Any other recommendations as required to address the findings of the Commission's report.''.
Cross Reference in the Trade Act of 1974.--Section 181(d) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2241(d)) is amended by striking ``section 1104(3)'' and inserting ``1107(3)''.
Other Cross Reference.--Section 1203(c) of division C of Public Law 105-277 (112 United States Statutes at Large 2681-727; 19 United States Code 2241 note) by striking ``section 1104(3)'' and inserting ``1107(3)''.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS REGARDING DEVELOPMENT OF UNIFORM TELECOMMUNICATIONS STATE AND LOCAL EXCISE TAX ACT.
Development of Uniform Telecommunications State and Local Excise Tax Act.--It is the sense of the Congress that, not later than October 21, 2003, States and political subdivisions of States should work cooperatively with the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (in this section referred to as the `Conference') to develop and draft a Uniform Telecommunications State and Local Excise Tax Act under the terms of which States and political subdivisions of States may impose on telecommunications only a simplified tax described in paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b).
Simplified Tax.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the simplified tax referred to in subsection (a) that may be imposed by a State shall-- (A) allow only 1 State transaction tax; (B) require each telecommunications provider to file only 1 tax return per reporting period per State; (C) allow only 1 audit at the State level; (D) establish nationwide uniform sourcing rules; (E) establish nationwide uniform definitions; and (F) provide for 120 days lead time for implementing tax base and rate changes.
If, on the effective date of this section, political subdivisions of a State are authorized by State law to impose a tax on telecommunications, then the simplified tax referred to in subsection (a) that may be imposed by such State and such political subdivisions shall-- (A) allow only 1 State transaction tax; (B) require each telecommunications provider to file only 1 tax return per reporting period per State; (C) allow only 1 audit at the State level; (D) establish nationwide uniform sourcing rules; (E) establish nationwide uniform definitions; (F) provides for 120 days lead time for implementing tax base and rate changes; and (G) require with respect to such political subdivisions that-- (i) tax base and exemptions conform to the simplified tax as imposed by such State; (ii) a single tax return be filed with the State tax return and with State distribution of funds; (iii) a unified audit be conducted at the State level; (iv) there be maintained a State-administered address, jurisdiction, and rate database in a nationwide uniform format to assign addresses to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction and to provide the appropriate rate; (v) telecommunications providers that rely on such database be immune to liability to such political subdivisions for such simplified tax; and (vi) there be provided a vendor's compensation.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS REGARDING ELIMINATION OF EXCESSIVE TAX BURDEN ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
It is the sense of the Congress that States and political subdivisions of States should eliminate the excessive tax burden on telecommunications by-- (1) eliminating telecommunications industry-specific and higher transaction tax rates; (2) eliminating the excessive tax burdens on telecommunication real, tangible, and intangible property; and (3) affording similar tax treatment of telecommunications infrastructure by States that exempt from sales and use taxes purchases of certain types of business equipment.
It is the sense of the Congress that States should establish, jointly, a deadline for-- (1) enacting the Uniform Telecommunications State and Local Excise Tax Act drafted under section 5; and (2) removing excess and multiple taxation of telecommunications.
It is the sense of the Congress that Federal requirements against adverse discrimination by a State in taxation of telecommunications services, property, or providers in relation to other services, property, and providers in such State should apply to any State that fails to enact, before October 21, 2004, the Uniform Telecommunications State and Local Excise Tax Act drafted under section 5.