This Act may be cited as the ``World University Games Commemorative Coin Act of 1993''.
Five-Dollar Gold Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 200,000 five-dollar coins which shall-- (A) weigh 8.359 grams; (B) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
Design.--The design of such five-dollar coins shall be emblematic of the participation of American athletes in the World University Games.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1993'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
One-Dollar Silver Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary shall issue not more than 750,000 one-dollar coins which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of such dollar coins shall be emblematic of the participation of American athletes in the World University Games.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1993'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Silver Bullion.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act (50 United States Code 98 et seq.).
Gold Bullion.--The Secretary shall obtain gold for the coins minted under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under existing law.
The design for each coin authorized by this Act shall be selected by the Secretary, after consultation with the Greater Buffalo Athletic Corporation and the Commission of Fine Arts.
As required under section 5135 of title 31, United States Code, the design shall also be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Advisory Committee.
SALE OF THE COINS.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the face value, plus the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders at a Discount.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharge Required.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $35 per coin for the five-dollar coins and $7 per coin for the one-dollar coins.
ISSUANCE OF THE COINS.
Gold Coins.--The five-dollar coins authorized under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities and shall be struck at the United States Bullion Depository at West Point.
Silver Coins.--The one-dollar coins authorized under this Act may be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities, except that not more than 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike each such quality.
Commencement of Issuance.--The coins authorized and minted under this Act may be issued beginning on July 1, 1993.
Termination of Authority.--Coins may not be minted under this Act after June 30, 1994.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
No provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Nothing in this section shall relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
All surcharges which are received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Greater Buffalo Athletic Corporation.
Such amounts shall be used by the Greater Buffalo Athletic Corporation to support local or community amateur athletic programs, to erect facilities for the use of such athletes, and to underwrite the cost of sponsoring the World University Games.
The Comptroller General shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Greater Buffalo Athletic Corporation as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under section 8.
NUMISMATIC PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND.
The coins issued under this Act are subject to the provisions section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, relating to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.
It is the sense of the Congress that this coin program should be self-sustaining and should be administered in a manner that results in no net cost to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.