This Act may be cited as the ``Power Marketing Administration Reform Act of 1998''.
The Congress finds that: (1) The use of fixed allocations of joint multipurpose project costs and the failure to provide for the recovery of actual interest costs and depreciation have resulted in substantial failures to recover costs properly recoverable through power rates by the Federal Power Marketing Administrations and the Tennessee Valley Authority and have resulted in the imposition of unreasonable burdens on the taxpaying public.
Existing under allocations and under recovery of costs have led to inefficiencies in the marketing of Federally generated electric power and to environmental damage.
With the emergence of open access to power transmission and competitive bulk power markets, market prices will provide the lowest reasonable rates consistent with sound business principles, consistent with maximum recovery of costs properly allocated to power production and consistent with encouraging the most widespread use of power marketed by Federal Power Marketing Administrations and the Tennessee Valley Authority.
The purpose of this Act is to provide for full cost recovery rates for power sold by Federal Power Marketing Administrations and the Tennessee Valley Authority and a transition to market-based rates for such power.
MODIFICATION OF EXISTING POWER MARKETING ADMINISTRATIONS.
Accounting.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Energy shall, in consultation with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, immediately upon enactment of this Act develop and implement procedures to ensure that the Federal Power Marketing Administrations utilize the same accounting principles and requirements, including those with respect to the accrual of actual interest costs during construction and pending repayment for any project and recognition of depreciation expenses, as are applied by the Commission to the electric operations of public utilities.
Development and Submittal of Rates to the Commission.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each Federal Power Marketing Administration and the Tennessee Valley Authority shall, not later than 1 year after enactment of this Act (and periodically thereafter but not less frequently than once each 5 years), submit to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission rates for the sale or disposition of Federal energy that will ensure the recovery of all costs incurred by such Federal Power Marketing Administration or the Tennessee Valley Authority for the generation and marketing of such Federal energy.
Such costs shall include all fish and wildlife expenditures required under existing treaty and legal obligations associated with the construction and operation of the facilities from which the federally marketed power is generated and sold.
Such costs shall not include any cost of transmitting such Federal energy.
Commission Review, Approval or Modification.--The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall review and either approve of or modify rates for the sale or disposition of Federal energy submitted to the Commission by each Federal Power Marketing Administration and the Tennessee Valley Authority under this section, to ensure that such rates will recover all costs of generating and marketing such Federal energy (including all fish and wildlife costs associated with such Federal energy as required under existing treaty and legal obligations, but not including any cost of transmitting such Federal energy).
Such review by the Commission shall be based on the record of proceedings before the Federal Power Marketing Administration or the Tennessee Valley Authority, except that all persons shall be afforded an opportunity by the Commission for an additional hearing in accordance with the procedures established for ratemaking by the Commission pursuant to the Federal Power Act.
Application of Rates.--Immediately upon approval or modification by the Commission of rates under this section for the sale or disposition of Federal energy by a Federal Power Marketing Administration or the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Federal Power Marketing Administration shall apply such rates, as approved or modified by the Commission, to each existing contract for the sale or disposition of Federal energy by such Federal Power Marketing Administration or the Tennessee Valley Authority to the maximum extent permitted by such contract.
This section shall not apply to any Federal Power Marketing Administration or the Tennessee Valley Authority if and at such time as it no longer has any outstanding commitments under any contract for the sale or disposition of Federal energy that were in existence as of the date of enactment of this Act.
Accounting Principles and Requirements.--In developing or reviewing the rates required by this section, the Federal Power Marketing Administrations, the Tennessee Valley Authority, and the Commission shall rely upon the accounting principles and requirements developed pursuant to subsection (a).
Interim Rates.--Until market pricing for such power sales is fully implemented, such full cost recovery rates shall be implemented for all new contracts for power sales by the Federal Power Marketing Administrator and the Tennessee Valley Authority entered into after the enactment of this Act and for renewals after the enactment of this Act for existing contracts for power sales by Federal Power Marketing Administrations and the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Transition to Market-Based Rates.--If the transition to full cost recovery rates would result in rates that exceed market rates, the Secretary of Energy is authorized to price power sold by Federal Power Marketing Administrations at market rates, and the Tennessee Valley Authority is authorized to price power sold by the Tennessee Valley Authority at market rates, if-- (1) operation and maintenance costs are recovered, including all fish and wildlife costs required under existing treaty and legal obligations; (2) the contribution toward recovery of investment pertaining to power production is maximized; and (3) purchasers of power under existing contracts consent to the remarketing by the relevant Federal Power Marketing Administration or the Tennessee Valley Authority of such power not later than 3 years thereafter through competitive bidding.
Competitive bidding shall be utilized to remarket power that is not accepted by existing customers under this section.
Market-Based Pricing.--Within 2 years after the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy shall develop and implement procedures to assure that all power sold by Federal Power Marketing Administrations and the Tennessee Valley Authority is sold at prices set by demand and supply within the relevant bulk power supply market.
The Secretary of Energy shall establish through notice and comment rulemaking bid and auction procedures to implement market-based pricing for power sold pursuant to any power sales contract entered into by a Federal Power Marketing Administration or the Tennessee Valley Authority after the date 2 years after the enactment of this Act, including power that is under contract but which is declined by the party entitled to purchase such power and remarketed after such date.
Use of Revenues Collected Through Market-Based Pricing.-- (1) In general.--Revenues collected through market-based pricing shall be disposed of as follows: (A) Revenues shall be remitted to the Secretary of the Treasury, first, to cover all power-related operations and maintenance expenses, all fish and wildlife costs required under existing treaty and legal obligations, and the project investment cost pertaining to power production.
Such revenues as shall remain after remission to the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be divided as follows: (i) 50 percent of such revenues shall be remitted to the Secretary of the Treasury for the purpose of reducing the Federal budget deficit.
35 percent of such revenues shall be deposited in the fund established under paragraph (2)(A) for the purpose of helping cover the costs of mitigating the damage to, and restoring the health of, fish, wildlife, and other environmental resources that is attributable to the construction and operation of the facilities from which power is generated and sold.
15 percent of such revenues shall be deposited in the fund established under paragraph (3)(A) for the purpose of helping cover the costs of the incremental cost (above the expected market cost of electricity) of nonhydroelectric renewable resources in the region in which power is marketed by the applicable power marketing administration.
Fund regarding environmental mitigation.-- (A) There is hereby established a fund to hold and expend the revenues allocated for environmental mitigation and restoration pursuant to paragraph (1)(B)(ii).
The fund shall be established within the Department of Interior and shall be governed by a Board of Directors consisting of the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Energy, and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency or their designees.
Other than expenditure of revenues to cover the costs of establishing and managing the fund, all revenues may be spent only pursuant to project- specific plans to mitigate damage to, and restore the health of, the environment.
At no time may the fund established under subparagraph (A) hold more than $200,000,000 that is not necessary to cover the costs of 1 or more project- specific mitigation plans.
Revenues that would otherwise be deposited in the fund but for the absence of 1 or more project-specific plans for environmental mitigation shall be remitted to the Secretary of the Treasury for purposes of Federal budget deficit reduction.
The Board of Directors of the fund established under subparagraph (A) shall develop project-specific mitigation plans for each project used to generate power marketed by the power marketing administrations or the Tennessee Valley Authority.
In developing such plans, the Board is directed, where feasible, to rely on data, information, and mitigation and restoration plans already developed by the United States Bureau of Reclamation, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the Environmental Protection Agency, and other Federal, State, and tribal agencies.
Fund regarding renewable resources.-- (A) There is hereby established a fund to hold and expend the revenues allocated for renewable resources pursuant to paragraph (1)(B)(iii).
The fund shall be established within the Department of Energy.
Revenues in the fund may be expended to pay for the incremental costs of nonhydroelectric renewable resources in the States in which the applicable power marketing administration markets power.
Other than expenditure of revenues to cover the costs of establishing and managing the fund, all revenues may be spent only-- (i) pursuant to a plan developed by the Secretary of Energy designed to foster the development of nonhydroelectric renewable resources that show substantial long-term promise but which are presently too expensive to attract private capital sufficient to develop or ascertain their potential; and (ii) on recipients chosen by a process of competitive bidding.
At no time may the fund established under subparagraph (A) hold more than $50,000,000 that is not necessary to meet the plan developed pursuant to such subparagraph.
Revenues that would otherwise be deposited in this fund but for the absence of such a plan shall be remitted to the Secretary of the Treasury for purposes of Federal budget deficit reduction.
Preference.--Public bodies and cooperatives shall be given a preference to future power allocations or reallocations of Federal power through a right of first refusal at market prices.
Power obtained through preference rights shall be consumed by the preference customer or resold for consumption by the constituent end-users of the preference customer and may not be resold to other entities.
As regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, preference recipients shall have transmission access to this purchased power.
If a public body or cooperative does not take allocation, the next highest bidder takes the allocation.
Reforms.--The Secretary of Energy shall require each Federal Power Marketing Administration to implement-- (1) program management in order to assign personnel and incur expenses for authorized power marketing, reclamation, and flood control activities only, and not diversification into ancillary activities including consulting or operating services for other entities; and (2) annual reporting plainly disclosing to the American public, the activities of the Power Marketing Administration including, but not limited to, the full cost of such power projects and power marketing programs.
Contract Renewal.--After the enactment of this Act, no Federal Power Marketing Administration may enter into or renew any power marketing contract for a term that exceeds 5 years.
Restrictions.--Excepting only the Bonneville Power Administration, each Federal Power Marketing Administration shall be subject to the restrictions on the construction of transmission and additional facilities established by section 5 of the Flood Control Act of 1944.
FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION JURISDICTION OVER TRANSMISSION SERVICE PROVIDED BY POWER MARKETING ADMINISTRATIONS AND TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY.
Transmission service provided by Federal Power Marketing Administrations shall be provided on an open access basis and at just and reasonable rates approved or established by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission under part II of the Federal Power Act in the same manner as such service is provided pursuant to Commission rules by any public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission under such Part II.
The preceding sentence shall not require any Federal Power Marketing Administration to expand transmission or interconnection capabilities or transmissions in the absence of other authority of law.
IMPLEMENTATION BY THE FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION.
Pending the implementation of market-based pricing, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall have authority to review and approve, reject, or revise power rate schedules recommended for approval by the Secretary of Energy, and existing rate schedules, for power sales by the Federal Power Marketing Administrations.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall base its approval of final rates upon the protection of the public interest and shall undertake to protect the interest of the taxpaying public as well as the interests of consumers in accordance with section 4.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission may review the factual basis for determinations made by the Secretary of Energy and may revise or modify those findings as appropriate and may revise proposed or effective rate schedules or remand the rate schedules to the Secretary of Energy as the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission determines is necessary to protect the public interest in accordance with section 4 until a full transition is made to market-based rates for power sold by Federal Power Marketing Administrations.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is authorized to proceed pursuant to informal notice and comment rulemaking pursuant to section 553(c) of title 5, United States Code.
Any affected party, including a taxpayer, bidder, preference customer, or affected competitor may seek a rehearing and judicial review of a final decision of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission pursuant to section 313 of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 8251).
The following provisions are repealed: (1) The last sentence of section 302(a)(3) of the Department of Energy Organization Act.
Section 505 of Public Law 102-377.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect with respect to power sales contracts entered into by a Federal Power Marketing Administration or the Tennessee Valley Authority after July 23, 1997.