This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Teacher Retention Act of 2005''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) More than 8,000,000 children, representing 21 percent of all public school children in the United States, attend public schools in rural areas.
There are 24,123 public schools in rural areas of the United States, representing 31 percent of all public schools.
More than 400,000 educators, or 31 percent of all public school teachers, teach in rural schools.
Rural school teachers earn approximately 14 percent less than their counterparts in other regions.
Despite lower salaries, rural school teachers typically teach multiple subjects and perform their jobs with fewer resources than their counterparts in other regions.
One of the most critical challenges facing rural school districts is in attracting and retaining qualified teachers.
Rural school districts tend to have higher teacher turnover rates than school districts in other regions.
High teacher turnover has a negative impact on student performance, school district performance, and the ability of teachers to become highly qualified.
In this Act: (1) Rural local educational agency.--The term ``rural local educational agency'' means a local educational agency that-- (A) is described in section 6211(b) or 6221(b)(1) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7345(b) and 7351(b)(1)); and (B) has experienced a teacher turnover rate of not less than 5 percent of all the teachers teaching in schools served by the agency in any of the 3 years preceding the date of enactment of this Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
In General.--From funds appropriated under section 5, the Secretary shall make an allotment to each rural local educational agency having an application approved under subsection (b) according to a formula based on the number of students in average daily attendance (as defined in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801)) in the schools served by the rural local educational agency.
Application.--A rural local educational agency that desires to receive an allotment under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--A rural local educational agency that receives an allotment under this section shall use the funds for the following: (A) Provide one-time signing bonuses of not more than $2,000 to teachers who commence employment with the rural local educational agency on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Provide bonuses of not more than $3,000 to qualified teachers who work in the rural local educational agency for not less than 3 consecutive years (except as provided in paragraph (2)).
Exception from consecutive service.--The 3 year period of service working in the rural local educational agency provided under paragraph (1)(B) may be nonconsecutive if the break in service is due to the qualified teacher taking leave from the rural local educational agency and such leave is-- (A) in compliance with the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 United States Code 2611); or (B) due to the qualified teacher being called or ordered to active duty as a member of the National Guard or other reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States, or a member of such Armed Forces in a retired status.
Consideration.--In determining the provision of bonuses under paragraph (1), a rural local educational agency shall consider such factors as the need for teachers in certain subjects, the value that a teacher brings to the agency, teacher performance and qualifications, and the unique needs of the agency.
Only one bonus in one year.--A teacher may receive only 1 bonus pursuant to this Act during a calendar year.
Duration.--The Secretary shall carry out this section as a pilot program for a 5-year period.
Relation to Other Federal Education Programs.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect the eligibility for assistance or the amount of assistance otherwise available under any other Federal education program for a rural local educational agency that receives an allotment under this section or a teacher who receives a bonus pursuant to this section.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2006 and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2007 and 2008.