This Act may be cited as the ``FHA-Insured Hospital Conversion and Reinvestment Act of 2001''.
GRANTS FOR FHA-INSURED HOSPITALS.
Section 242 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1715z-7) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i) Grants for FHA-Insured Hospitals.-- ``(1) Authority and use.--To the extent that amounts for use under this subsection are made available pursuant to section 519(g), the Secretary may make grants to eligible FHA- insured hospitals for use only for purposes that the Secretary determines will reduce the risk of default and loss on mortgages for those hospitals, which purposes shall include-- ``(A) carrying out activities to convert the excess capacity of an eligible FHA-insured hospital to facilities that provide health care and supportive housing for elderly persons and families, including assisted living facilities, nursing homes, and supportive housing for the elderly; and ``(B) assisting in paying debt service for an eligible FHA-insured hospital, including service on debt insured under this section.
Treatment of mortgage insurance.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any provision of this section or of any contract for mortgage insurance provided pursuant to this section, an eligible FHA- insured hospital (or a portion of an eligible FHA- insured hospital) may be converted in accordance with paragraph (1)(A), using grant amounts under this subsection.
Continuing coverage.--The Secretary shall provide for the uninterrupted continuation of the mortgage insurance coverage for a hospital that is converted in accordance with paragraph (1)(A), for the duration of the original term of the mortgage insurance contract.
Definitions.--As used in this subsection: ``(A) Assisted living facility; nursing home.--The terms `assisted living facility' and `nursing home' have the same meanings as in section 232 (12 United States Code 1715w).
Elderly person.--The term `elderly person' has the same meaning as in section 202(k) of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 United States Code 1701q(k)).
Eligible fha-insured hospitals.--The term `eligible FHA-insured hospital' means a hospital that-- ``(i) is subject to a mortgage that is insured under this section; ``(ii) would, in the determination of the Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, improve its financial soundness as a result of the proposed activities or costs to be funded with grant amounts under this subsection; and ``(iii) has submitted an application to the Secretary for a grant under this subsection, in accordance with such requirements as the Secretary shall establish.
Supportive housing for the elderly.--The term `supportive housing for the elderly' has the same meaning as in section 202(k) of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 United States Code 1701q(k)).
Funding.--In addition to any amounts made available under section 519(g), there are authorized to be appropriated for grants under this subsection, such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.
FUNDING OF GRANTS FROM SURPLUS AMOUNTS IN FHA INSURANCE FUNDS.
General Insurance Fund Surplus.--Section 519 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1735c) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Availability of Surplus Amounts for Grants for FHA-Insured Hospitals.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of any negative credit subsidy that is determined for any fiscal year for purposes of title V of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 661 et sequentes), and is attributable to the programs referred to in paragraph (2) shall be considered to be new budget authority and shall be available, without fiscal year limitation, for grants under section 242(i).
Covered programs.--The programs referred to in this paragraph are the programs under this Act for insurance of mortgages and loans that are classified under budget account number 86-0200-0-1-371 and are referred to as `FHA Full Insurance for Health Care Facilities (plus 241/232)', `Health Care Refinances', and `Hospitals' on page 515 of the Appendix to the Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2001 (H. Doc.
, in the table entitled `Summary of Loan Levels, Subsidy Budget Authority and Outlays by Program'.''.
Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, pursuant to the authority in section 211 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1715b), the Secretary shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the amendments made by this Act.