This Act may be cited as the ``Grey Towers National Historic Site Act of 2004''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) James and Mary Pinchot constructed a home and estate that is known as Grey Towers in Milford, Pennsylvania.
James and Mary Pinchot were also the progenitors of a family of notable accomplishment in the history of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Nation, in particular, their son, Gifford Pinchot.
Gifford Pinchot was the first Chief of the Forest Service, a major influence in formulating and implementing forest conservation policies in the early 20th Century, and twice Governor of Pennsylvania.
During the early 20th century, James and Gifford Pinchot used Grey Towers and the environs to establish scientific forestry, to develop conservation leaders, and to formulate conservation principles, thus making this site one of the primary birthplaces of the American conservation movement.
In 1963, Gifford Bryce Pinchot, the son of Gifford and Cornelia Pinchot, donated Grey Towers and 102 acres to the Nation.
In 1963, President John Federal Reporter Kennedy dedicated the Pinchot Institute for Conservation ``for the greater knowledge of land and its uses'' at Grey Towers National Historic Landmark, thereby establishing a partnership between the public and private sectors.
Grey Towers today is a place of historical significance where leaders in natural resource conservation meet, study, and share ideas, analyses, values, and philosophies, and is also a place where the public can learn and appreciate our conservation heritage.
As established by President Kennedy, the Pinchot Institute for Conservation, and the Forest Service at Grey Towers operate through an established partnership in developing and delivering programs that carry on Gifford Pinchot's conservation legacy.
Grey Towers and associated structures in and around Milford, Pennsylvania, can serve to enhance regional recreational and educational opportunities.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To honor and perpetuate the memory of Gifford Pinchot.
To promote the recreational and educational resources of Milford, Pennsylvania, and its environs.
To authorize the Secretary of Agriculture-- (A) to further the scientific, policy analysis, educational, and cultural programs in natural resource conservation at Grey Towers; (B) to manage the property and environs more efficiently and effectively; and (C) to further collaborative ties with the Pinchot Institute for Conservation, and other Federal, State, and local agencies with shared interests.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this Act: (1) Associated properties.--The term ``Associated Properties'' means lands and improvements outside of the Grey Towers National Historic Landmark within Pike County, Pennsylvania, and which were associated with James and Mary Pinchot, the Yale School of Forestry, or the Forest Service.
Grey towers.--The term ``Grey Towers'' means the buildings and surrounding area of approximately 303 acres, including the 102 acres donated in 1963 to the United States and so designated that year.
Historic site.--The term ``Historic Site'' means the Grey Towers National Historic Site, as so designated by this Act.
Pinchot institute.--The term ``Pinchot Institute'' means the Pinchot Institute for Conservation, a nonprofit corporation established under the laws of the District of Columbia.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
DESIGNATION OF NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
Subject to valid existing rights, all lands and improvements formerly encompassed within the Grey Towers National Historic Landmark are designated as the ``Grey Towers National Historic Site''.
Purposes.--The Historic Site shall be administered for the following purposes: (1) Education, public demonstration projects, and research related to natural resource conservation, protection, management, and use.
Leadership development within the natural resource professions and the Federal civil service.
Continuing Gifford Pinchot's legacy through pursuit of new ideas, strategies, and solutions to natural resource issues that include economic, ecological, and social values.
Preservation, use, and maintenance of the buildings, grounds, facilities, and archives associated with Gifford Pinchot.
Study and interpretation of the life and works of Gifford Pinchot.
Public recreation and enjoyment.
Protection and enjoyment of the scenic and natural environs.
Applicable Laws.--The Secretary shall administer federally owned lands and interests in lands at the Historic Site and Associated Properties as components of the National Forest System in accordance with this Act, 16 United States Code 461 et sequentes and other laws generally applicable to the administration of national historic sites, and the laws, rules, and regulations applicable to the National Forest System, except that the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1600, et sequentes) shall not apply.
Land Acquisition.--The Secretary is authorized to acquire, on a willing seller basis, by purchase, donation, exchange, or otherwise, privately owned lands and interests in lands, including improvements, within the Historic Site and the Associated Properties, using donated or appropriated funds.
Gifts.-- (1) Accepted by entities other than the secretary.--Subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, any public or private agency, organization, institution, or individual may solicit, accept, and administer private gifts of money and real or personal property for the benefit of, or in connection with, the activities and services at the Historic Site.
Accepted by the secretary.--Gifts may be accepted by the Secretary for the benefit of, or in connection with, the activities and services at the Historic Site notwithstanding the fact that a donor conducts business with or is regulated by the Department of Agriculture in any capacity.
Grants, Contracts, and Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary is authorized to enter into agreements for grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements as appropriate with the Pinchot Institute, public and other private agencies, organizations, institutions, and individuals to provide for the development, administration, maintenance, or restoration of land, facilities, or Forest Service programs at Grey Towers or to otherwise further the purposes of this Act.
Interdepartmental.--The Secretary and the Secretary of the Interior are authorized and encouraged to cooperate in promoting public use and enjoyment of Grey Towers and the Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area and in otherwise furthering the administration and purposes for which both areas were designated.
Such cooperation may include colocation and use of facilities within Associated Properties and elsewhere.
Other.--The Secretary may authorize use of the grounds and facilities of Grey Towers by the Pinchot Institute and other participating partners including Federal, State, and local agencies, on such terms and conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, including the waiver of special use authorizations and the waiver of rental and use fees.
Fees and Charges.--The Secretary may impose reasonable fees and charges for admission to and use of facilities on Grey Towers.
Special Fund.--Any monies received by the Forest Service in administering Grey Towers shall be deposited into the Treasury of the United States and covered in a special fund called the Grey Towers National Historic Site Fund.
Monies in the Grey Towers National Historic Site Fund shall be available until expended, without further appropriation, for support of programs of Grey Towers, and any other expenses incurred in the administration of Grey Towers.
The Secretary shall produce and keep for public inspection a map of the Historic Site and associated properties within Pike County, Pennsylvania, which were associated with James and Mary Pinchot, the Yale School of Forestry, or the Forest Service.
Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to diminish the authorities of the Secretary under the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act or any other law pertaining to the National Forest System.