Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Safe and Affordable Manufactured Housing Improvement Act of 1996.''
Reference.--Whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974.
Section 603 (42 United States Code 5402) is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (7) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(7) `Federal manufactured home construction and safety standard' means a reasonable performance standard for the construction, design, and transportation of a manufactured home which meets the needs of the public including the need for affordability, quality, durability, and safety;''; (2) in paragraph (12), by striking ``and'' at the end; (3) in paragraph (13), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and (4) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs: ``(14) `consensus committee' means the body established to provide periodic recommendations to the Secretary pursuant to the provisions of section 604; ``(15) `consensus process' means the process by which the consensus committee, established pursuant to section 604, recommends to the Secretary any additions, revocations, and/or amendments to the Federal manufactured home construction and safety standards and any related interpretations; ``(16) `transportation' means the movement of a manufactured home or manufactured home components from the manufacturing facility to a retailer's place of business or a location selected by the purchaser, and the movement of a manufactured home or manufactured home components from the retailers's place of business to a site selected by the home purchaser, where applicable; and ``(17) `Secretariat' means the qualified technical or building code maintenance organization selected by the Secretary to administer the consensus process, and to appoint the members of the consensus committee established under section 604.''.
FEDERAL MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS.
In General.--Section 604 (42 United States Code 5403) is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following new subsection: ``(a) Establishment.-- ``(1) Authority of secretary.--The Secretary shall establish, by order, appropriate Federal manufactured home design, construction, transportation, and safety performance standards that shall be reasonable, practicable, objectively stated, and reflective of current developments in building standards and technology.
The Secretary shall issue such orders pursuant to the consensus process described in this section.
Establishment of consensus committee and procedures.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of the Manufactured Housing Improvement Act of 1996, the Secretary, in accordance with all relevant statutes, regulations, orders, and directives pertaining to competitively bid procurement, shall enter into a contract with a qualified technical or building code organization to administer a consensus process as its secretariat and to establish a manufactured housing consensus committee and appoint the members of that committee.
The performance of such secretariat shall be reviewed by the Secretary on a periodic basis.
The consensus committee shall be exempt from the requirements of the Federal Advisory Committee Act.
All meetings shall be open to the public, and advance notice of such meetings shall be provided in the Federal Register.
Any final action by the consensus committee shall be taken only after notice to the public and opportunity for public comment in accordance with the provisions of section 553 and subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
Selection and qualifications.--The consensus committee shall function, and its members shall be selected, in accordance with the procedures for consensus committees promulgated by the American National Standards Institute.
Members of the consensus committee shall be qualified to participate in the work of the committee.
The consensus committee and the secretariat organization shall be certified by the American National Standards Institute and shall be provided reasonable staff resources by the administering organization.
Responsibilities.--The consensus committee established under this subsection shall be responsible for the maintenance and revision of the Federal manufactured home construction and safety standards, including the interpretation of such standards.
Revisions to standards.--The consensus committee shall consider additions, deletion, and amendments to the Federal manufactured home construction and safety standards, as needed, over a 2-year cycle.
The consensus committee, after notice and an opportunity for public comment, shall publish any proposed standards or revisions and notice of their submission to the Secretary, in the Federal Register.
This notice shall describe the circumstances under which the proposed standards could become effective.
Secretary's response.--The Secretary may either adopt or reject the standards submitted by the consensus committee.
A final order adopting such a standard, or rejecting such a standard, shall be issued by the Secretary no later than 180 days after the date the proposed standard or regulation is submitted to the Secretary by the consensus committee, and shall be published in the Federal Register.
In the event that the Secretary rejects, in whole or in part, such a standard, such publication shall be preceded by publication of the proposed standard and the Secretary's proposed final order for public comment in accordance with section 553 and subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
Failure to take action.--If the Secretary fails to take final action under paragraph (6) and publish notice of the action in the Federal Register within the required 180-day period, the recommendations of the consensus committee shall take effect 60 days after the 180-day period.
Within 10 days after the expiration of the 180-day period, the consensus committee shall publish in the Federal Register notice of the Secretary's failure to act, the revised standards, and the effective date of the revised standards.
Interim emergency standards.--The Secretary shall have the authority at any time to request that the consensus committee develop interim emergency performance standards or amendments to the standards, when necessary to respond to a health or safety emergency, as determined by the Secretary in writing.
The consensus committee shall have 60 days to submit such proposed interim standards or amendments following a request by the Secretary.
Written interpretations.--Upon request from an interested party and after a finding that such an interpretation is reasonably necessary, the consensus committee shall submit to the Secretary written interpretations of the Federal manufactured home construction and safety standards.
These interpretations shall become binding upon the completion of notice and comment rulemaking procedures by the Secretary in accordance with section 553 and subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, which shall be instituted within 180 days of the Secretary's receipt of such an interpretation.
The Secretary may reject, in whole or in part, an interpretation only upon a written finding that the interpretation is inconsistent with the purposes of this title.
''; (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by striking ``All'' and inserting ``Except as expressly provided herein, all''; and (B) by inserting ``and subchapter II of chapter 5'' after ``section 553''; (3) in subsection (c), by striking ``Each'' and all that follows through ``effect,'' and inserting the following: ``Each order establishing, amending, deleting, or interpreting a Federal manufactured home construction and safety standard shall specify the date such standard, amendment, or interpretation is to take effect,''; (4) by striking subsections (d), (e), (f), and (g) and inserting the following new subsections: ``(d) Preemption.--Except as may otherwise be expressly authorized by the provisions of this title, a State or local unit of government shall not establish, continue in effect, or enforce any standard pertaining to the design, construction, transportation, or safety of manufactured homes after the effective date of the United States Housing Act of 1996.
The standards mandated by this title are deemed complete and exhaustive and shall supersede and preempt State and local law and regulations.
Considerations.--The consensus committee, in recommending performance standards and issuing interpretations, and the Secretary, in establishing such standards and standards interpretations under this title, shall-- ``(1) consider relevant, reliable manufactured home construction and safety data, including the results of the research, development, testing, and evaluation activities conducted pursuant to this title, and those activities conducted by private organizations and other governmental agencies to determine how best to promote the purposes of this title; ``(2) consult with such State or interstate agencies (including legislative committees) as they deem appropriate; ``(3) consider whether any such proposed performance standard or standard interpretation is reasonable for the particular type of manufactured home or for the geographic region for which it is adopted; ``(4) consider the probable effect of such standard or standard interpretation on the cost of the manufactured homes to purchasers and potential purchasers; and ``(5) consider the extent to which any such standard or standard interpretation will contribute to carrying out the purposes of this title.
''; (5) by redesignating subsections (h), (i), and (j) as subsections (f), (h), and (i), respectively; (6) by inserting after subsection (f) (as so redesignated by paragraph (5) of this subsection) the following new subsection: ``(g) Evaluation Methodologies.--Based on a finding of need, as determined in writing by the Secretary, the consensus committee may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, establish reasonable, cost-effective, uniform evaluation methodologies in order to determine compliance with existing standards, or may evaluate proposed methodologies.
''; and (7) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Required Use of Consensus Process.--After the date of the enactment of the Manufactured Housing Improvement Act of 1996, the Secretary shall not adopt or amend any standards or standards interpretations other than through the consensus process set forth in this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 610 (42 United States Code 5409(a)(6)) is amended by striking ``subsection (h)'' and inserting ``subsection (f)''.
Section 620 (42 United States Code 5419) is amended to read as follows: ``inspection and collection and utilization of fees ``Sec.
Establishment.--The Secretary may establish and impose, on manufactured home manufacturers, distributors, and dealers, a reasonable fee to offset the necessary expenses incurred in conducting the inspections required by this title and the expenses incurred by the consensus committee in performing its duties under this title.
Such fees shall be established and/or modified pursuant to notice and comment rulemaking in accordance with section 553 and subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
Use.--Fees collected pursuant to this title shall be deposited in a dedicated fund and shall be expended only for the functions specified in subsection (a), and shall be subject for expenditure only to the extent approved in an appropriations Act.
The Secretary shall provide an annual report to the Congress specifying expenditures of these funds.
The Secretary shall also make available to the public, in accordance with all applicable disclosure statutes, regulations, orders, or directives, information pertaining to such funds, including but not limited to, information pertaining to amounts collected, amounts disbursed, and the fund balance.