This Act may be cited as the ``Business Retained Income During Growth and Expansion Act of 2001'' or the ``BRIDGE Act of 2001''.
DEFERRED PAYMENT OF TAX BY CERTAIN SMALL BUSINESSES.
In General.--Subchapter B of chapter 62 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to extensions of time for payment of tax) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EXTENSION OF TIME FOR PAYMENT OF TAX FOR CERTAIN SMALL BUSINESSES.
In General.--An eligible small business may elect to pay the tax imposed by chapter 1 in 4 equal installments.
Limitation.--The maximum amount of tax which may be paid in installments under this section for any taxable year shall not exceed whichever of the following is the least: ``(1) The tax imposed by chapter 1 for the taxable year.
The amount contributed by the taxpayer into a BRIDGE Account during such year.
The excess of $250,000 over the aggregate amount of tax for which an election under this section was made by the taxpayer (or any predecessor) for all prior taxable years.
Eligible Small Business.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `eligible small business' means, with respect to any taxable year, any person if-- ``(A) such person meets the active business requirements of section 1202(e) throughout such taxable year, ``(B) the taxpayer has gross receipts of $10,000,000 or less for the taxable year, ``(C) the gross receipts of the taxpayer for such taxable year are at least 10 percent greater than the average annual gross receipts of the taxpayer (or any predecessor) for the 2 prior taxable years, and ``(D) the taxpayer uses an accrual method of accounting.
Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 448(c) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
Date for Payment of Installments; Time for Payment of Interest.-- ``(1) Date for payment of installments.-- ``(A) In general.--If an election is made under this section for any taxable year, the first installment shall be paid on or before the due date for such installment and each succeeding installment shall be paid on or before the date which is 1 year after the date prescribed by this paragraph for payment of the preceding installment.
Due date for first installment.--The due date for the first installment for a taxable year shall be whichever of the following is the earliest: ``(i) The date selected by the taxpayer.
The date which is 2 years after the date prescribed by section 6151(a) for payment of the tax for such taxable year.
Time for payment of interest.--If the time for payment of any amount of tax has been extended under this section-- ``(A) Interest for period before due date of first installment.--Interest payable under section 6601 on any unpaid portion of such amount attributable to the period before the due date for the first installment shall be paid annually.
Interest during installment period.--Interest payable under section 6601 on any unpaid portion of such amount attributable to any period after such period shall be paid at the same time as, and as a part of, each installment payment of the tax.
Interest in the case of certain deficiencies.--In the case of a deficiency to which subsection (e)(3) applies for a taxable year which is assessed after the due date for the first installment for such year, interest attributable to the period before such due date, and interest assigned under subparagraph (B) to any installment the date for payment of which has arrived on or before the date of the assessment of the deficiency, shall be paid upon notice and demand from the Secretary.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Application of limitation to partners and s corporation shareholders.-- ``(A) In general.--In applying this section to a partnership which is an eligible small business-- ``(i) the election under subsection (a) shall be made by the partnership, ``(ii) the amount referred to in subsection (b)(1) shall be the sum of each partner's tax which is attributable to items of the partnership and assuming the highest marginal rate under section 1, and ``(iii) the partnership shall be treated as the taxpayer referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (b).
Overall limitation also applied at partner level.--In the case of a partner in a partnership, the limitation under subsection (b)(3) shall be applied at the partnership and partner levels.
Similar rules for s corporations.--Rules similar to the rules of subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall apply to shareholders in an S corporation.
Acceleration of payment in certain cases.-- ``(A) In general.--If-- ``(i) the taxpayer ceases to meet the requirement of subsection (c)(1)(A), or ``(ii) there is an ownership change with respect to the taxpayer, then the extension of time for payment of tax provided in subsection (a) shall cease to apply, and the unpaid portion of the tax payable in installments shall be paid on or before the due date for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 for the first taxable year following such cessation.
Ownership change.--For purposes of subparagraph, in the case of a corporation, the term `ownership change' has the meaning given to such term by section 382.
Rules similar to the rules applicable under the preceding sentence shall apply to a partnership.
Proration of deficiency to installments.--Rules similar to the rules of section 6166(e) shall apply for purposes of this section.
BRIDGE Account.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `BRIDGE Account' means a trust created or organized in the United States for the exclusive benefit of an eligible small business, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted for any taxable year in excess of the amount allowed as a deferral under subsection (b) for such year.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which such person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
The assets of the trust consist entirely of cash or of obligations which have adequate stated interest (as defined in section 1274(c)(2)) and which pay such interest not less often than annually.
The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
Amounts in the trust may be used only-- ``(i) as security for a loan to the business or for repayment of such loan, or ``(ii) to pay the installments under this section.
Account taxed as grantor trust.--The grantor of a BRIDGE Account shall be treated for purposes of this title as the owner of such Account and shall be subject to tax thereon in accordance with subpart E of part I of subchapter J of this chapter (relating to grantors and others treated as substantial owners).
Time when payments deemed made.--For purposes of this section, a taxpayer shall be deemed to have made a payment to a BRIDGE Account on the last day of a taxable year if such payment is made on account of such taxable year and is made within 3\1/2\ months after the close of such taxable year.
Reports.--The Secretary may require such reporting as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to carry out this section.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply to taxes imposed for taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this section and before January 1, 2006.''
Priority of Lender.--Subsection (b) of section 6323 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) Loans secured by bridge accounts.--With respect to a BRIDGE account (as defined in section 6168(f)) with any bank (as defined in section 408(n)), to the extent of any loan made by such bank without actual notice or knowledge of the existence of such lien, as against such bank, if such loan is secured by such account.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 62 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Extension of time for payment of tax for certain small businesses.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Study by General Accounting Office.-- (1) Study.--In consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Comptroller General of the United States shall undertake a study to evaluate the applicability (including administrative aspects) and impact of the BRIDGE Act of 2001, including how it affects the capital funding needs of businesses under the Act and number of businesses benefiting.
Report.--Not later than March 31, 2005, the Comptroller General shall transmit to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate a written report presenting the results of the study conducted pursuant to this subsection, together with such recommendations for legislative or administrative changes as the Comptroller General determines are appropriate.