Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1.
This Act may be cited as the ``Family Service Center Act of 1994''.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS TO COORDINATE THE ADMINISTRATION OF SERVICES TO NEEDY FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN.
In General.--In order to coordinate the administration of programs that provide services to needy families with children, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as ``the Secretary'') may authorize States to conduct demonstration projects in accordance with this section.
Description of Project.--Each State desiring to conduct a demonstration project under this section may submit to the Secretary an application that contains a description of the measures to be employed to coordinate the administration of the following programs: (1) AFDC program.--The program of aid and services for needy families with children under the State plan approved under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 601 et sequentes).
Child support enforcement program.--The child support enforcement program carried out under the State plan approved under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act.
Food stamp program.--The food stamp program, as defined in section 3(h) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2012(h)).
WIC program.--The special supplemental food program for women, infants, and children authorized under section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1786).
Maternal and child health block grant program.--The maternal and child health block grant program under title V of the Social Security Act.
Medicaid program.--Medical assistance furnished under the State plan approved under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
Substance abuse treatment programs.--Substance abuse treatment programs under title V of the Public Health Service Act and subpart II of part B of title XIX of such Act.
Jobs programs.--Programs under the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1501 et sequentes) and other Federal job training programs.
Mental health programs.--Mental health service programs under title V of the Public Health Service Act and subpart I of part B of title XIX of such Act.
Housing programs.--Programs for housing assistance administered by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or the Secretary of Agriculture.
Programs for the developmentally disabled.--Programs for developmentally disabled individuals under the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act.
Other programs.--Any other program administered by the State, which offers services for children, youth, or needy families with children, that the State considers appropriate to include in the demonstration project.
Projects Aimed at a Diversity of Clients.--The Secretary shall ensure that, as a group, the demonstration projects authorized to be conducted under this section serve urban, rural, and linguistically and culturally diverse clients and include the broadest possible range of services.
Project Requirements.--Each State authorized to conduct a demonstration project under this section shall-- (1) ensure that the project provides-- (A) each client with a single place and organization providing access to, and information and counseling about, the services offered by the programs described in subsection (b); (B) access points in clients' neighborhoods for communication with service providers regarding their applications and benefits through electronic data processing and communications technology; and (C) approaches to integrating the administration of services that are linguistically and culturally appropriate to the clientele of the project; and (2) conduct the project in accordance with such other requirements as the Secretary may prescribe.
Grants; Duration of Projects.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall make grants to each State whose application to conduct a demonstration project under this subsection is approved by the Secretary, to assist the State in carrying out the project for a period of not more than 3 years.
Renewal.--The Secretary may extend for not more than 3 additional years the authority to conduct any demonstration project under this section, upon approval by the Secretary based on the effectiveness of the project in achieving the objectives of this section.
Timing of grant payments.--The Secretary may pay grants under this section in advance or in installments, as the Secretary determines appropriate.
State Evaluation of Project.-- (1) In general.--Each State that conducts a demonstration project under this section shall, as a part of the project-- (A) conduct an evaluation of the effectiveness and outcomes of the project in improving the coordination and delivery, and in reducing the administrative costs, of services to needy families with children; and (B) cooperate with the Secretary in the conduct of national evaluations of the effectiveness and cost savings of all such demonstration projects.
Report.-- (A) In general.--Each State authorized to conduct a demonstration project under this section shall submit to the Secretary a report on the results of the evaluation described in paragraph (1).
Timing.--The report required by subparagraph (A) with respect to a demonstration project shall be submitted within 6 months after the earlier of-- (i) the completion of the project; or (ii) the end of the 3-year period that begins with the commencement of the project.
State Report on Impediments to Delivery of Services, and on Measures Taken To Eliminate or Reduce Such Impediments.--Each State authorized to conduct a demonstration project under this section shall submit to the Secretary at such time as the Secretary may prescribe a report that describes-- (1) the administrative policies and laws of the Federal Government and of the State or of a political subdivision of the State, that the State has identified as impediments to the coordination of the delivery of services to needy families with children; and (2) the measures that the State has taken or intends to take to eliminate or reduce the impediments described in paragraph (1) that are attributable to administrative policies and laws of the State or of a political subdivision of the State.
Federal Evaluations.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct evaluations of the implementation and outcomes of the demonstration projects authorized under this section.
Annual reports.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report the results of the evaluations conducted under paragraph (1) that includes the recommendations of the Secretary as to any statutory changes that would improve integration of services provided through programs included in the demonstration projects conducted under this section.
Funding.--The Secretary may reserve up to 5 percent of the amounts appropriated for grants under this section for the purpose of conducting and reporting on evaluations of the demonstration projects authorized under this section.
No Waiver Authority.--This section shall not be construed to authorize the Secretary or appropriate agency head to waive or modify any requirement of any program described in subsection (b).
State Defined.--As used in this section, the term ``State'' includes the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.