There is established the National Commission on Threats to the Homeland and United States National Security (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall be composed of six members, as follows: (1) Two members appointed by the President, not more than one of whom shall be appointed from the same political party.
One member appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
One member appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
One member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Qualifications.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed from among distinguished Americans in private life who have served at the most senior levels of the Federal government, including the national security, law enforcement, and public safety agencies of the United States.
Chairman.--The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among its members.
Quorum.--A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers but shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.--After its initial meeting, the Commission shall meet upon the call of the Chairman or a majority of its members.
Appointments Deadline.--It is the sense of Congress that members of the Commission should be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
In General.--The Commission shall evaluate, in light of the terrorist attacks against the United States on September 11, 2001, the threats to the United States and to United States national security, in order to assist the Federal Government set priorities in the national budget, and in the organization of the relevant government departments, to address those threats.
Particular Subjects for Review.--In particular, the Commission shall-- (1) provide a comprehensive assessment of the range of threats to the United States and to United States national security, taking into account analyses by United States agencies and nongovernmental entities that have recently reviewed relevant issues, such as the United States Commission on National Security/21st Century, the National Commission on Terrorism, the Department of Energy Russia Task Force, and the Advisory Panel to Assess Domestic Response Capabilities for Terrorism Involving Weapons of Mass Destruction; and (2) make recommendations to the President and Congress on the priority that should be accorded to those threats in the United States national security strategy, taking into account-- (A) the likelihood such threats will result in attacks on the United States or important United States interests; (B) the potential damage to the United States or important United States interests that would result from such attacks; and (C) current United States capabilities to counter and respond to such threats.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission or, at its direction, any panel or member of the Commission, may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, receive evidence, and administer oaths to the extent that the Commission or any panel or member considers advisable.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly or from any Federal department or agency any information that the Commission considers necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of any such department or agency shall furnish such information expeditiously to the Commission.
Postal, Printing and Binding Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails and obtain printing and binding services in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
STAFF OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, appoint a staff director and such additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The staff director of the Commission shall be appointed from private life, and such appointment shall be subject to the approval of the Commission as a whole.
Compensation.--The Chairman of the Commission may fix the pay of the staff director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay fixed under this paragraph for the staff director may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title and the rate of pay for other personnel may not exceed the maximum rate payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Detail of Government Employees.--Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a nonreimbursable basis, any personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its administrative and clerical functions.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Administrative and Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall furnish the Commission, on a non-reimbursable basis, any administrative and support services requested by the Commission consistent with this Act.
COMPENSATION AND TRAVEL EXPENSES.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission may be compensated at not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
SECURITY CLEARANCES FOR COMMISSION MEMBERS AND STAFF.&lt;plus-minus&gt; The appropriate departments, agencies, and other entities of the United States Government shall cooperate with the Commission in expeditiously providing to the Commission members and staff appropriate security clearances in a manner consistent with existing procedures and requirements, except that no person shall be provided with access to classified information under this section who would not otherwise qualify for such security clearance.
Interim Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit an interim report to the President and the Congress describing its activities since the date of enactment of this Act.
Final Report.--Not later than September 11, 2002, the Commission shall submit a final report to the President and the Congress describing its activities since the date of enactment of this Act, together with a summary of the comprehensive assessment and recommendations made by the Commission under section 3(b).
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Act of September 18, 2001 (Public Law 107-38), amounts appropriated by that Act shall be available to carry out the provisions of this Act.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall terminate 60 days after the date of the submission of the final report required by section 8(b).
Wind Up Activities.--The Commission may use the 60-day period referred to in subsection (a) for the purpose of concluding its activities, including providing testimony to congressional committees concerning its final report and disseminating that report.