This Act may be cited as the ``Liberian Relief, Rehabilitation, and Reconstruction Act of 1994''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) due to the long historical ties between the United States and Liberia, and the support that the United States provided to the Doe regime during the 1980s, the United States has a unique responsibility to the people of Liberia; (2) the United States should continue to provide support to the United Nations peacekeeping forces in Liberia in order to end the civil war that began in December 1989, has claimed 150,000 lives, and has left 1,700,000 persons displaced; (3) supporting and facilitating the cease-fire in Liberia that became effective August 1, 1993, provides the United States with an opportunity to fulfill its responsibility to the people of Liberia by helping to restore political order in that country; and (4) the United States should continue to help the people of Liberia by providing a substantial commitment of assistance for the reconstruction of that country.
Chapter 9 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2292-2292p) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
LIBERIAN CIVIL STRIFE ASSISTANCE.
Authorization of Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance for civil strife relief, rehabilitation, and general recovery in Liberia.
Assistance under this section shall be for humanitarian purposes and shall be provided on a grant basis.
Use of Funds.--In providing the assistance authorized in subsection (a), priority shall be given to funding activities which-- ``(1) maximize the use of private voluntary agencies for relief, rehabilitation, and recovery projects; ``(2) emphasize emergency health projects, including efforts to rehabilitate the primary health care system of Liberia; ``(3) contribute to the restoration of schools and the general education system, including efforts to support the teaching of displaced children; and ``(4) contribute to efforts by the international community to respond to Liberian relief and development needs.
Authorization of Appropriations; Transfers.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition to the amounts otherwise available for such purpose, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President $45,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and $45,000,000 for fiscal year 1995 for use in providing assistance under this section.
Management support activities.--The President is authorized to transfer up to $750,000 of the amount appropriated pursuant to this section in each of fiscal years 1994 and 1995 to the `Operating Expenses of the Agency for International Development' account.
These funds shall be used for management support activities associated with the planning, monitoring, and supervision of emergency humanitarian assistance for Liberia.
Development fund for africa.--The President is authorized to transfer to the Development Fund for Africa funds appropriated pursuant to this section for use in supporting longer-term rehabilitation activities in Liberia.
Policies and authorities to be applied.--Assistance under this section shall be furnished in accordance with the policies and general authorities contained in section 491.''.
MIGRATION AND REFUGEE ASSISTANCE.
Authorization of Appropriations.--In addition to amounts otherwise available for such purpose, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of State for ``Migration and Refugee Assistance'' $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1995 for emergency relief, repatriation, and rehabilitation efforts for Liberian refugees who have fled civil strife and, where appropriate, for support of relief programs assisting local populations in the bordering countries of Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Cote d'Ivoire, and other countries in the region, which have been affected by the influx of Liberian refugees.
Provision of Assistance.--To the extent feasible, assistance authorized under this section shall be provided through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other international relief organizations.
EMERGENCY FOOD ASSISTANCE FOR LIBERIA.
Authorization of Assistance.--In addition to the assistance provided under section 495L of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (as added by section 3 of this Act) and section 4 of this Act, the President is authorized to provide supplemental emergency food assistance for civilian victims of civil strife in Liberia, including additional emergency food assistance (primarily rice, processed foods, and oils) for the needs of the affected and displaced civilian population of Liberia under title II of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 and to provide ocean and inland transport of such food assistance.
Use of Grants.--In providing assistance authorized by this section, the President is authorized to make grants to United States, international, and indigenous private and voluntary organizations as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Transfers and General Authorities.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition to the amounts otherwise available for such purpose, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President $27,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and $27,000,000 for fiscal year 1995 for use in providing assistance under this section.
Management support activities.--The President is authorized to transfer up to $500,000 of the amount appropriated pursuant to this section in each of fiscal years 1994 and 1995 to the ``Operating Expenses of the Agency for International Development'' account.
These funds shall be used for management support activities associated with the planning, monitoring, and supervision of emergency food assistance for Liberia that is provided under this section.
Additional Funds for Humanitarian Assistance for Liberia.-- (1) Use of local currencies.--In order to provide additional resources for relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction programs for victims of civil strife in Liberia, the Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall ensure that not less than $12,000,000 of the local currencies generated under title II of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 during fiscal year 1994, and not less than $12,000,000 of the local currencies generated under such title during fiscal year 1995, are used for disaster assistance purposes as are authorized by section 495L(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as added by this Act.
Assistance subject to availability of funds.--Paragraph (1) shall apply only to the extent that local currencies described in such paragraph are available.
Use of funds.--Funds made available pursuant to this subsection may be used for general relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction purposes and may include the provision or transport of emergency food assistance.
Such assistance shall be administered by the Agency for International Development.
Nonapplicability of Provision.--The assistance authorized for Liberia by this Act may be provided without regard to section 518 of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102-391), section 620(q) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2370(q)) (the so-called Brooke-Alexander amendment), or any similar provision of the law relating to foreign assistance repayments.
Regular Assistance Programs To Be Maintained.--Relief and rehabilitation assistance provided for Liberia under this Act, or any amendment made by this Act, is in addition to the regularly programmed assistance for that country for fiscal year 1994 or fiscal year 1995 under chapter 1 (relating to development assistance) or chapter 10 (relating to the Development Fund for Africa) of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and titles I, II, and III of the Agricultural Trade Development Assistance Act of 1954 (relating to food assistance).
Reconstruction Assistance Assessment.-- (1) Assessment.--The Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall compile a comprehensive assessment of the long-term reconstruction, rehabilitation, and development needs of Liberia.
Such assessment shall include an evaluation of the infrastructure of the country, particularly power generation, water and sewage systems, transportation, health facilities, and educational facilities.
The assessment shall indicate projected resources required for development and the levels of United States foreign assistance required for reconstruction in Liberia.
Report to congress.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to the appropriate committees of the Congress a detailed report of the assessment made under paragraph (1).
Foreign Assistance for Liberia.--Not later than January 31, 1995, and not later than January 31, 1996, the President shall submit to the Congress a report which analyzes the impact and effectiveness of United States assistance (including assistance provided under this Act) for Liberia during the two preceding fiscal years.