This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Professional Baseball Act of 1995''.
There is hereby established the National Commission on Professional Baseball (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of seven members, all of whom shall be appointed by the President.
The President shall appoint-- (1) one member after consultation with the owners of Major League Baseball; (2) one member after consultation with the Major League Baseball Players Association; (3) one member after consultation with the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues, Incorporated; (4) one member after solicitation of recommendations from government officials of cities, towns, or counties in which major league and minor league baseball teams are located; and (5) three members after consultation with baseball fan organizations and the informal solicitation of recommendations from the general public, one of whom the President shall designate as Chairman of the Commission.
Term.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for a five- year term.
In the event that the term of the Commission is extended by the Congress pursuant to section 10 of this Act, the term of individual members shall also be extended, except that no individual may serve as a member for more than six years.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but the Commission may provide for the taking of testimony and the reception of evidence at meetings at which there are present not less than three members of the Commission.
Appointment Date.--The first appointments made under subsection (a) shall be made within sixty days after the date of enactment of this Act.
First Meeting.--The first meeting of the Commission shall be called by the Chairman and shall be held within ninety days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Public Meetings.--All Commission meetings and hearings shall be open to the public.
Vacancy.--If any member of the Commission is unable to serve a full term or becomes unqualified to serve in such position, a new member shall be appointed to serve the remainder of such term of office, within forty-five days of the vacancy, in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The duties of the Commission are to oversee and investigate any aspect of major league baseball and minor league baseball, where, in the opinion of the Commission, it is in the best interests of baseball to intervene, including but not limited to the-- (1) negotiation of contract agreements between major league team owners and players; (2) renegotiation of the professional baseball agreement between major league and minor league team owners; (3) setting of ticket prices; (4) expansion and relocation of major league and minor league team franchises; (5) structural requirements and financing of baseball stadiums and facilities; (6) terms and conditions of minor league player contracts; (7) licensing of television broadcast rights and allocation of television revenues; (8) licensing and marketing of merchandise and allocation of revenues; and (9) revenue sharing among owners of major league teams and among the major and minor leagues.
Arbitration and Mediation.--The duty of the Commission to intervene in any aspect of major league or minor league baseball, pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall include but not be limited to the-- (1) conduct of binding arbitration in the event of a labor impasse between Major League Baseball and players; and (2) mediation or arbitration of disputes between Major League Baseball or individual owners of major league teams and minor league baseball team owners.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Meetings.--The Commission or, on authorization of the Commission, a panel of at least three members of the Commission, may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as the Commission considers appropriate.
Obtaining Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department, agency, or court information and assistance necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such agency or department shall furnish such information or assistance to the Commission.
In addition, the Commission may request any relevant information from any appropriate parties with an interest in major league or minor league baseball.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) Issuance.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence that relates to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within a judicial district at any designated place of hearing within the judicial district.
Enforcement.--If a person issued a subpoena under paragraph (1) refuses to obey the subpoena or is guilty of contumacy, any court of the United States within the judicial district within which the hearing is conducted or within the judicial district within which the person is found or resides or transacts business may (upon application by the Commission) order the person to appear before the Commission to produce evidence or to give testimony relating to the matter under investigation.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt of the court.
Manner of service.--A subpoena of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Place of service.--All process of any court to which application may be made under this section may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
Orders and Injunctions.--Whenever the Commission has reason to believe that an act or practice of Major League Baseball or of any individual owner of a major league baseball team may not be in the public interest or in the best interest of baseball, the Commission shall have authority-- (1) to issue orders to stay temporarily such act or practice pending review by the Commission or pending a request for mediation or arbitration of disputes involving such action submitted to the Commission by baseball players, minor league team owners, or public officials; and (2) to bring a civil action in an appropriate district court of the United States to enjoin such act or practice and, upon proper showing that such action would be in the public interest, to obtain a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction against such act or practice: Provided, however, That in proper cases the Commission may seek, and upon proper showing of proof, the court may grant a permanent injunction.
Facilities and Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such facilities and support services as the Commission may request.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of a Federal department or agency may make any of the facilities and services of such agency available to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Expenditures and Contracts.--The Commission or, on authorization of the Commission, a member of the Commission may make expenditures and enter into contracts for the procurement of such supplies, services, and property as the Commission or members consider appropriate for the purposes of carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Such expenditures and contracts may be made only to such extent or in such amounts as appropriated under section 9 of this Act.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal departments and agencies of the United States.
COMPENSATION OF THE COMMISSION.
Compensation.--Each member of the Commission shall be a full- time Federal employee and shall be paid at an annual rate of basic pay payable for level II of the Executive Schedule under section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
Expenses.--Members of the Commission shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Staff.-- (1) Appointment.--The Chairman of the Commission may appoint and terminate no more than ten staff personnel to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
Compensation.--The Chairman of the Commission may fix the compensation of personnel without regard to the provision of chapter 51 and subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of position and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Commission Study.--The Commission shall undertake a study of the antitrust exemption for Major League Baseball that shall include but not be limited to analysis of the-- (1) effects of the antitrust exemption on major league and minor league baseball players, minor league baseball teams, baseball fans, local governments, and taxpayers of municipalities in which baseball teams are located; (2) possible effects of continuing the antitrust exemption; (3) possible effects of proposals for modification of the antitrust exemption on Major League Baseball, minor league baseball teams, major league and minor league baseball players, baseball fans, local governments, and taxpayers, including but not limited to proposals for-- (A) elimination of the antitrust exemption; (B) partial elimination of the antitrust exemption for purposes of labor relations between Major League Baseball and professional baseball players or for purposes of major league team franchise expansion or relocation; and (C) elimination of the antitrust exemption with protections to hold harmless existing contractual relationships between major league and minor league baseball teams with respect to player development, territorial arrangements, and other activities that might otherwise be subject to the antitrust laws.
Report.--Not later than three years after the date of the enactment of the Act, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a report containing its findings and conclusions pursuant to this section, together with its recommendations as to any legislation it may consider appropriate for modification of the antitrust exemption for Major League Baseball.
Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated such funds as may be necessary to carry out this title, except that the amount of such funds shall not exceed the amount of funds made available pursuant to subsection (b) of this section.
All funds appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.
Fees.--Major League Baseball shall pay to the Treasury of the United States on or before March 15 of each calendar year a fee in the amount of two-tenths of 1 per centum of the aggregate dollar amount of combined team revenues received during each preceding calendar year, except that the Commission, by rule, may exempt any revenue or class of revenue from any fee imposed by this subsection, if the Commission finds that such exemption is consistent with the public interest.
The Commission, by rule, shall set forth the manner and terms under which such payment shall be made after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and Major League Baseball.
Payment of any fee under this subsection shall be made for each of the five years that this Act shall be effective, and for any additional years the Congress shall determine pursuant to section 10 of this Act.
TERM OF THE COMMISSION.
The duties and powers set forth in this Act shall cease to be effective five years after the date of enactment, unless otherwise extended by the Congress.
This Act shall take effect on the date of enactment.