This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care and Housing for Women and Children Act of 1993''.
TITLE I--MATERNAL HEALTH CERTIFICATES PROGRAM SEC.
MATERNAL HEALTH CERTIFICATES FOR ELIGIBLE PREGNANT WOMEN.
Establishment of Maternal Health Certificates for Eligible Pregnant Women.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish a program to provide maternal health certificates for eligible pregnant women to use to cover expenses incurred in receiving services at a maternity and housing services facility.
Eligibility of Individuals.-- (1) In general.--A pregnant woman is eligible to receive a maternal health certificate under the program established under subsection (a) if the woman-- (A) has an annual individual income (determined without taking into account the income of any parent or guardian of the individual) not greater than 175 percent of the income official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to such individual; and (B) provides the Secretary with such other information and assurances as the Secretary may require.
Income of estranged spouse not included.--In determining the income of an individual for purposes of paragraph (1)(A), there shall not be included the income of a spouse if the spouse has been living apart from the woman for not less than 6 months.
Participation in afdc program not required.--An individual otherwise eligible to receive a maternal health certificate under the program established under subsection (a) shall not be found ineligible to receive such a certificate solely on the grounds that the individual does not receive aid under the State plan for aid to families with dependent children under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act.
Limitations on Amount of Expenses Incurred.--A certificate received under the program established under subsection (a) may be used to cover an amount of expenses incurred by an individual at a maternity housing and services facility that does not exceed an amount equal to-- (1) $100; multiplied by (2) the number of days during which such services are provided to the individual at such facility.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Maternity and housing services facility.--The term ``maternity and housing services facility'' means a nonprofit facility licensed or otherwise approved by the State in which the facility is located to serve as a residence for not fewer than 4 pregnant women during pregnancy and for a limited period after the date on which the child carried during the pregnancy is born, as the Secretary may determine, that provides such pregnant women with appropriate supportive services, which may include the following supportive services: (A) Room and board.
Medical care (provided either at the facility or off-site) for the woman and her child, including prenatal, delivery, and post-delivery care.
Instruction and counseling regarding future health care for the woman and her child.
Nutrition services and nutrition counseling.
Counseling and education concerning all aspects of prenatal care, childbirth, and motherhood.
General family counseling, including child and family development counseling.
Vocational and educational counseling and services.
Basic transportation services to enable the woman to obtain services from the facility.
Pregnant woman.--The term ``pregnant woman'' means a woman determined to have one or more fetuses in utero.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for maternal health certificates under this section-- (1) $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1993; (2) $75,000,000 for fiscal year 1994; and (3) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
TITLE II--REHABILITATION GRANTS FOR MATERNITY HOUSING AND SERVICES FACILITIES SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF GRANT PROGRAM.
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall carry out a program to provide assistance under this title to eligible nonprofit entities for rehabilitation of existing structures for use as facilities to provide housing and services to pregnant women.
Authority.--The Secretary may make grants under the program under this title to eligible nonprofit entities to rehabilitate existing structures for use as maternity housing and services facilities.
Applications.--The Secretary may make grants only to nonprofit entities that submit applications for grants under this title in the form and manner that the Secretary shall prescribe, which shall include assurances that grant amounts will be used to provide a maternity housing and services facility.
Maximum Grant Amount.--A grant under this title may not be in an amount greater than $1,000,000.
An eligible nonprofit entity may not receive more than 1 grant under this title in any fiscal year.
Maximum Number of Grants.--The Secretary may not make grants under this title to more than 100 eligible nonprofit entities in any fiscal year.
Use of Grants for Rehabilitation Activities.--Any eligible nonprofit entity that receives a grant under this title shall use the grant amounts for the acquisition or rehabilitation (or both) of existing structures for use as a maternity housing and services facility, which may include planning and development costs, professional fees, and administrative costs related to such acquisition or rehabilitation.
The Secretary shall require each eligible nonprofit entity that receives a grant under this title to submit to the Secretary a report, at such times and including such information as the Secretary shall determine, describing the activities carried out by the eligible nonprofit entity with the grant amounts.
For purposes of this title: (1) Eligible nonprofit entities.--The term ``eligible nonprofit entity'' means any organization that-- (A) is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is exempt from taxation under subtitle A of such Code; and (B) has submitted an application under section 702(b) for a grant under this title.
Maternity housing and services facility.--The term ``maternity housing and services facility'' means a facility licensed or otherwise approved by the State in which the facility is located to serve as a residence for not fewer than 4 pregnant women during pregnancy and for a limited period after the date on which the child carried during the pregnancy is born, as the Secretary may determine, that provides such pregnant women with appropriate supportive services, which may include the following services: (A) Room and board.
Medical care for the woman and her child, including prenatal, delivery, and post-delivery care.
Instruction and counseling regarding future health care for the woman and her child.
Nutrition services and nutrition counseling.
Counseling and education concerning all aspects of prenatal care, childbirth, and motherhood.
General family counseling, including child and family development counseling.
Vocational and educational counseling and services.
Basic transportation services to enable the woman to obtain services from the facility.
Any other appropriate supportive services.
Pregnant woman.--The term ``pregnant woman'' means a woman determined to have one or more fetuses in utero.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and $60,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.