Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Although title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 United States Code 1681 et sequentes) does not prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, one section of the Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights' 1997 final policy guidance, entitled ``Sexual Harassment Guidance: Harassment of Students by School Employees, Other Students, or Third Parties'' published in the Federal Register on March 13, 1997, 62 Fed.
12034, included a determination that ``sexual harassment directed at gay or lesbian students that is sufficiently serious to limit or deny a student's ability to participate in or benefit from the school's program constitutes sexual harassment prohibited by title IX under the circumstances described in this guidance.''.
This language was unchanged in a 2001 update of the policy guidance entitled ``Revised Sexual Harassment Guidance: Harassment of Students by School Employees, Other Students, or Third Parties'' for which a notice of availability was published in the Federal Register on January 19, 2001, 66 Fed.
That section of the 2001 ``Revised Sexual Harassment Guidance: Harassment of Students by School Employees, Other Students, or Third Parties'' went on to state: ``Though beyond the scope of this guidance, gender-based harassment, which may include acts of verbal, nonverbal, or physical aggression, intimidation, or hostility based on sex or sex-stereotyping, but not involving conduct of a sexual nature, is also a form of sex discrimination to which a school must respond, if it rises to the level that denies or limits a student's ability to participate in or benefit from the educational program....A school must respond to such harassment in accordance with the standards and procedures described in this guidance.''.
There is evidence that brings into question the degree to which the policy guidance on sexual harassment against gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender students is being implemented.
For example, a 7-State study by Human Rights Watch of the abuses suffered by gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender students at the hands of their peers, published in ``Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Students in United States Reports Schools'' found that such students were often the victims of abuses.
A 2000 study by the American Association of University Women focused on implementation of title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 more generally, and the findings of that study, published in ``A License for Bias: Sex Discrimination, Schools, and Title IX'', included a finding that many schools and universities have not established procedures for handling title IX-based grievances.
The 2001 report of the Surgeon General, entitled ``Surgeon General's Call to Action to Promote Sexual Health and Responsible Sexual Behavior'' notes that ``antihomosexual attitudes are associated with psychological distress for homosexual persons and may have a negative impact on mental health, including a greater incidence of depression and suicide, lower self-acceptance and a greater likelihood of hiding sexual orientation.''.
It goes on to report: ``Averaged over two dozen studies, 80 percent of gay men and lesbians had experienced verbal or physical harassment on the basis of their orientation, 45 percent had been threatened with violence, and 17 percent had experienced a physical attack.''.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide for an examination of how secondary schools are implementing the policy guidance of the Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights related to sexual harassment directed against gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender students.
STUDY OF HOW EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS ARE IMPLEMENTING THE POLICY GUIDANCE RELATING TO SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
In General.--The United States Commission on Civil Rights (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'') shall conduct a study of the 1997 final policy guidance entitled ``Sexual Harassment Guidance: Harassment of Students by School Employees, Other Students, or Third Parties'' published in the Federal Register on March 13, 1997, 62 Fed.
12034, and the application of such policy guidance.
Scope.-- (1) Nationwide.--The study shall be conducted nationwide.
Elements of study.--The study shall examine, at a minimum, with regard to secondary schools-- (A) the extent to which there exists sexual harassment against gay and lesbian students in secondary schools, using the applicable standards in the policy guidance of the Office for Civil Rights described in subsection (a); (B) the extent to which there exists gender-based harassment that negatively affects the learning environment of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender students in secondary schools, applying the definition of such gender-based harassment contained in the 2001 update of the policy guidance entitled ``Revised Sexual Harassment Guidance: Harassment of Students by School Employees, Other Students, or Third Parties'' for which a notice of availability was published in the Federal Register on January 19, 2001, 66 Fed.
5512; (C) the level of awareness by school officials and students of the policy guidance described in subsection (a); and (D) the level of implementation of such policy guidance.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``secondary school'' has the meaning given the term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
In General.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall transmit to Congress and to the Secretary of Education-- (1) a report of the Commission's findings under section 2; and (2) any policy recommendations developed by the Commission based upon the study carried out under section 2.
Dissemination.--The report and recommendations shall be disseminated, in a manner that is easily understandable, to the public by means that include the Internet.
COOPERATION OF FEDERAL AGENCIES.
In General.--The head of each Federal department or agency shall cooperate in all respects with the Commission with respect to the study under section 2.
Information.--The head of each Federal department or agency shall provide to the Commission, to the extent permitted by law, such data, reports, and documents concerning the subject matter of such study as the Commission may request.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``Federal department or agency'' means any agency as defined in section 551 of title 5, United States Code.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2002.
Availability.--Any amount appropriated under the authority of subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.