BAN ON CHILDREN'S PRODUCTS THAT CONTAIN LEAD.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Young children are exposed to lead in consumer products by swallowing or directly mouthing objects containing lead or from handling such objects and subsequently putting their hands in their mouths.
The adverse health effects of lead poisoning in children are well-documented and may have long-lasting or permanent consequences, including neurological damage, delayed mental and physical development, attention and learning deficiencies, hearing problems, and in extreme and rare cases, death.
Children are particularly susceptible to the effects of lead poisoning, and, because lead accumulates in the body, even exposures to small amounts of lead contribute to the overall level of lead in the blood and to the risk of adverse health effects.
Eliminating or reducing the exposure of children to lead will prevent or limit the harmful effects of lead on children.
In January of 1998, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, which has jurisdiction over consumer products, issued a guidance for lead in consumer products, urging manufacturers to eliminate lead in consumer products.
Since January of 1998, the Consumer Product Safety Commission has recalled over 50 different children's products that contain lead.
Ban on Children's Products That Contain Lead.-- (1) In general.--Beginning on the date that is 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, any children's product that contains lead shall be treated as a banned hazardous substance under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1261 et sequentes) and the prohibitions contained in section 4 of such Act shall apply without regard to whether the lead contained in such children's product is accessible to children.
Definitions.--In this section: (A) Children's product defined.--The term ``children's product'' means any consumer product marketed for use by children under the age of 7, or any product the substantial use of which by children under the age of 7 is foreseeable.
Children's product that contains lead.--The term ``children's product that contains lead'' means-- (i) in the case of a children's product that is jewelry, a product any part of which contains lead or lead compounds and the lead content of such part (calculated as lead metal) is greater than 0.02 percent by weight of the total weight of such part; and (ii) in the case of a children's product that is not jewelry, a product any part of which contains lead or lead compounds and the lead content of such part (calculated as lead metal) is greater than 0.04 percent by weight of the total weight of such part.
Regulations.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Consumer Product Safety Commission shall determine whether thresholds lower than those described in clauses (i) and (ii) of paragraph (2)(B) should be prescribed for children's products.
If the Commission makes such a determination, the Commission shall prescribe regulations establishing lower thresholds in lieu of the thresholds established in such clauses.
Successor regulations.--If, after a determination has been made in accordance with subparagraph (A), the Consumer Product Safety Commission makes a subsequent determination that thresholds lower than those described in clauses (i) and (ii) of paragraph (2)(B) or prescribed in accordance with subparagraph (A) should be prescribed for children's products, the Commission may prescribe regulations establishing lower thresholds in lieu of the thresholds established in such clauses or in accordance with such subparagrpah.
Construction.--Subsection (b) shall not be construed to alter or amend the provisions of part 1303 of title 16, Code of Federal Regulations (relating to the ban of lead-containing paint and certain consumer products bearing lead-containing paint) or any successor regulation.