HONESTY IN SWEEPSTAKES ACT OF 1999.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Honesty in Sweepstakes Act of 1999''.
Unmailable Matter.--Section 3001 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by-- (1) redesignating subsections (j) and (k) as subsections (l) and (m), respectively; and (2) inserting after subsection (i) the following: ``(j)(1) Matter otherwise legally acceptable in the mails that-- ``(A) constitutes a solicitation or offer in connection with the sales promotion for a product or service (including any sweepstakes) that includes the chance or opportunity to win anything of value; and ``(B) contains words or symbols that suggest that-- ``(i) the recipient has or will receive anything of value if that recipient has in fact not won that thing of value; or ``(ii) the recipient is likely to receive anything of value if statistically the recipient is not likely to receive anything of value, shall not be carried or delivered by mail, and may be disposed of as the Postal Service directs, unless such matter bears the notice described in paragraph (2).
(A) The notice referred to in paragraph (1) is the following notice: ``(i) `This is a game of chance (or sweepstakes, if applicable).
You have not automatically won.
Your chances of winning are (inserting corresponding mathematical probability for each prize shown).
No purchase is required either to win a prize or enhance your chances of winning a prize.
', or a notice to the same effect in words which the Postal Service may prescribe; or ``(ii) a standardized Postal Service designed warning label to the same effect as the Postal Service may prescribe.
The notice described in subparagraph (A) shall be in conspicuous and legible type in contrast by typography, layout, or color with other printing on its face, in accordance with regulations that the Postal Service shall prescribe and be prominently displayed on the first page of the enclosed printed material and on any other pages enclosed.
If the matter described in paragraph (1) is an envelope, the face of the envelope shall bear the notice described in subparagraph (A).
If the matter described in paragraph (1) is an order entry device, the face of the order entry device shall bear the following notice: `` `This is a game of chance (or sweepstakes, if applicable).
No purchase is required either to win a prize or enhance your chances of winning a prize.
', or a notice to the same effect in words which the Postal Service may prescribe.
Matter otherwise legally acceptable in the mails that constitutes a solicitation or offer in connection with the sales promotion for a product or service that uses any matter resembling a negotiable instrument shall not be carried or delivered by mail, and may be disposed of as the Postal Service directs, unless such matter bears on the face of the negotiable instrument in conspicuous and legible type in contrast by typography, layout, or color with other printing on its face, in accordance with regulations which the Postal Service shall prescribe the following notice: `This is not a check (or negotiable instrument).
This has no cash value.
', or a notice to the same effect in words which the Postal Service may prescribe.''.
Technical Amendment.--Section 3005(a) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by-- (1) striking ``or'' after ``(h),'' both places it appears; and (2) inserting ``, (j), or (k)'' after ``(i)''.
Penalties.-- (1) In general.--Section 3012 of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsections (b), (c), and (d), as subsections (c), (d), and (e), respectively; (B) by inserting after subsection (a) the following: ``(b) Any person who, through use of the mail, sends any matter which is nonmailable under sections 3001 (a) through (k), 3014, or 3015 of this title, shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty in accordance with regulations the Postal Service shall prescribe.
The civil penalty shall not exceed $50,000 for each mailing of less than 50,000 pieces; $100,000 for each mailing of 50,000 to 100,000 pieces; with an additional $10,000 for each additional 10,000 pieces above 100,000, not to exceed $2,000,000.
''; (C) in subsection (c)(1) and (2), as redesignated, by inserting after ``of subsection (a)'' the following: ``or subsection (b),''; and (D) in subsection (d), as redesignated, by striking ``Treasury of the United States'' and inserting ``Postal Service Fund established by section 2003 of this title''.
Allocation of Funds.--It is the sense of Congress that civil penalties collected through the enforcement of the amendment made by paragraph (1) should be allocated by the Postal Service to increase consumer awareness of misleading solicitations received through the mail, including releasing an annual listing of the top 10 offenders of the Honesty in Sweepstakes Act of 1999.
No Preemption.--Nothing in this Act shall preempt any State law that regulates advertising or sales promotions or goods and services that includes the chance or opportunity to win anything of value.