This Act may be cited as the ``Oil Shale Reserve Fund Revenue Disposition Act''.
DISPOSITION OF QUALIFIED OIL SHALE REVENUES.
Section 7439 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (f)-- (A) in paragraph (1)-- (i) by striking ``all moneys received during the period specified in paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``during the period beginning on November 18, 1997, and ending on December 31, 2017, all amounts received''; and (ii) by striking ``and shall not be subject to the distribution to the states pursuant to subsection (a) of such section 35'' and inserting ``for distribution in accordance with subsection (g)''; and (B) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following: ``(2) Any amounts deposited under paragraph (1) shall not be subject to distribution to the States under section 35(a) of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 191(a)).
''; and (2) by striking subsection (g) and inserting the following: ``(g) Use of Revenues.-- ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection: ``(A) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term `State' means the State of Colorado.
State fund.--The term `State fund' means the oil shale special fund established under Colo. Rev.
United States Statutes at Large 34-63-104.
Distribution of revenues.--Of the amounts deposited in the general fund of the Treasury under subsection (f)(1)-- ``(A) 50 percent shall be transferred from the Secretary of the Treasury to the State for deposit in the State fund, for use in accordance with paragraph (3); and ``(B) 50 percent shall be deposited in a special account of the Treasury, to be available to the Secretary without further appropriation until expended, for use in accordance with paragraph (4).
Use of state fund.--Amounts deposited in the State fund under paragraph (2)(A) shall be used by the State in accordance with the provisions of the State fund to assist State agencies, school districts, and political subdivisions of the State affected by the development and production of energy resources from oil shale land in planning for and providing facilities and services associated with the development and production.
Use of special account.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall use amounts deposited in the special account under paragraph (2)(B) only for 1 or more of the following purposes: ``(i) Any necessary environmental restoration, waste management, or environmental compliance activities with respect to Oil Shale Reserve Numbered 3 that are-- ``(I) the responsibility of the United States; and ``(II)(aa) identified in the report relating to Oil Shale Reserve Numbered 3 submitted by the Secretary to Congress in November 2005; or ``(bb) identified by the Secretary after the date of the submission of the report described in item (aa).
Any necessary additional analysis, site characterization, and geotechnical studies or monitoring that the Secretary determines to be necessary to support environmental restoration, waste management, or environmental compliance with respect to Oil Shale Reserve Numbered 3.
Financial assistance to local governments in the States of Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming affected by the development and production of energy resources from oil shale land in the form of grants awarded in a manner prescribed by the Secretary to carry out planning for, and providing infrastructure that may be necessary to address, community needs created by new energy production and development activities.
Financial assistance to the States of Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming for purposes of-- ``(I) conducting studies requested by the Secretary; or ``(II) carrying out coordination and consultation activities under this section.
Any additional administrative costs incurred by the Bureau of Land Management for the coordination and processing of use authorizations on Federal land, inspection and enforcement activities, and monitoring necessary to implement section 369 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 15927).
Coordination.--To ensure accountability and demonstrated results, the Secretary shall coordinate with the Secretary of Energy, the State, local governments, and other interested persons in using amounts in the special account under this paragraph.