This Act may be cited as the ``International Financial Institution Reexamination and Review Commission Act of 1998''.
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTION REEXAMINATION AND REVIEW COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a commission to be known as the International Financial Institution Reexamination and Review Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of twelve members, as follows: (A) 4 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
4 members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
2 members appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
2 members appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Timing of appointments.--All appointments to the Commission shall be made not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Qualifications.-- (1) In general.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed from among those with knowledge and expertise in the workings of the international financial institutions (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act), the World Trade Organization, and the Bank for International Settlements.
Affiliation.--At least 4 members of the Commission shall be individuals who were officers or employees of the Executive Branch before January 20, 1992, and not more than half of such 4 members shall have served under Presidents from the same political party.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Duties of the Commission.--The Commission shall advise and report to the Congress on the future role and responsibilities of the international financial institutions (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act), the World Trade Organization, and the Bank for International Settlements.
In carrying out such duties, the Commission shall examine-- (1) the effect of globalization, increased trade, capital flows, and other relevant factors on such institutions; (2) the adequacy, efficacy, and desirability of current policies and programs at such institutions as well as their suitability for respective beneficiaries of such institutions; (3) cooperation or duplication of functions and responsibilities of such institutions; and (4) other matters the Commission deems necessary to make recommendations pursuant to subsection (g).
Powers and Procedures of the Commission.-- (1) Hearings.--The Commission or, at its direction, any panel or member of the Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, receive evidence, and administer oaths to the extent that the Commission or any panel or member considers advisable.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly information that the Commission considers necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
Chairman.--The members appointed under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (b)(1) shall select the Chairman of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Report.--On the termination of the Commission, the Commission shall submit Secretary of the Treasury, the Committees on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and on Appropriations of the Senate, and the Committees on Banking and Financial Services and on Appropriations of the House of Representatives a report that contains recommendations regarding the following matters: (1) Changes to policy goals set forth in the Bretton Woods Agreements Act and the International Financial Institutions Act.
Changes to the charters, organizational structures, policies and programs of the international financial institutions (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act).
Additional monitoring tools, global standards, or regulations for, among other things, global capital flows, bankruptcy standards, accounting standards, payment systems, and safety and soundness principles for financial institutions.
Possible mergers or abolition of the international financial institutions (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act), including changes to the manner in which such institutions coordinate their policy and program implementation and their roles and responsibilities.
Any additional changes necessary to stabilize currencies, promote continued trade liberalization and to avoid future financial crises.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 6 months after the first meeting of the Commission, which shall be not later than 30 days after the appointment of all members of the Commission.
Feasibility and Implementation Reports by the Executive Branch.-- (1) Within three months of receiving the report of the Commission under subsection (g), the President of the United States through the Secretary of the Treasury shall report to the committees specified in subsection (g) on the desirability and feasibility of implementing the recommendations contained in the report.
Annually, for three years after the termination of the Commission, the President of the United States through the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the committees specified in subsection (g) a report on the steps taken through relevant international institutions and international fora to implement such recommendations.