This Act may be cited as the ``Teacher Mentoring Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) High-quality teaching is essential to improving the Nation's educational system.
High teacher turnover rates severely hamper the ability to create and maintain a high-quality teaching and learning environment.
Approximately one-third of the Nation's new teachers leave the teaching profession during their first 3 years of teaching, and almost one-half leave during their first 5 years of teaching.
Turnover is highest in low-income schools, where the turnover rate is almost one-third higher than the corresponding rate for all teachers in all schools.
Teachers who have left the profession report that better support for beginning teachers is among the 5 top policy reforms that would help school systems retain more teachers.
Teachers without mentoring programs have been shown to leave the profession at a rate almost 70 percent higher than those with mentoring programs.
It is in the best interest of the United States to ensure that all students have access to a high-quality education through the promotion of mentoring programs that assist in the development of highly qualified teachers, particularly in low-income areas.
GRANTS FOR TEACHER MENTORING PROGRAMS.
Grants.--Part C of title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6671 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subpart 6--Teacher Mentoring Programs ``SEC.
Establishment.--For the purpose of providing guidance and assistance to new teachers and improving teacher quality, the Secretary may award grants on a competitive basis to local educational agencies to establish or implement teacher mentoring programs.
Use of Funds.--The Secretary may not award a grant under this section to a local educational agency unless the agency agrees to use the grant to establish or implement a teacher mentoring program that-- ``(1) will establish and implement minimum qualifications for mentors; ``(2) will provide training and stipends for mentors; ``(3) will provide mentoring programs for teachers in their first year of teaching; ``(4) will provide regular and ongoing opportunities for mentors and mentees to observe each other's teaching methods in classroom settings during the school day; ``(5) will establish an evaluation and accountability plan for activities conducted under such grant that includes rigorous objectives to measure the impact of such activities; and ``(6) will report to the Secretary on an annual basis regarding the agency's progress in meeting the objectives described in paragraph (5).
Low-Performing Schools.--The Secretary may not award a grant under this section to a local educational agency unless the agency agrees that, in establishing or implementing a teacher mentoring program with the grant, the agency will prioritize funding for mentoring activities at elementary and secondary schools which the agency identifies under section 1116(b) as failing to make adequate yearly progress.
Duration.--Each grant awarded under this section shall be for a period of 3 years.
LOW-INCOME LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
Priority.--Of the grants awarded under section 2371 for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall award not less than 50 percent of such grants to low-income local educational agencies.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `low- income local educational agency' means a local educational agency for which-- ``(1) not less that 30 percent of the children served by the agency are from families with incomes below the poverty line; and ``(2)(A) there is a high percentage of out-of-field teachers (as that term is defined at section 2102); ``(B) the number or percentage of unfilled teaching positions at the schools served by such agency is higher than the corresponding number or percentage for not less than 75 percent of all the local educational agencies in the State; or ``(C) there is a high teacher turnover rate.
``In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary should seek to ensure an equitable geographic distribution among the regions of the United States and among local educational agencies located in urban, rural, and suburban areas.
``To seek a grant under this section, a local educational agency shall, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may require, submit an application to the Secretary containing the following: ``(1) A plan for establishing a mentor program described in this subpart.
A description of how the activities to be carried out under the program will improve new teacher experiences and increase teacher retention rates.
A description of the research on teacher mentoring that is the basis for the plan.
A description of the evaluation and accountability plan to be established.
Such other information as the Secretary may require.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subpart such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents at section 2 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 2368 the following: ``Subpart 6--Teacher Mentoring Programs ``Sec.
Low-income local educational agencies.
Report.--Not less than 3 years after the date of the first award of a grant under the program established by the amendments made by this section, the Secretary of Education shall submit a report to the Congress on the results of such program, including the impact of mentoring programs assisted under this Act on teacher retention rates.