This Act may be cited as the ``Tribal-State Tax Fairness Act of 2000''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Covered state tax.--The term ``covered State tax'' means a lawfully imposed and nondiscriminatory State excise, sales, or transaction tax levied or imposed on purchases, by nonmembers of a tribe, of tobacco products or motor fuels from a tribal retail enterprise, including a non-Indian retailer affiliated with an Indian tribe.
Indian country.--The term ``Indian country'' means-- (A) all lands within the limits of any Indian reservation; and (B) all lands title to which is either held in trust by the United States for the benefit of any Federally recognized Indian tribe or individual Indian or held by any Indian tribe or individual Indian subject to restriction by the United States against alienation and over which an Indian tribe exercises governmental power.
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(e) of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
Person.--The term ``person'' means individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations of persons, State or local governments, or Indian tribal governments.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior or his or her designee.
Service.--The term ``Service'' means the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service established under section 202 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 172).
Tribal retail enterprise.--The term ``tribal retail enterprise'' means a retail store carrying on business in Indian country that sells tobacco products or motor fuels and is owned or operated by a person or an Indian tribe or a member of an Indian tribe, or is owned or operated by a person who is not a member of an Indian tribe under a management contract with an Indian tribe or a member of an Indian tribe.
Tribal-state agreement.--The term ``tribal-State agreement'' means an agreement or compact between a State and an Indian tribe concerning State taxes on tobacco products or motor fuels that is in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, or was in effect at any time between January 1, 1990, and the date of enactment of this Act.
In General.--Except to the extent that a tribal-State agreement provides otherwise, this Act shall not apply to any covered State tax for which-- (1) a State law specifically exempts, either in whole or in part, the collection or remittance of such taxes; (2) the legal incidence of the otherwise applicable State tax falls on a tribe or its members, thereby subjecting the purchase by a tribal member from a tribal retail enterprise to a State excise, sales, or transaction tax; or (3) the State tax is preempted by the operation of Federal law.
Prospective Applicability.--This Act shall apply only to covered State taxes due, or amounts due under tribal-State agreements, with respect to purchases completed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
COLLECTION OF COVERED STATE TAXES PURSUANT TO STATE PETITIONS.
Collection and Remittance of Taxes.--Not later than 60 days after receiving a petition from the Governor of a State within the borders of which a tribal retail enterprise is located alleging the non-collection of a covered State tax by the tribal retail enterprise, the Secretary shall determine whether or not the tribal retail enterprise is collecting and remitting the appropriate amount of covered State tax according to the laws of such State) (if no tribal- State agreement exists) or the terms of a tribal-State agreement (if a tribal-State agreement exists).
Upon a determination of non-collection and non-remittance, the Secretary shall notify and direct the tribal retail enterprise to collect the covered State tax and remit it to the Secretary pursuant to subsection (b).
Remittance to Secretary.-- (1) In general.--A tribal retail enterprise shall remit to the Secretary covered State taxes collected pursuant to subsection (a) on a monthly basis, by the 15th day following the month in which the taxes were collected.
Determination of amount to be remitted to secretary.-- (A) Existence of tribal-state agreement.--In the event a tribal-State agreement exists or existed with respect to the tribal retail enterprise or Indian tribe named in a subsection (a) petition, then the amount of covered State taxes remitted to the Secretary pursuant to such a petition shall in no event be more than the amount provided for by the terms of such tribal-State agreement, even if such tribal-State agreement is no longer in effect at the time of the subsection (a) petition because the agreement has expired or one of the parties to the agreement has terminated the agreement.
Absence of tribal-state agreement.--In the event a tribal-State agreement with respect to the tribal retail enterprise or Indian tribe named in a subsection (a) petition did not or does not exist, then the Secretary shall consult with a State making the petition under subsection (a) to determine the appropriate amount of covered State taxes that should be remitted to the Secretary under this subsection based upon the volume of motor fuels and tobacco products sold to nontribal members at the tribal retail enterprise.
Mediation.--If necessary to determine the amount to be remitted under this subsection, the Secretary shall consult with the Service and establish a mediation between the Indian tribe and the State for the purposes of determining such amount.
The Service shall complete such mediation within 180 days of the initial consultation by the Secretary and render its determination on the appropriate amount to be remitted to the Secretary immediately.
Once the Secretary has received the Service's determination, that determination shall be used by the Secretary in establishing the appropriate amount to be remitted under subsection (a).
Exclusion.--Unless otherwise provided by a tribal-State agreement described in subsection (b)(2)(A), a tribal retail enterprise shall not remit to the Secretary any covered State taxes collected from tribal members from purchases of tobacco products and motor fuels.
Return of Funds to Appropriate State.--Not later than 30 days after receiving a covered State tax payment from a tribal retail enterprise or Indian tribe under subsection (b), the Secretary shall remit the balance of taxes collected under subsection (b) (after subtracting administrative expenses subject to subsection (d)) to the State fund specified by the Governor in the petition submitted under subsection (a).
Administrative Expenses.--Prior to the return of funds to the appropriate State under subsection (c), the Secretary shall deduct from the amount remitted from the tribal retail enterprise pursuant to subsection (b) an administrative fee that is equal to the direct cost of administering this Act.
The administrative fee deducted under this subsection shall not exceed one percent of the amounts remitted pursuant to subsection (b).
Satisfaction of Duties Under Tribal-State Agreement.--Amounts remitted to the Secretary under subsection (b) shall be applied by the State to amounts due under the terms of the tribal-State agreement described in subsection (b)(2)(A).
Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations providing for the implementation and enforcement of this Act.
Specific Prices.--No provision of this Act shall require any tribal retail enterprise to sell motor fuels or tobacco products at any specific price.
MEDIATION OF DISPUTES BETWEEN TRIBES AND STATES UNDER TRIBAL- STATE AGREEMENTS.
In General.--A State or an Indian tribe may petition the Secretary to mediate disputes between a State and an Indian tribe regarding compliance with the terms of a tribal-State agreement in effect on the date of such petition.
Mediation.--Within 60 days of receiving a petition under subsection (a), the Secretary shall either convene a mediation of the State and the Indian tribe to resolve the dispute or consult with the Service and establish a mediation between the Indian tribe and the State for the purposes of determining such amount.
The Service shall report its conclusions regarding the dispute contained in a subsection (a) within 180 days of the initial consultation by the Secretary.
Once the Secretary or the Service has made a determination regarding the issue in dispute, the Secretary shall notify the parties to the subsection (a) petition of the determination and urge the adoption of the determination by such parties.
Notice of Violation.--If a tribal retail enterprise fails to comply within 60 days with section 4(a) once the Secretary has made a determination under section 4(b), the Secretary shall notify the tribal retail enterprise of this violation and demand immediate compliance with the determination.
Referral of Violation to Department of Justice.--If a tribal retail enterprise is not in compliance with section 4 within 30 days of the notification under subsection (a), the Secretary shall refer the matter within 15 days to the Department of Justice.
Commencement of Civil Enforcement Action.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after a referral under subsection (b), the Department of Justice shall initiate a civil enforcement action in Federal district court against the tribal retail enterprise.
Tribal-owned retail enterprise.--If the tribal retail enterprise named in such a civil enforcement action is owned or operated by an Indian tribe, then the civil action shall include requests for injunctive relief against the tribal retail enterprise and the appropriate Indian tribal government and for the payment to the Secretary of all covered State taxes, as determined under section 4(b), owed by the tribal retail enterprise from the date of the enactment of this Act.
Tribal member-owned retail enterprise.--If the tribal retail enterprise named in such a civil enforcement action is owned or operated by a member of an Indian tribe, then the civil action shall include requests for injunctive relief and civil penalties in the amount of 3 times the covered State taxes, as determined under section 4(b), owed by the tribal retail enterprise from the date of enactment of this Act.
Challenge to Compliance.-- (1) Information.-- (A) In general.--Any person, including but not limited to a State, that has information indicating that a tribe is not remitting the appropriate covered State tax to the Secretary under section 4(b), may submit such information to the Secretary.
Not later than 30 days after receipt of such information, the Secretary shall commence an administrative action to determine the validity of this information.
Such administrative action shall be concluded within 60 days.
If, after this administrative action, the Secretary concludes that the tribal retail enterprise is in violation of this Act, then the Secretary shall issue a notice of violation under subsection (a).
Limitation.--The Secretary shall commence an administrative action under subparagraph (A) only if the information submitted by a person under subparagraph (A) directly relates to covered State tax amounts due as a result of the Secretary's action on a petition submitted under section 4(a).
Judicial review.--A person may challenge the Secretary's conclusions under this subsection by commencing an action in Federal district court; provided, that if the challenge is not sustained by the court, the challenging person shall be liable to the Secretary for attorney's fees and court costs.