This Act may be cited as the ``National Initiative on Surface Transportation and the Environment Act''.
CONGESTION MITIGATION AND AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
Eligible Projects.--Section 149(b) of title 23, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting after ``nonattainment area'' the first place it appears ``(including an area subsequently redesignated as an attainment area)''; and (2) by inserting ``or thereafter'' after ``1994''.
Priority for Projects With Long-Term Sustainable Air Quality Benefits.--Section 149 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Priority for Projects With Long-Term Sustainable Air Quality Benefits.--The Secretary, after consultation with the Administrator, shall establish a system for ranking projects and programs that are likely to have long-term sustainable air quality benefits, including energy efficiency, and for providing priority funding under this section for projects and programs that are ranked the highest under such system.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying out the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program under title 23, United States Code, there is authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) $1,300,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003.
Sense of Congress.--In order to provide the increased authorization of appropriations under subsection (c), it is the sense of Congress that the authorization of appropriations from the Highway Trust Fund for the National Highway System and the surface transportation program shall be reduced in the aggregate by $400,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2003.
ASSESSMENT AND CLEANUP OF BROWNFIELD SITES.
National Highway System.--Section 103(i) of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(14) In accordance with all applicable Federal law and regulations, participation in assessment and cleanup of brownfield sites relating to projects funded under this title, projects on the rights-of-way of facilities constructed on such system under this title before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, and projects for development of a brownfield site if such development will provide a substantive and demonstrable benefit to transportation on such system, including reduction of congestion, increased use of mass transit, and improved access to a transportation facility.
Contributions toward these efforts may occur in advance of project construction only if such efforts are consistent with all applicable requirements of Federal law and regulations and State transportation planning processes.''.
Surface Transportation Program.-- (1) Eligible projects.--Section 133(b) of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(12) In accordance with all applicable Federal law and regulations, participation in assessment and cleanup of brownfield sites relating to projects funded under this title, projects on the rights-of-way of facilities constructed under this title before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, and projects for development of a brownfield site if such development will provide a substantive and demonstrable benefit to motor vehicle transportation, including reduction of congestion, increased use of mass transit, and improved access to a transportation facility.
Contributions toward these efforts may occur in advance of project construction only if such efforts are consistent with all applicable requirements of Federal law and regulations and State transportation planning processes.''.
Funding for urbanized areas over 200,000 population.-- Section 133(d) of such title is amended-- (A) in paragraph (3)(A)-- (i) by striking ``62.5'' and inserting ``70''; and (ii) by striking ``37.5'' and inserting ``30''; and (B) in paragraph (3)(C) by striking ``62.5'' and inserting ``70''.
Definitions.--Section 133 of such title is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Definitions.--In this section and section 103(i), the following definitions apply: ``(1) Brownfield site.--The term `brownfield site' means a parcel of land that contains or contained abandoned or underused commercial, industrial, or public facility, the expansion or redevelopment of which may be complicated by the presence or potential presence of hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants.
Facility.--The term `facility' has the meaning such term has under section 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601).
Hazardous substance.--The term `hazardous substance' has the meaning such term has under such section 101.
Pollutant or contaminant.--The term `pollutant or contaminant' has the meaning such term has under such section 101.''.
Federal Transit Programs.-- (1) Block grants.--Section 5307(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(6) Assessment and cleanup of brownfield sites.--Amounts under this section may also be made available for assessment and cleanup of brownfield sites relating to projects funded under this title, projects on the rights-of-way of facilities constructed under this title before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, and projects for development of a brownfield site if such development will provide a substantive and demonstrable benefit to mass transportation, including reduction of congestion, increased use of mass transit, and improved access to a transportation facility.
Such assessments and cleanups shall be carried out in accordance with all applicable Federal law and regulations.''.
Discretionary grants and loans.--Section 5309(a) of such title 49 is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (F); (B) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (G) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(H) in accordance with all applicable Federal law and regulations, assessment and cleanup of brownfield sites relating to projects funded under this title, projects on the rights-of-way of facilities constructed under this title before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this subparagraph, and projects for development of a brownfield site if such development will provide a substantive and demonstrable benefit to mass transportation, including reduction of congestion, increased use of mass transit, and improved access to a transportation facility.''.
Financial assistance for other than urbanized areas.-- Section 5311(b)(1) of such title 49 is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the first sentence the following: ``and, in accordance with all applicable Federal law and regulations, assessment and cleanup of brownfield sites relating to projects funded under this section, projects on the rights-of-way of facilities constructed under this section before, on, or after the date of the enactment of the National Initiative on Surface Transportation and the Environment Act, and projects for development of a brownfield site if such development will provide a substantive and demonstrable benefit to mass transportation, including reduction of congestion, increased use of mass transit, and improved access to a transportation facility in such areas''.
Definitions.--Section 5302(a) of such title 49 is amended-- (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (13) as paragraphs (2) through (14), respectively; and (B) by inserting before paragraph (2), as so redesignated, the following: ``(1) Brownfield site.--The term `brownfield site' means a parcel of land that contains or contained abandoned or underused commercial, industrial, or public facility, the expansion or redevelopment of which may be complicated by the presence or potential presence of hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants.
In this paragraph, the terms `facility', `hazardous substance', and `pollutant or contaminant' have the meaning such terms have under section 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601).''.
Establishment.--Chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Wetlands restoration program ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a wetlands restoration program under which the Secretary may make grants to States for projects to mitigate against losses of wetlands that have occurred as a result of Federal-aid highway construction projects carried out before the date of the enactment of this section.
Allocation of Funds.--The Secretary shall allocate funds made available to carry out this section for a fiscal year among the States in the ratio that the number of acres of wetlands lost by each State as a result of Federal-aid highway construction projects in the preceding fiscal year bears to the number of acres of wetlands lost by all States as a result of such projects in such fiscal year; except that no State may receive more than 5 percent of such funds.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) $16,666,000 per fiscal year for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2003 to carry out this section.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``162.
Use of STP Funds for Mitigation of Water Pollution.--Section 133(d) of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) For mitigation of water pollution.--1 percent of the funds apportioned to a State under section 104(b)(3) for a fiscal year shall only be available for monitoring, mitigating, and cleaning up water pollution due to highway runoff.''.
Applied Research and Technology Program.--Section 307(e) of such title is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (9) through (13) as paragraphs (10) through (14), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (8) the following: ``(9) Porous paving materials.--As part of the program under this subsection, the Secretary shall carry out a program to assess the benefits of using porous paving materials for highways and parking lots as a method of mitigating water pollution due to highway runoff.''.
INCENTIVES FOR REDUCTIONS IN MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSIONS.
In General.--Chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Incentives for reductions in motor vehicle emissions ``(a) Grants to MPO's.-- ``(1) Authority to make grants.--The Secretary may make grants to up to 10 metropolitan planning organizations designated under section 134 for implementing alternative transportation strategies to achieve reductions in motor vehicle emissions.
Such strategies include coordinating land uses with transportation systems, creating balanced commercial and residential regions, promoting alternative fuel vehicles and alternative transport strategies, designing local modeling systems, and increasing full public participation.
Amount of grants.--Each grant made to a metropolitan planning organization under this subsection in a fiscal year shall be in an amount equal to one-tenth of the amount made available to carry out this subsection in such fiscal year.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) to carry out this subsection $4,500,000 per fiscal year for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2003.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
Grants to States.-- ``(1) Authority to make grants.--On or before December 31, 2003, the Secretary shall award a grant to each of the 10 States that the Secretary determines have achieved during the period beginning on October 1, 1997, and ending on September 30, 2003, the greatest per capita reduction in fuel consumption.
Use of grants.--A State may obligate amounts from grants received under paragraph (1) for projects eligible for funding under section 149.
Amount of grants.--Each grant made under this subsection shall be in an amount equal to one-tenth of the total amount made available to carry out this subsection.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) for fiscal years 1997 through 2003 $500,000,000 in the aggregate to carry out this subsection.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``163.
Incentives for reductions in motor vehicle emissions.