THE NATIONAL TEACHERS HALL OF FAME.
Part B of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 1533 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 1534--THE NATIONAL TEACHERS HALL OF FAME ``Sec.
Duty to maintain corporate and tax-exempt status.
Liability for acts of officers and agents.
Organization ``(a) Federal Charter.--The National Teachers Hall of Fame, Inc., incorporated in Kansas, is a federally chartered corporation.
Expiration of Charter.--If the corporation does not comply with any provision of this chapter, the charter granted by this chapter expires.
Purposes ``The purposes of the corporation are as provided in its bylaws and articles of incorporation and include-- ``(1) recognizing meritorious teachers by-- ``(A) sponsoring a teacher recognition program that is open to all teachers in the United States of grades from pre-kindergarten through 12th grade and that uses a national committee to review, evaluate, and select deserving teachers annually for induction into the Hall of Fame; and ``(B) promoting other teacher recognition programs throughout the United States; ``(2) bringing honor and recognition to all teachers and to the teaching profession by presenting exhibits and displays, and by sponsoring programs and activities, that-- ``(A) provide individuals with opportunities to honor and recognize the special teachers in their lives; ``(B) commend teachers throughout the history of the United States whose dedication, commitment, sacrifice, and quiet heroism have helped the United States to progress further and faster than virtually any other Nation on earth; ``(C) portray teachers in their historical and contemporary settings and show how their contributions enrich American values, spirit, and life; and ``(D) heighten public awareness of the vitally important function of teachers in preparing children to become successful adult citizens in society; ``(3) sponsoring national conferences, seminars, institutes, and workshops on topics relating to teaching, including topics such as professional development, effective teaching methods, the role of teachers, and teaching as a profession; ``(4) utilizing the invaluable teaching experiences, expertise, and accomplishments of Hall of Fame inductees by promoting, coordinating, and facilitating the use of the inductees as speakers, consultants, and resources to school districts, businesses, and government agencies; ``(5) sponsoring and coordinating programs that use technology to foster communications among teachers, administrators, parents, students, governmental agencies, businesses, and the public at large; and ``(6) promoting appropriate change in education by fostering a greater understanding of the potential functions that people, technology, and emerging forces and trends can perform in the teaching enterprise.
Operation ``(a) In General.--The corporation shall operate a facility to be known as The National Teachers Hall of Fame.
Designation of Collection.--The collection of The National Teachers Hall of Fame shall be known as The National Teachers Hall of Fame Collection.
Exclusive Right.--The corporation shall have the sole and exclusive right to use, in carrying out its purposes, the name `The National Teachers Hall of Fame' and the sole and exclusive right to the use of its corporate seal, emblems, and badges as adopted by the corporation.
Membership ``Eligibility for membership in the corporation and the rights and privileges of members are as provided in the bylaws of the corporation.
Governing body ``(a) Board of Directors.--The board of directors of the corporation and the responsibilities of the board are as provided in the bylaws and articles of incorporation of the corporation.
Officers.--The officers and the election of officers of the corporation are as provided in the bylaws and articles of incorporation of the corporation.
Powers ``The corporation has only the powers provided in its bylaws and articles of incorporation in the State of Kansas and in the certificate of authority in any other State in which the corporation is, or shall be, qualified to do business.
Restrictions ``(a) Stock and Dividends.--The corporation may not issue stock or declare or pay a dividend.
Political Activities.--The corporation or a director or officer, acting as such director or officer, may not contribute to, support, or participate in any political activity or in any manner attempt to influence legislation.
Distribution of Income or Assets.--The income or assets of the corporation may not inure to the benefit of, or be distributed to, a director, officer, or member during the life of the charter granted by this chapter.
This subsection does not prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to an officer or reimbursement for actual necessary expenses in amounts approved by the board of directors.
Loans.--The corporation may not make a loan to a director, officer, or employee.
Claim of Governmental Approval or Authorization.--The corporation may not claim congressional approval or the authority of the United States Government for any of its activities.
Duty to maintain corporate and tax-exempt status ``(a) Corporate Status.--The corporation shall maintain its corporate status as a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Kansas.
Tax-Exempt Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 1 et sequentes).
Records and inspection ``(a) Records.--The corporation shall keep-- ``(1) correct and complete records of account; ``(2) minutes of the proceedings of its members, board of directors, and committees; and ``(3) at its principal office, a record of the names and addresses of its members entitled to vote, if any.
Inspection.--Any officer or director, or any member entitled to vote (if any), or an agent or attorney of such officer, director, or member, may inspect the records of the corporation for any proper purpose at any reasonable time.
Service of process ``The corporation shall comply with the law on service of process of the State of Kansas and in each State in which it carries on activities.
Liability for acts of officers and agents ``The corporation is liable for the acts of its officers and agents acting within the scope of their authority.
Annual report ``The corporation shall submit an annual report to Congress on the activities of the corporation during the prior fiscal year.
The report shall be submitted at the same time as the report of the audit required by section 10101 of this title.
The report may not be printed as a public document.
Definitions ``For purposes of this chapter-- ``(1) the term `corporation' means The National Teachers Hall of Fame, Inc., incorporated in Kansas; and ``(2) the term `State' includes the District of Columbia and the territories and possessions of the United States.''.
The table of chapters at the beginning of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 1533 the following new item: ``1534.
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS HALL OF FAME.................. 153401''.