This Act may be cited as the ``American History and Civics Education Act of 2003''.
In this Act: (1) American history and civics.--The term ``American history and civics'' means the key events, key persons, key ideas, and key documents that shaped the institutions and democratic heritage of the United States.
Chairperson.--The term ``Chairperson'' means the Chairperson of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)).
Key documents.--The term ``key documents'' means the documents that established or explained the foundational principles of democracy in the United States, including the United States Constitution and the amendments to the Constitution (particularly the Bill of Rights), the Declaration of Independence, the Federalist Papers, and the Emancipation Proclamation.
Key events.--The term ``key events'' means the critical turning points in the history of the United States (including the American Revolution, the Civil War, the world wars of the twentieth century, the civil rights movement, and the major court decisions and legislation) that contributed to extending the promise of democracy in American life.
Key ideas.--The term ``key ideas'' means the ideas that shaped the democratic institutions and heritage of the United States, including the notion of equal justice under the law, freedom, individualism, human rights, and a belief in progress.
Key persons.--The term ``key persons'' means the men and women who led the United States as founding fathers, elected officials, scientists, inventors, pioneers, advocates of equal rights, entrepreneurs, and artists.
Nonprofit educational institution.--The term ``nonprofit educational institution''-- (A) means-- (i) an institution of higher education; or (ii) a nonprofit educational research center; and (B) includes a consortium of entities described in subparagraph (A).
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
PRESIDENTIAL ACADEMIES FOR TEACHING OF AMERICAN HISTORY AND CIVICS.
Establishment.--From amounts appropriated under subsection (j), the Chairperson shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to nonprofit educational institutions to establish Presidential Academies for Teaching of American History and Civics (in this section referred to as ``Academies'') that shall offer workshops for teachers of American history and civics-- (1) to learn how better to teach the subjects of American history and civics; and (2) to strengthen such teachers' knowledge of such subjects.
Application.-- (1) In general.--A nonprofit educational institution that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Chairperson at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Chairperson may require.
Contents.--An application submitted under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) include the criteria the nonprofit educational institution intends to use to determine which teachers will be selected to attend workshops offered by the Academy; (B) identify the individual the nonprofit educational institution intends to appoint to be the primary professor at the Academy; and (C) include a description of the curriculum to be used at workshops offered by the Academy.
Number of Grants.--Except as provided in subsection (e)(2)(B), the Chairperson shall award not more than 12 grants to different nonprofit educational institutions under this section.
Distribution.--In awarding grants under this section, the Chairperson shall ensure that such grants are equitably distributed among the geographical regions of the United States.
Grant Terms.-- (1) In general.--Grants awarded under this section shall be for a term of 2 years.
Grants after first two years.--Upon completion of the first 2-year grant term, the Chairperson shall-- (A) renew a grant awarded under this section to a nonprofit educational institution for one more term of 2 years; or (B) award a new grant to a nonprofit educational institution having an application approved under this section for a term of 2 years, notwithstanding the 12 grant award maximum under subsection (c).
Use of Funds.-- (1) Workshops.-- (A) In general.--A nonprofit educational institution that receives a grant under this section shall establish an Academy that shall offer a workshop during the summer, or during another appropriate time, for kindergarten through grade 12 teachers of American history and civics-- (i) to learn how better to teach the subjects of American history and civics; and (ii) to strengthen such teachers' knowledge of such subjects.
Duration of workshop.--A workshop offered pursuant to this section shall be approximately 2 weeks in duration.
Academy staff.-- (A) Primary professor.--Each Academy shall be headed by a primary professor identified in the application submitted under subsection (b) who shall-- (i) be accomplished in the field of American history and civics; and (ii) design the curriculum for and lead the workshop.
Core teachers.--Each primary professor shall appoint an appropriate number of core teachers.
At the direction of the primary professor, the core teachers shall teach and train the workshop attendees.
Selection of teachers.-- (A) In general.-- (i) Number of teachers.--Each year, each Academy shall select approximately 300 kindergarten through grade 12 teachers of American history and civics to attend the workshop offered by the Academy.
Flexibility in number of teachers.--An Academy may select more than or fewer than 300 teachers depending on the population in the region where the Academy is located.
Teachers from same region.--In selecting teachers to attend a workshop, an Academy shall select primarily teachers who teach in schools located in the region where the Academy is located.
Teachers from public and private schools.--An Academy may select teachers from public schools and private schools to attend the workshop offered by the Academy.
Costs.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a teacher who attends a workshop offered pursuant to this section shall not incur costs associated with attending the workshop, including costs for meals, lodging, and materials while attending the workshop.
Travel costs.--A teacher who attends a workshop offered pursuant to this section shall use non-Federal funds to pay for such teacher's costs of transit to and from the Academy.
Evaluation.--Not later than 90 days after completion of all of the workshops assisted in the third year grants are awarded under this section, the Chairperson shall conduct an evaluation to-- (1) determine the overall success of the grant program authorized under this section; and (2) highlight the best grantees' practices in order to become models for future grantees.
Non-Federal Funds.--A nonprofit educational institution receiving Federal assistance under this section may contribute non- Federal funds toward the costs of operating the Academy.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $7,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
CONGRESSIONAL ACADEMIES FOR STUDENTS OF AMERICAN HISTORY AND CIVICS.
Establishment.--From amounts appropriated under subsection (j), the Chairperson shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to nonprofit educational institutions to establish Congressional Academies for Students of American History and Civics (in this section referred to as ``Academies'') that shall offer workshops for outstanding students of American history and civics to broaden and deepen such students' understanding of American history and civics.
Application.-- (1) In general.--A nonprofit educational institution that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Chairperson at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Chairperson may require.
Contents.--An application submitted under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) include the criteria the nonprofit educational institution intends to use to determine which students will be selected to attend workshops offered by the Academy; (B) identify the individual the nonprofit educational institution intends to appoint to be the primary professor at the Academy; and (C) include a description of the curriculum to be used at workshops offered by the Academy.
Number of Grants.--Except as provided in subsection (e)(2)(B), the Chairperson shall award not more than 12 grants to different nonprofit educational institutions under this section.
Distribution.--In awarding grants under this section, the Chairperson shall ensure that such grants are equitably distributed among the geographical regions of the United States.
Grant Terms.-- (1) In general.--Grants awarded under this section shall be for a term of 2 years.
Grants after first two years.--Upon completion of the first 2-year grant term, the Chairperson shall-- (A) renew a grant awarded under this section to a nonprofit educational institution for one more term of 2 years; or (B) award a new grant to a nonprofit educational institution having an application approved under this section for a term of 2 years, notwithstanding the 12 grant award maximum under subsection (c).
Use of Funds.-- (1) Workshops.-- (A) In general.--A nonprofit educational institution that receives a grant under this section shall establish an Academy that shall offer a workshop during the summer, or during another appropriate time, for outstanding students of American history and civics to broaden and deepen such students' understanding of American history and civics.
Duration of workshop.--A workshop offered pursuant to this section shall be approximately 4 weeks in duration.
Academy staff.-- (A) Primary professor.--Each Academy shall be headed by a primary professor identified in the application submitted under subsection (b) who shall-- (i) be accomplished in the field of American history and civics; and (ii) design the curriculum for and lead the workshop.
Core teachers.--Each primary professor shall appoint an appropriate number of core teachers.
At the direction of the primary professor, the core teachers shall teach the workshop attendees.
Selection of students.-- (A) In general.-- (i) Number of students.--Each year, each Academy shall select approximately 300 eligible students to attend the workshop offered by the Academy.
Flexibility in number of students.--An Academy may select more than or fewer than 300 eligible students depending on the population in the region where the Academy is located.
Eligible students.--A student shall be eligible to attend a workshop offered by an Academy if the student-- (i) is recommended by the student's secondary school principal (or other head of such student's secondary school) to attend the workshop; and (ii) will be a junior or senior in a public or private secondary school in the academic year following attendance at the workshop.
Students from same region.--In selecting students to attend a workshop, an Academy shall select primarily students who attend secondary schools located in the region where the Academy is located.
Costs.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a student who attends a workshop offered pursuant to this section shall not incur costs associated with attending the workshop, including costs for meals, lodging, and materials while attending the workshop.
Travel costs.--A student who attends a workshop offered pursuant to this section shall use non-Federal funds to pay for such student's costs of transit to and from the Academy.
Evaluation.--Not later than 90 days after completion of all of the workshops assisted in the third year grants are awarded under this section, the Chairperson shall conduct an evaluation to-- (1) determine the overall success of the grant program authorized under this section; and (2) highlight the best grantees' practices in order to become models for future grantees.
Non-Federal Funds.--A nonprofit educational institution receiving Federal assistance under this section may contribute non- Federal funds toward the costs of operating the Academy.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $14,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
NATIONAL ALLIANCE OF TEACHERS OF AMERICAN HISTORY AND CIVICS.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under subsection (e), the Chairperson shall award a grant to an organization for the creation of a national alliance of elementary school and secondary school teachers of American history and civics.
Purpose.--The purpose of the national alliance is-- (A) to facilitate the sharing of ideas among teachers of American history and civics; and (B) to encourage best practices in the teaching of American history and civics.
Application.--An organization that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Chairperson at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Chairperson may require.
Grant Term.--A grant awarded under this section shall be for a term of 2 years and may be renewed after the initial term expires.
Use of Funds.--An organization that receives a grant under this section may use the grant funds for any of the following: (1) Creation of a website on the Internet to facilitate discussion of new ideas on improving American history and civics education.
Creation of in-State chapters of the national alliance, to which individual teachers of American history and civics may belong, that sponsors American history and civics activities for such teachers in the State.
Seminars, lectures, or other events focused on American history and civics, which may be sponsored in cooperation with, or through grants awarded to, libraries, States' humanities councils, or other appropriate entities.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.