This Act may be cited as the ``Little Rock Nine Medals and Coins Act''.
TITLE I--LITTLE ROCK NINE GOLD MEDALS SEC.
The Congress hereby finds the following: (1) Jean Brown Trickey, Carlotta Walls LaNier, Melba Patillo Beals, Terrence Roberts, Gloria Ray Karlmark, Thelma Mothershed Wair, Ernest Green, Elizabeth Eckford, and Jefferson Thomas, hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Little Rock Nine'', voluntarily subjected themselves to the bitter stinging pains of racial bigotry.
The Little Rock Nine are civil rights pioneers whose selfless acts considerably advanced the civil rights debate in this country.
The Little Rock Nine risked their lives to integrate Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas, and subsequently the Nation.
The Little Rock Nine sacrificed their innocence to protect the American principle that we are all ``one nation, under God, indivisible''.
The Little Rock Nine have indelibly left their mark on the history of this Nation.
The Little Rock Nine have continued to work towards equality for all Americans.
Presentation Authorized.--The President is authorized to present, on behalf of the Congress, to Jean Brown Trickey, Carlotta Walls LaNier, Melba Patillo Beals, Terrence Roberts, Gloria Ray Karlmark, Thelma Mothershed Wair, Ernest Green, Elizabeth Eckford, and Jefferson Thomas, commonly referred to collectively as the ``Little Rock Nine'', gold medals of appropriate design, in recognition of the selfless heroism such individuals ex- hibited and the pain they suffered in the cause of civil rights by integrating Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Design and Striking.--For purposes of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions to be determined by the Secretary for each recipient.
Authorization of Appropriation.--Effective October 1, 1997, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Striking and Sale.--The Secretary of the Treasury may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medals struck pursuant to section 2 under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, at a price sufficient to cover the cost thereof, including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses, and the cost of the gold medal.
Reimbursement of Appropriation.--The appropriation used to carry out section 2 shall be reimbursed out of the proceeds of sales under subsection (a).
The medals struck pursuant to this title are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.
TITLE II--GERALD AND BETTY FORD GOLD MEDAL SEC 201.
Presentation Authorized.--The President is authorized to present, on behalf of the Congress, to Gerald R. and Betty Ford a gold medal of appropriate design-- (1) in recognition of their dedicated public service and outstanding humanitarian contributions to the people of the United States; and (2) in commemoration of the following occasions in 1998: (A) The 85th anniversary of the birth of President Ford.
The 80th anniversary of the birth of Mrs. Ford.
The 50th wedding anniversary of President and Mrs. Ford.
The 50th anniversary of the 1st election of Gerald R. Ford to the United States House of Representatives.
The 25th anniversary of the approval of Gerald R. Ford by the Congress to become Vice President of the United States.
Design and Striking.--For purposes of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions to be determined by the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriation.--There are authorized to be appropriated not to exceed $20,000 to carry out this section.
Striking and Sale.--The Secretary of the Treasury may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck pursuant to section 201 under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, at a price sufficient to cover the cost thereof, including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses, and the cost of the gold medal.
Reimbursement of Appropriation.--The appropriation used to carry out section 201 shall be reimbursed out of the proceeds of sales under subsection (a).
The medals struck pursuant to this title are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.
TITLE III--JACKIE ROBINSON COMMEMORATIVE COINS SEC.
SIX-MONTH EXTENSION FOR CERTAIN SALES.
Notwithstanding section 101(7)(D) of the United States Commemorative Coin Act of 1996, the Secretary of the Treasury may, at any time before January 1, 1999, make bulk sales at a reasonable discount to the Jackie Robinson Foundation of not less than 20 percent of any denomination of coins minted under section 101(7) of such Act which remained unissued as of July 1, 1998, except that the total number of coins of any such denomination which were issued under such section or this section may not exceed the amount of such denomination of coins which were authorized to be minted and issued under section 101(7)(A) of such Act.
TITLE IV--$1 COIN DESIGN EVALUATION SEC.
COMMISSIONING OF STUDY REQUIRED.
In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall commission, on a reimbursable basis, a study, similar to the study conducted under section 302 of the United States Commemorative Coin Act of 1996, to compare the relative acceptance by the public and the fiscal impact on the Treasury of the United States of the use of the image of Sacajawea on the obverse of the new $1 coin with that of the relative acceptance by the public and the fiscal impact on the Treasury of the United States of the use of the image of the Statue of Liberty.
Design and Scope of Study.--The study required to be commissioned under subsection (a) shall-- (1) be designed by the Comptroller General, in consultation with the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Director of the United States Mint; (2) be conducted by private sector consultants selected by the Comptroller General on the basis of their education, training, and experience; (3) measure the estimated acceptance of each image, including an estimate of the number of potential sales of proof, uncirculated, and other qualities of coins bearing each such image; (4) estimate the number of coins bearing each such image which would be removed from circulation for collections or as souvenirs by both formal and informal numismatists and other collectors, as well as tourists; and (5) examine the financial impact which could flow from other factors that might influence the choice of an image for the obverse of the coin.
Inclusion of Focus Groups and Interested Associations.--In carrying out the study required under this section, the consultants selected by the Comptroller General shall-- (1) convene groups consisting of individuals representing a broad cross-section of the populace for purposes of testing the relative acceptance of the 2 images; and (2) consult with the American Numismatic Association and the Coin Coalition, as well as any marketing organization or operator of a sales location which might sell proof, uncirculated, and other qualities of the new $1 coin.
Report.-- (1) In general.--A report on the study shall be completed and submitted to the Congress before January 31, 1999.
Contents.--The report submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall contain the findings and conclusions of the consultants conducting the study and the Comptroller General, together with such recommendations as the consultants and the Comptroller General determine to be appropriate.
Funding.--Not to exceed $350,000 of the costs of the study required under this section shall be reimbursed by the Secretary of the Treasury from the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund.
TITLE V--LEIF ERICSSON MILLENNIUM COMMEMORATIVE COIN SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Leif Ericsson Millennium Commemorative Coin Act''.
$1 Silver Coins.--In conjunction with the simultaneous mining and issuance of commemorative coins by the Republic of Iceland in commemoration of the millennium of the discovery of the New World by Leif Ericsson, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 1 dollar coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this title shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this title shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary may obtain silver for minting coins under this title from any available source, including stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this title shall be emblematic of the millennium of the discovery of the New World by Leif Ericsson.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this title there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2000''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this title shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Leifur Eiriksson Foundation and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this title shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this title.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this title beginning January 1, 2000.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this title after December 31, 2000.
In General.--All sales of coins minted under this title shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this title shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Leifur Eiriksson Foundation for the purpose of funding student exchanges between students of the United States and students of Iceland.
Audits.--The Leifur Eiriksson Foundation shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code, with regard to the amounts received by the Foundation under subsection (b).
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this title.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
Passed the House of Representatives October 9, 1998.