This Act may be cited as the ``Common Sense Smoking Prevention Act of 1998''.
Group Health Plans.-- (1) Public health service act amendments.--(A) Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
STANDARD RELATING TO SMOKERS.
Requirement.--In the case of benefits consisting of medical care provided under a group health plan, or in the case of group health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan, the plan or issuer-- ``(1) shall deny, cancel, or refuse to renew such benefits or such coverage on the basis that a participant or beneficiary (or family member of a participant or beneficiary) refuses testing by a licensed physician to determine whether or not such participant or beneficiary is a smoker; and ``(2) shall increase the premiums for such benefits or coverage by 10 percent for any participant or beneficiary under the plan on the basis that a licensed physician has determined that the participant or beneficiary (or family member of the participant or beneficiary) is a smoker.
Definition of Family Member.--For purposes of this section the term `family member' means, with respect to an individual, a spouse or child of the individual.
Notice.--A group health plan under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 713(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements of this section as if such section applied to such plan.''.
Section 2723(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-23(c)), as amended by section 604(b)(2) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by striking ``section 2704'' and inserting ``sections 2704 and 2706''.
ERISA amendments.--(A) Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Requirement.--In the case of benefits consisting of medical care provided under a group health plan, or in the case of group health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan, the plan or issuer-- ``(1) shall deny, cancel, or refuse to renew such benefits or such coverage on the basis that a participant or beneficiary (or family member of a participant or beneficiary) refuses testing by a licensed physician to determine whether or not such participant or beneficiary is a smoker; and ``(2) shall increase the premiums for such benefits or coverage by 10 percent for any participant or beneficiary under the plan on the basis that a licensed physician has determined that the participant or beneficiary (or family member of the participant or beneficiary) is a smoker.
Definition of Family Member.--For purposes of this section the term `family member' means, with respect to an individual, a spouse or child of the individual.
Notice Under Group Health Plan.--The imposition of the requirement of this section shall be treated as a material modification in the terms of the plan described in section 102(a)(1), for purposes of assuring notice of such requirements under the plan; except that the summary description required to be provided under the last sentence of section 104(b)(1) with respect to such modification shall be provided by not later than 60 days after the first day of the first plan year in which such requirement apply.''.
Section 731(c) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191(c)), as amended by section 603(b)(1) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 713''.
Section 732(a) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191a(a)), as amended by section 603(b)(2) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 713''.
The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 712 the following new item: ``Sec.
Standard relating to smokers.''.
Individual Health Insurance.--(1) Part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after section 2751 the following new section: ``SEC.
STANDARD RELATING TO SMOKERS.
In General.--The provisions of section 2706(a) shall apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in the individual market in the same manner as they apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan in the small or large group market.
Notice.--A health insurance issuer under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 713(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements referred to in subsection (a) as if such section applied to such issuer and such issuer were a group health plan.''.
Section 2762(b)(2) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-62(b)(2)), as added by section 605(b)(3)(B) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by striking ``section 2751'' and inserting ``sections 2751 and 2752''.
Effective Dates.--(1) Subject to paragraph (3), the amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1999.
The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply with respect to health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the individual market on or after such date.
In the case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining agreements between employee representatives and 1 or more employers ratified before the date of enactment of this Act, the amendments made subsection (a) shall not apply to plan years beginning before the later of-- (A) the date on which the last collective bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the date of enactment of this Act), or (B) January 1, 1999.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), any plan amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to any requirement added by subsection (a) shall not be treated as a termination of such collective bargaining agreement.
Coordinated Regulations.--Section 104(1) of Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 is amended by striking ``this subtitle (and the amendments made by this subtitle and section 401)'' and inserting ``the provisions of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, the provisions of parts A and C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, and chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986''.