This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security for the 21st Century Act''.
Establishment and Maintenance of Retirement Security Accounts.--Title II of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by inserting before section 201 the following: ``Part A--Insurance Benefits''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``Part B--Retirement Security Accounts ``definitions ``Sec.
In this part-- ``(1) Commissioner.--The term `Commissioner' means the Commissioner of Social Security.
Electing individual.--The term `electing individual' means an individual with respect to whom an election under section 252 is in effect.
Eligible individual.--The term `eligible individual' means an individual-- ``(A) who is 18 years of age or older; and ``(B) who is receiving wages subject to tax under section 3101(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or self-employment income subject to tax under section 1401(a) of such Code.
Retirement security account.--The term `retirement security account' means any retirement security account in the Retirement Security Fund (established under section 255(a)) which is administered by the Retirement Security Fund Investment Board (established under section 255(b)).
Retirement security account contribution.--The term `retirement security account contribution' has the meaning given such term by section 252(e)(2)(A).
``election and establishment of retirement security accounts ``Sec.
Election.--An eligible individual may elect to make retirement security account contributions to a retirement security account established under subsection (d) and maintained for the benefit of such individual.
Election Period.--An election under subsection (a) shall be irrevocable and shall be effective with respect to wages paid or self- employment income earned during any quarter of coverage beginning after the date of such election.
Form of Election.--An election under this section shall be made-- ``(1) on W-4 forms (or any successor form), or ``(2) in such other manner as the Commissioner may prescribe in order to ensure ease of administration and reductions in burdens on employers.
Establishment.--The Commissioner, within 30 days of the receipt of the first contribution received pursuant to subsection (e) with respect to any electing individual, shall establish in the name of such individual a retirement security account.
The retirement security account shall be identified to the account holder by means of the account holder's social security account number.
Contributions.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer from the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund, for crediting by the Commissioner to a retirement security account of an electing individual, a retirement security account contribution of such individual.
Retirement security account contribution.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this part, the term `retirement security account contribution' means, with respect to any quarter of coverage during an election period under subsection (b), an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the amount collected under section 3101(a) or 1401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on account of wages or self- employment income of an electing individual for such quarter.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the applicable percentage for any quarter of coverage during an election period under subsection (b) shall be equal to-- ``(i) in the case of amounts collected under section 3101(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 2.5 percent for the first 4 quarters, increased (but not above 50 percent) by 2.5 percentage points for each successive 4 quarters, and ``(ii) in the case of amounts collected under section 1401(a) of such Code, 1.25 percent for the first 4 quarters, increased (but not above 25 percent) by 1.25 percentage points for each successive 4 quarters.
Designation of Investment Options for Retirement Security Account.-- ``(1) Designation.--Each electing individual shall designate 1 or more investment options for the individual's retirement security account to which retirement security account contributions on behalf of such individual are to be credited.
Form of designation.--The designation described in paragraph (1) shall be made in such manner and at such intervals as the Commissioner may prescribe in order to ensure ease of administration and reductions in burdens on employers.
Designation in absence of designation by individual.--In any case in which no designation of an investment option for an individual's retirement security account is made, the Commissioner shall make such a designation in accordance with regulations.
``treatment of retirement security accounts ``Sec.
Except as otherwise provided in this part, any retirement security account shall be treated in the same manner as an individual account in the Thrift Savings Fund under subchapter III of chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code.
``retirement security account distributions ``Sec.
Date of Initial Distribution.--Except as provided in subsection (c), distributions may only be made from a retirement security account of an electing individual on and after the date on which the individual begins receiving benefits under this title.
Forms of Distribution.-- ``(1) Required monthly payments.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), beginning with the date determined under subsection (a), an amount equal to not less than 75 percent of the balance in a retirement security account, as elected by the account holder (in such form and manner as shall be prescribed in regulations of the Retirement Security Account Fund Investment Board), shall be paid by means of the purchase of annuities or equal monthly payments over the life expectancy of the electing individual (determined under reasonable actuarial assumptions) in accordance with requirements (which shall be provided in regulations of the Board) similar to the requirements applicable to payments of benefits under subchapter III of chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code, and providing for indexing for inflation.
Payment of excess funds.--To the extent funds remain in an individual's retirement security account after the application of paragraph (1), such funds shall be payable to the individual in such manner and in such amounts as determined by the individual, in accordance with rules established by the Retirement Security Fund Investment Board.
Distribution in the Event of Death Before the Date of Initial Distribution.--If the individual dies before the date determined under subsection (a), the balance in such individual's retirement security account shall be distributed in a lump sum to the individual's heirs, under rules established by the Retirement Security Fund Investment Board.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.--All distributions under this section shall be exempt from any taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
``retirement security fund ``Sec.
Establishment.--There is established and maintained in the Treasury of the United States a Retirement Security Fund in the same manner as the Thrift Savings Fund under sections 8437, 8438, and 8439 of title 5, United States Code.
Retirement Security Fund Investment Board.-- ``(1) In general.--There is established and operated in the Executive Branch of the Government a Retirement Security Fund Investment Board (referred to in this section as the `Board') in the same manner as the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board under subchapter VII of chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code.
Specific investment and reporting duties.-- ``(A) In general.--The Retirement Security Fund Investment Board shall manage and report on the activities of the Retirement Security Fund and the retirement security accounts of such Fund in the same manner as the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board manages and reports on the Thrift Savings Fund and the individual accounts of such Fund under subchapter VII of chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code.
Study and report on increased investment options.-- ``(i) Study.--The Retirement Security Fund Investment Board shall conduct a study regarding ways to increase an individual's investment options with respect to such individual's retirement security account.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Social Security for the 21st Century Act, the Retirement Security Fund Investment Board shall submit a report to the President and Congress that contains a detailed statement of the results of the study conducted pursuant to clause (i), together with the Board's recommendations for such legislative actions as the Board considers appropriate.
``budgetary treatment of retirement security fund and accounts ``Sec.
The receipts and disbursements of the Retirement Security Fund and any accounts within such fund shall not be included in the totals of the budget of the United States Government as submitted by the President or of the congressional budget and shall be exempt from any general budget limitation imposed by statute on expenditures and net lending (budget outlays) of the United States Government.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to elections made after December 31, 2000.
ADJUSTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFIT FOR ELECTING INDIVIDUALS.
Reduction of Benefits Under OASDI Upon Election Under Part B.-- Section 215 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 415) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``reduction on account of election under part b ``(j)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the primary insurance amount for an electing individual (as defined in section 251), as determined without regard to this subsection, shall be reduced by 50 percent.
A reduction of benefits for an electing individual under paragraph (1) shall not be taken into account in determining the benefit of any individual which is dependent upon the wages and self- employment income of the electing individual.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect with respect to benefits received after December 31, 2000.
PERSONAL EARNINGS AND BENEFIT ESTIMATE STATEMENT.
In General.--Section 1143(a)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320b-13(a)(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(E) an estimate of the aggregate of the retirement security account contributions under part B of title II of the eligible individual (as defined in section 251) and any amounts in the retirement security account of such individual as shown by the records of the Secretary on the date of the request.''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL RESERVE ACCOUNT.
In General.--Section 201 of the Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(n)(1) There is established within the Treasury a special reserve account to be known as the `Protect Social Security Account' (in this subsection referred to as the `account').
The account shall be used to save budget surpluses until a reform measure is enacted to ensure the long-term solvency of the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall pay into the account at the end of each fiscal year in the fiscal-year period beginning on October 1, 1999, and ending on September 30, 2010, an amount which in the aggregate, at the end the fiscal-year period, will equal an amount equal to 70 percent of the projected surplus (if any) in the total budget of the United States Government for that fiscal-year period.
Within 10 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall project the budget surplus (if any) for the total budget of the United States Government for the fiscal-year period beginning on October 1, 1999, and ending on September 30, 2010.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest the funds held in the account pending enactment of the reform measure referred to in paragraph (1).
The purposes for which obligations of the United States may be issued under chapter 31 of title 31, United States Code, are hereby extended to authorize, in the manner provided in subsection (d), the issuance at par of public-debt obligations for purchase for the account.
The interest on, and the proceeds from redemption of, any obligations held in the account shall be credited to and form a part of the account.
In this subsection, the term `total budget of the United States Government' means all spending and receipt accounts of the United States Government that are designated as on-budget or off-budget accounts.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to fiscal years beginning on or after October 1, 1999.