This Act may be cited as the ``Workforce Preparation and Development Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The knowledge and skills of the United States workforce are fundamental to the economic competitiveness of the Nation today and in the future, however, the United States does not currently possess a comprehensive, effective, and efficient system of workforce preparation and development.
Due to global competition, emerging technologies in the workplace, the emergence of quality managing, corporate realignments, and the loss of many low-skilled jobs, United States workers will increasingly need to enhance their skills on a continuing, lifelong basis through such a workforce preparation and development system.
Reports from the Comptroller General of the United States have identified 154 different Federal programs, totaling $24,000,000,000, and administered by 14 different Federal agencies, that offer some form of education, job training, or employment assistance to youths and adults.
Such reports point to the many problems of duplication and fragmentation that exist within the varied Federal workforce preparation and development programs, including-- (A) the additional costs of administering overlapping workforce preparation and development programs at the Federal, State, and local levels which divert scarce resources that could be better used to assist all individuals in preparing for and entering the workforce; and (B) conflicting eligibility requirements, annual budgeting and operating cycles, planning and reporting requirements, and performance measurement systems which serve as barriers to the integration of Federal workforce preparation and development programs and result in an inefficient use of resources.
Major goals of any reform of the Federal workforce preparation and development system must be-- (A) to streamline and consolidate individual workforce preparation and development programs, eliminating unnecessary duplication and fragmentation in such programs; (B) to provide maximum authority and responsibility to States and local communities for operation of State and local workforce preparation and development programs; (C) to stress private sector partnerships and encourage increased leadership and responsibility on the part of the private sector through the use of creative incentives for investment in workforce training (which may include reduced regulatory burdens, tax incentives, and employer loans for the training of incumbent workers); (D) to establish a system which is market-driven, accountable, provides customer choice and easy access to services, and reinforces individual responsibility; (E) to improve education, literacy, job training and employment assistance programs in the United States, encouraging lifelong learning and skills upgrading through a seamless system connecting elementary, secondary, postsecondary, adult, and work- based training and education; and (F) to establish a comprehensive, integrated labor market information system to ensure that workforce preparation and development programs are related to the demand for particular skills in local labor markets, and to ensure that information about the employment and earnings of the local workforce, occupations in demand, skill requirements for such occupations, and the performance of education and training providers, are available to job seekers, employers, teachers, students, and decision-makers.
Early exposure to career opportunities can enrich the education experience and provide incentives for students to stay in school and achieve higher levels of learning.
Millions of families in the United States are trapped in a cycle of poverty, dependency, and undereducation that is linked to illiteracy and low educational achievement, for which adult education and family literacy programs have been shown to be successful in improving the educational attainment and job skills of parents and their children, contributing to reductions in crime, welfare dependency, and enhancing employment opportunities for such individuals.
In recent years, a number of innovative States and local communities have begun successful efforts to integrate Federal workforce preparation and development programs through one-stop service delivery systems, however, without exception, such States and communities have experienced numerous Federal barriers to such program integration.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to begin the transformation of the vast array of Federal workforce preparation and development programs from a collection of fragmented and duplicative categorical programs into a streamlined, comprehensive, coherent, high- quality, cost-effective, and accountable Federal workforce preparation and development system that is designed to meet the education, employment, and training needs of the workforce of the United States, both today and in the future.
Not later than the adjournment sine die of the 104th Congress, the Congress shall carry out the following: (1) The Congress shall conduct a thorough evaluation of all Federal workforce preparation and development programs to determine the quality, effectiveness, and efficiency of such programs.
The Congress shall enact legislation that provides for the following: (A) The elimination of duplication and fragmentation among Federal workforce preparation and development programs through the reform, consolidation, and, where appropriate, elimination of such programs, thus providing States and local communities with streamlined and more flexible funding for the purpose of preparing the future and current workforce.
The transfer of major decision-making authority for the design, governance, and implementation of comprehensive, integrated workforce preparation and development systems to States and local communities.
A vital role for the private sector at the Federal, State, and local levels in the design and implementation of a Federal workforce preparation and development system established in accordance with subparagraph (D), encouraging the utilization of State and local employer-led boards responsible for strategic planning and program oversight of State and local workforce preparation and development systems.
The establishment of a Federal workforce preparation and development system that-- (i) is streamlined and consolidated; (ii) provides maximum authority and responsibility to States and local communities for the operation of State and local workforce preparation and development programs; (iii) is accountable; (iv) stresses private sector partnerships and encourages increased leadership and responsibility on the part of the private sector for investment in workforce training; (v) is market-driven; (vi) provides customer choice and easy access to services; and (vii) reinforces individual responsibility by stressing attachment to employment, and at the same time, encouraging lifelong learning and skills upgrading through a seamless system connecting elementary, secondary, postsecondary, adult, and work-based training and education.
The establishment of a national labor market information system that provides employers, job seekers, students, teachers, training providers, and others with accurate and timely information on the local economy, occupations in demand, earnings, and the skill requirements for such occupations, and information on the performance of service providers in the local community.
Consistent with the legislation enacted in accordance with paragraph (2), the Congress shall provide for the repeal of existing Federal workforce preparation and development programs, as appropriate.
FEDERAL WORKFORCE PREPARATION AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS DEFINED.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``Federal workforce preparation and development programs'' means programs under any of the following provisions of law: (1) The Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act (20 United States Code 2301 et sequentes).
The Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1501 et seq.).
The Wagner-Peyser Act (29 United States Code 49 et sequentes).
The Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training Program authorized under part F of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 681 et sequentes).
The Adult Education Act (20 United States Code 1201 et sequentes).
The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 701 et sequentes).
The School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994 (20 United States Code 6101 et sequentes).
Chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2271 et sequentes).
Section 6(d)(4) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977.
Veterans vocational training programs authorized under chapter 106 of title 10, United States Code, and chapters 30, 31, 32, 35, and 41 of title 38, United States Code.
Other Federal employment, education, or training programs, as appropriate.