MAKING IT ILLEGAL TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE WITH A DRUG OR ALCOHOL IN THE BODY OF THE DRIVER AT LAND BORDER PORTS OF ENTRY.
Section 13(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Whoever with a drug or alcohol in his or her body operates a motor vehicle at a land border port of entry in a manner that is punishable, because of the presence of the drug or alcohol, if committed within the jurisdiction of the State in which that land border port of entry is located (under the laws of that State in force at the time of the act) shall be guilty of a like offense and subject to a like punishment.
Any individual who operates a motor vehicle at a land border port of entry is deemed to have given consent to submit to a chemical or other test of the blood, breath, or urine of the driver by an officer or employee of the Immigration and Naturalization Service authorized under section 287(h) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1357(h)) for the purpose of determining the presence or concentration of a drug or alcohol in such blood, breath, or urine.
If an individual refuses to submit to such a test after being advised by the officer or employee that the refusal will result in notification under this paragraph, the Attorney General shall give notice of the refusal to-- ``(A) the State or foreign state that issued the license permitting the individual to operate a motor vehicle; or ``(B) if the individual has no such license, the State or foreign state in which the individual is a resident.
The Attorney General shall give notice of a conviction of an individual under this section for operation of a motor vehicle at a land border port of entry with a drug or alcohol in the body of the individual, to-- ``(A) the State or foreign state that issued the license permitting the individual to operate a motor vehicle; or ``(B) if the individual has no such license, the State or foreign state in which the individual is a resident.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `land border port of entry' means any land border port of entry (as defined in section 287(h)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1357(h)(3))) that was not reserved or acquired as provided in section 7 of this title.''.
AUTHORIZING OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE TO CONDUCT TESTS FOR A DRUG OR ALCOHOL.
Section 287 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1357) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h)(1) If an officer or employee of the Service authorized under regulations prescribed by the Attorney General is inspecting a driver at a land border port of entry and has reasonable grounds to believe that, because of alcohol in the body of the driver, operation of a motor vehicle by the driver is an offense under section 13 of title 18, United States Code, the officer or employee may require the driver to submit to a test of the breath of the driver to determine the presence or concentration of the alcohol.
If an officer or employee of the Service authorized under regulations prescribed by the Attorney General arrests a driver under this section for operation of a motor vehicle in violation of section 13 of title 18, United States Code, because of a drug or alcohol in the body of the driver, the officer or employee may require the driver to submit to a chemical or other test to determine the presence or concentration of the drug or alcohol in the blood, breath, or urine of the driver.
For purposes of this subsection: ``(A) The term `driver' means an individual who is operating a motor vehicle at a land border port of entry.
The term `land border port of entry' means any immigration checkpoint operated by the Immigration and Naturalization Service at a land border between a State (as that term is used in section 13 of title 18, United States Code) and a foreign state.''.
REQUIRING NOTICE AT LAND BORDER PORTS OF ENTRY REGARDING OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE AND DRUGS AND ALCOHOL.
In General.--The Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by inserting after section 294 (8 United States Code 1363a) the following: ``notice at land border ports of entry regarding operation of a motor vehicle and drugs and alcohol ``Sec.
At each point where motor vehicles regularly enter a land border port of entry (as defined in section 287(h)(3)), the Attorney General shall post a notice that operation of a motor vehicle with a drug or alcohol in the body of the driver at a land border port of entry is an offense under Federal law.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The first section of the Immigration and Nationality Act is amended in the table of contents by inserting after the item relating to section 294 the following: ``Sec.
Notice at land border ports of entry regarding operation of a motor vehicle and drugs and alcohol.''.
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLE FOR REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO TEST FOR DRUG OR ALCOHOL.
Not more than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall issue regulations authorizing an officer or employee of the Immigration and Naturalization Service to impound a vehicle, if the individual who operates the vehicle refuses to submit to a chemical or other test under section 13(a)(3) of title 18, United States Code.
This Act shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.