This Act may be cited as the ``Robert Carey Service Disabled Veterans' Insurance Act of 2002''.
ADDITIONAL PROGRAM OF SERVICE DISABLED VETERANS' INSURANCE FOR VETERANS.
In General.--(1) Subchapter I of chapter 19 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1922A the following new section: ``Sec.
Service disabled veterans' insurance: level premium term insurance ``(a) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person described in subsection (b) shall, upon payment of premiums as provided in subsection (f), be granted insurance by the United States against the death of such person occurring while such insurance is in force.
A person described in this subsection is any person as follows: ``(1) A person insured under section 1922(a) of this title if such person applies for insurance under this section within the times provided for under paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (e).
A person (other than a person described in paragraph (1)) who-- ``(A) is released from active military, naval, or air service, under other than dishonorable conditions; ``(B) is found by the Secretary to be suffering from a disability or disabilities for which compensation would be payable if 10 percent or more in degree; ``(C) except for the disability or disabilities referred to in subparagraph (B), would be insurable according to standards of good health established by the Secretary; and ``(D) has not attained the age of 65 years as of the date of application for insurance under this section.
(1) Insurance under this section for a person described in subsection (b)(1) is in addition to the insurance of such person under section 1922(a) of this title and the insurance, if any, of such person under section 1922A of this title.
A person deemed insured under section 1922(b) of this title is not eligible for or entitled to insurance under this section.
(1)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B) and except as provided in paragraph (3), the amount for which a person described by subsection (b)(1) is insured under this section shall, at the election of the person, be-- ``(i) $45,000; or ``(ii) an amount less than $45,000, but more than $5,000, that is evenly divisible by $5,000.
The amount of insurance elected under this paragraph by a person described by subsection (b)(1) may not cause the aggregate amount of insurance of the person under this section and sections 1922(a) and 1922A of this title to exceed $50,000.
Except as provided in paragraph (3), the amount for which a person described by subsection (b)(2) is insured under this section shall, at the election of the person, be-- ``(A) $50,000; or ``(B) an amount less than $50,000, but more than $5,000, that is evenly divisible by $5,000.
Upon attaining the age of 70 years, the amount for which a person is insured under this section shall be the amount equal to 20 percent of the amount otherwise elected by the person under paragraph (1) or (2), as applicable.
(1) A person seeking insurance under this section shall submit to the Secretary an application in writing for such insurance.
The application of a person under paragraph (1) shall be submitted not later than 10 years after the date of the release of the person from active military, naval, or air service.
(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the application of a person under paragraph (1) shall be submitted not later than two years after the date on which the Secretary finds the service- connection for the disability or disabilities of the person on which the application is based.
In the case of a person shown by evidence satisfactory to the Secretary to have been mentally incompetent during any part of the two- year period otherwise applicable to the person under subparagraph (A), an application for insurance under this section shall be filed not later than the earlier of-- ``(i) two years after a guardian for the person is appointed; or ``(ii) two years after the removal of such disability or disabilities, as determined by the Secretary.
(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), a person insured under this section shall pay premiums for such insurance as determined under paragraph (4).
The provisions of section 1912 of this title shall apply with respect to payment of premiums for insurance under this section.
A person shall not be required to pay premiums for insurance under this section after attaining the age of 70 years.
The premium rates for insurance under this section shall be level, and shall be based on the Commissioners 1980 Standard Ordinary Basic Table of Mortality and interest at the rate of 5 per cent per annum.
All premiums and other collections for insurance under this section shall be credited directly to a revolving fund in the Treasury established for purposes of this section, and any payments on such insurance shall be made directly from such fund.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, insurance under this section shall be issued on the same terms and conditions as are contained in standard policies of National Service Life Insurance, except that insurance issued under this section shall have no loan value or extended values.
All settlements on insurance under this section shall be paid in a lump sum.
Insurance under this section may be referred to as `Robert Carey Service Disabled Veterans' Insurance'.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 19 of that title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1922A the following new item: ``1922B.
Service disabled veterans' insurance: level premium term insurance.''.
Coordination with Current Service Disabled Veterans' Insurance Program.--Section 1922 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) A person deemed insured under this subsection is not eligible for or entitled to insurance under section 1922B of this title.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) A person insured under subsection (a) may also be eligible for insurance under section 1922B of this title in accordance with the provisions of that section.''.
Other Amendments to Current Service Disabled Veterans' Insurance Program.--Subsection (a) of such section 1922 is amended by striking ``Commissioners 1941 Standard Ordinary Table of Mortality and interest at the rate of 2\1/4\ per centum per annum'' each place it appears in paragraphs (1) and (2) and inserting ``Commissioners 1980 Standard Ordinary Basic Table of Mortality and interest at the rate of 5 per cent per annum''.
Review of Applicability of Mortality Tables.--(1) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, from time to time, evaluate the standard ordinary table of mortality being used for purposes of service disabled veterans' insurance under sections 1922 and 1922B of title 38, United States Code, in order to determine whether such table of mortality continues to be suitable for such purposes.
If as the result of an evaluation under paragraph (1) the Secretary determines that the standard ordinary table of mortality being used for purposes of insurance referred to in that paragraph is no longer suitable for such purposes, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report setting forth that determination and including a recommendation for an alternative standard ordinary table of mortality to be used for such purposes.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall prescribe regulations for purposes of administering section 1922B of title 38, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), and for purposes of administering the amendments to section 1922 of that title made by subsections (b) and (c).
Such regulations shall take effect on October 1, 2003.
Authorization of Appropriations for Revolving Fund.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Veterans Affairs for the revolving fund established pursuant to subsection (f)(5) of section 1922B of title 38, United States Code (as added by subsection (a) of this section), such sums as may be necessary for purposes of that section.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) through (c) shall take effect on October 1, 2003.