In General.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after section 136 the following new section: ``SEC.
Exclusion.--Gross income of an employee shall not include any amount contributed during the taxable year by the employer to a medical incentives account of such employee.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum exclusion.-- ``(A) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to contributions for the taxable year in excess of $3,000.
Medical care cost adjustment.-- ``(i) In general.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 1994, the dollar amount in subparagraph (A) shall be increased for such calendar year by the medical care cost adjustment for such calendar year.
Medical care cost adjustment.--For purposes of clause (i), the medical care cost adjustment for any calendar year is the percentage (if any) by which-- ``(I) the medical care component of the Consumer Price Index (as defined in section 1(f)(5)) for August of the preceding calendar year, exceeds ``(II) such component for August of 1993.
If any increase under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $50.
Employee must have employer-provided health insurance.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any employee unless-- ``(A) such employee is covered under insurance which constitutes medical care (as defined in section 213(d)), and ``(B) any portion of the cost of such insurance is provided by such employee's employer.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Medical incentives account.--The term `medical incentives account' means a trust created or organized in the United States exclusively for the purpose of paying (or reimbursing) the medical expenses of the account beneficiary, the spouse of such beneficiary, or any dependent (as defined in section 152) of such beneficiary, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted unless it is in cash, and contributions will not be accepted for the taxable year in excess of the limitation under subsection (b)(1).
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which such person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
The interest of an individual in the balance in his account is nonforfeitable.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
Medical expenses.--The term `medical expenses' means, with respect to the account beneficiary, the amount paid by such beneficiary during the taxable year which would be allowable as a deduction for the taxable year under section 213 but for the threshold based on adjusted gross income.
Account beneficiary.--The term `account beneficiary' means the employee for whose benefit the medical incentives account is established.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Any amount paid or distributed out of a medical incentives account shall be included in the gross income of the account beneficiary unless such amount is used exclusively to pay (or reimburse) the medical expenses of such beneficiary, the spouse of such beneficiary, or any dependent (as defined in section 152) of such beneficiary.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to the extent that the aggregate of such payments and distributions during any taxable year which are not so used does not exceed the account balance as of the close of the preceding taxable year.
Penalty for amounts included in income.--If any amount is includible in the gross income of the account beneficiary for any taxable year, such beneficiary's tax imposed by this chapter shall be increased by 10 percent of the amount so includible.
Tax Treatment of Accounts.-- ``(1) Exemption from tax.--Any medical incentives account is exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such account has ceased to be a medical incentives account by reason of paragraph (2) or (3).
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such account shall be subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc.
Account terminates if individual engages in prohibited transaction.-- ``(A) In general.--If, during any taxable year of the individual for whose benefit the medical incentives account was established, such individual engages in any transaction prohibited by section 4975 with respect to the account, the account ceases to be a medical incentives account as of the first day of that taxable year.
Account treated as distributing all its assets.--In any case in which any account ceases to be a medical incentives account by reason of subparagraph (A) on the first day of any taxable year, paragraph (1) of subsection (d) shall be applied as if there were a distribution on such first day in an amount equal to the fair market value (on such first day) of all assets in the account (on such first day) and no portion of such distribution were used to pay medical expenses.
Effect of pledging account as security.--If, during any taxable year, the individual for whose benefit a medical incentives account was established uses the account or any portion thereof as security for a loan, the portion so used is treated as distributed to that individual and not used to pay medical expenses.
Custodial Accounts.--For purposes of this section, a custodial account shall be treated as a trust if-- ``(1) the assets of such account are held by a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which he will administer the account will be consistent with the requirements of this section, and ``(2) the custodial account would, except for the fact that it is not a trust, constitute a medical incentives account described in subsection (c).
For purposes of this title, in the case of a custodial account treated as a trust by reason of the preceding sentence, the custodian of such account shall be treated as the trustee thereof.
Reports.--The trustee of a medical incentives account shall make such reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the individual for whose benefit the account is maintained with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require under regulations.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by those regulations.''
Exclusion Applies for Employment Tax Purposes.-- (1) Social security taxes.-- (A) Paragraph (20) of section 3121(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 132'' and inserting ``132, or 137''.
Paragraph (17) of section 209(a) of the Social Security Act is amended by striking ``or 132'' and inserting ``132, or 137''.
Railroad retirement tax.--Paragraph (5) of section 3231(e) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 132'' and inserting ``132, or 137''.
Unemployment tax.--Paragraph (16) of section 3306(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 132'' and inserting ``132, or 137''.
Withholding tax.--Paragraph (19) of section 3401(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 132'' and inserting ``, 132, or 137''.
Tax on Prohibited Transactions.--Section 4975 of such Code (relating to prohibited transactions) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of subsection (c) the following new paragraph: ``(4) Special rule for medical incentives accounts.--An individual for whose benefit a medical incentives account (within the meaning of section 137(c)) is established shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if, with respect to such transaction, the account ceases to be a medical incentives account by reason of the application of section 137(e)(2)(A) to such account.
'', and (2) by inserting ``or a medical incentives account described in section 137(c)'' in subsection (e)(1) after ``described in section 408(a)''.
Failure To Provide Reports on Medical Incentives Accounts.-- Section 6693 of such Code (relating to failure to provide reports on individual retirement account or annuities) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or on medical incentives accounts'' after ``annuities'' in the heading of such section, and (2) by adding at the end of subsection (a) the following: ``The person required by section 137(g) to file a report regarding a medical incentives account at the time and in the manner required by such section shall pay a penalty of $50 for each failure unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause.''
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Cross references to other Acts.''
The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 68 of such Code is amended by inserting ``or on medical incentives accounts'' after ``annuities'' in the item relating to section 6693.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the close of the calendar year which includes the date of the enactment of this Act.