This Act may be cited as the ``Packers and Stockyards Improvement Act of 1996''.
Title III of the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (7 United States Code 201 et seq.
), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- ``(1) a burden on and obstruction to commerce in livestock is caused by financing arrangements under which dealers and market agencies purchasing livestock on commission encumber, give lenders security interests in, or have liens placed on livestock purchased by the dealers and market agencies in cash sales, or on receivables from or proceeds of the sales, when payment is not made for the livestock; and ``(2) the carrying out of the arrangements is contrary to the public interest.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to remedy the burden on and obstruction to commerce in livestock described in subsection (a)(1) and protect the public interest.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Cash sale.--The term `cash sale' means a sale in which the seller does not expressly extend credit to the buyer.
Trust.--The term `trust' means 1 or more assets of a buyer that (subsequent to a cash sale of livestock) constitute the corpus of a trust held for the benefit of a seller and consist of-- ``(A) accounts receivable and proceeds earned from the cash sale of livestock by a dealer or market agency buying on a commission basis; ``(B) accounts receivable and proceeds of a marketing agency earned on commission from the cash sale of livestock; ``(C) the inventory of the dealer or marketing agency; or ``(D) livestock involved in the cash sale, if the seller has not received payment in full for the livestock and a bona fide third-party purchaser has not purchased the livestock from the dealer or marketing agency.
Holding in Trust.-- ``(1) In general.--The accounts receivable and proceeds generated in a cash sale made by a dealer or a market agency on commission and the inventory of the dealer or market agency shall be held by the dealer or market agency in trust for the benefit of the seller of the livestock until the seller receives payment in full for the livestock.
Exemption.--Paragraph (1) does not apply in the case of a cash sale made by a dealer or market agency if the total amount of cash sales made by the dealer or market agency during the preceding 12 months does not exceed $250,000.
Dishonor of instrument of payment.--A payment in a sale described in paragraph (1) shall not be considered to be made if the instrument by which payment is made is dishonored.
Loss of benefit of trust.--If an instrument by which payment is made in a sale described in paragraph (1) is dishonored, the seller shall lose the benefit of the trust under paragraph (1) on the earlier of-- ``(A) the date that is 15 business days after the date on which the seller receives notice of the dishonor; or ``(B) the date that is 30 days after the final date for making payment under section 409; unless the seller gives written notice to the dealer or market agency of the seller's intention to preserve the trust and submits a copy of the notice to the Secretary.
Rights of third-party purchaser.--The trust established under paragraph (1) shall have no effect on the rights of a bona fide third-party purchaser of the livestock, without regard to whether the livestock are delivered to the bona fide purchaser.
Jurisdiction.--The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction in a civil action-- ``(1) by the beneficiary of a trust described in subsection (d)(1), to enforce payment of the amount held in trust; and ``(2) by the Secretary, to prevent and restrain dissipation of a trust described in subsection (d)(1).''.
Section 401 of the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (7 United States Code 221), is amended-- (1) by striking ``Sec.
Every'' and inserting the following: ``SEC.
ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS OF BUSINESSES; REPORTS TO SECRETARY.
Accounts and Records.--Each''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Reports to Secretary.--Each packer, stockyard owner, market agency, and dealer shall report to the Secretary, in a manner determined by the Secretary-- ``(1) the quantity of livestock and livestock products exported from, and imported into, the United States; and ``(2) the price paid for livestock.''.
INCLUSION OF FORMULA-PRICED CATTLE IN DEFINITION OF CAPTIVE SUPPLY.
Section 407 of the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (7 United States Code 228), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Inclusion of Formula-Priced Cattle in Definition of Captive Supply.--The Secretary shall include all formula-priced cattle in the definition of captive supply for purposes of collecting data to carry out this Act.