This Act may be cited as the ``Disease Research Revitalization Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Past investments in cancer and Alzheimer's disease research have resulted in better health, an improved quality of life for all Americans, and a reduction in national health care expenditures.
The Nation's commitment to cancer and Alzheimer's disease research has expanded the base of scientific knowledge about health and disease and revolutionized the practice of medicine.
The Federal Government is the single largest contributor to medical research conducted in the United States.
Research continues to play a vital role in the growth of this Nation's biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries.
The origin of many of the new drugs and procedures currently in use is based on cancer and Alzheimer's disease research supported by the National Institutes of Health.
Unless we make a new commitment to cancer and Alzheimer's disease research, one out of two American alive today will fall victim to one or both of these diseases.
Neurodegenerative diseases of the elderly, such as Alzheimer's disease, threaten to destroy the lives of millions of Americans, overwhelm the Nation's health care system, and bankrupt the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
Cancer is the second leading cause of death, and 552,000,000 Americans will die from the disease this year.
This year, doctors will tell 1,200,000 Americans they have cancer.
Women have traditionally been underrepresented in medical research protocols, yet are severely affected by diseases including breast cancer, which will kill over 43,900 women this year.
Ovarian cancer will claim another 14,500 lives.
Approximately one out of every six American men will develop prostate cancer, and over 49,200 men will die from the disease each year.
Four million Americans currently suffer from Alzheimer's disease and another 360,000 will be diagnosed with the disease this year.
Alzheimer's disease is the fourth leading cause of death in adults.
As the population of this Nation grows older, the number of Americans diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease could double.
The mapping and sequencing of the entire human genome will lead to a new era of molecular medicine that will provide unprecedented opportunities for the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and cure of diseases that currently plague society.
The fundamental way science is conducted is changing at a revolutionary pace, demanding a far greater investment in emerging new technologies and research training programs, and in developing new skills among scientific investigators.
Research about prevention and early diagnosis of cancer and Alzheimer's disease may result in significantly reducing the incidence of these two diseases.
Most Americans show overwhelming support for an increased Federal investment in cancer and Alzheimer's disease research and researchers now have unprecedented opportunities to conquer these two diseases.
About 14,600,000 Americans are suffering with asthma, resulting in over $6,000,000,000 in health care costs each year.
Almost 5,000,000 children are afflicted with asthma today and the number continues to rise, making it the leading child disease in America.
ADDITIONAL AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2002 REGARDING FEDERAL INVESTMENT IN CANCER, ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE, AND ASTHMA RESEARCH.
In General.--In addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for fiscal year 2002 for the purpose of conducting and supporting research on cancer, Alzheimer's disease, and asthma through the National Institutes of Health, there is authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000,000 for such purpose for fiscal year 2002.
Sense of House Regarding Budget Resolution.--It is the sense of the House of Representatives that the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2002 should appropriately reflect the authorization of appropriations established in subsection (a).
SENSE OF HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES REGARDING AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2003 THROUGH 2006.
It is the sense of the House of Representatives that funding for the National Institutes of Health to conduct and support research on cancer, Alzheimer's disease, and asthma should be increased-- (1) for fiscal year 2003, by $2,000,000,000 over the amount appropriated for fiscal year 2002; and (2) for each of the fiscal years 2004 through 2006, by $1,000,000,000 over the amount appropriated for the preceding fiscal year.