This Act may be cited as the ``Promoting Healthy Eating Behaviors in Youth Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Anorexia Nervosa is an eating disorder characterized by self-starvation and excessive weight loss.
Anorexia Nervosa is common: an estimated .5 to 3.7 percent of American women will suffer from this disorder in their lifetime.
Anorexia Nervosa is associated with serious health consequences including heart failure, kidney failure, osteoporosis, and death.
Anorexia Nervosa has the highest mortality rate of all psychiatric disorders.
A young woman is 12 times more likely to die than other women her age without Anorexia.
Anorexia Nervosa usually appears in adolescence.
Bulimia Nervosa is an eating disorder characterized by excessive food consumption followed by inappropriate compensatory behaviors, such as self-induced vomiting, misuse of laxatives, fasting, or excessive exercise.
Bulimia Nervosa is common: an estimated 1.1 to 4.2 percent of American women will suffer from this disorder in their lifetime.
Bulimia Nervosa is associated with cardiac, gastrointestinal, and dental problems including irregular heartbeats, gastric rupture, peptic ulcer, and tooth decay.
Bulimia Nervosa usually appears in adolescence.
On the 1999 Youth Risk Behavior Survey, 7.5 percent of high school girls reported recent use of laxatives or vomiting to control their weight.
Binge Eating Disorder is characterized by frequent episodes of uncontrolled overeating.
Binge Eating Disorder is common: an estimated 2 to 5 percent of Americans experience this disorder in a 6-month period.
Binge Eating is associated with obesity, heart disease, gall bladder disease, and diabetes.
Eating disorders are commonly associated with substantial psychological problems, including depression, substance abuse, and suicide.
Obesity is reaching epidemic proportions: 27 percent of United States adults are obese and 13 percent of children and 14 percent of adolescents are seriously overweight.
Poor eating habits have led to a ``calcium crisis'' among American youth: only 13.5 percent of adolescent girls get the recommended daily amount of calcium, placing them at serious risk for osteoporosis and other bone diseases.
Because nearly 90 percent of adult bone mass is established by the end of this age range, the Nation's youth's insufficient calcium intake is truly a calcium crisis.
Eating disorders of all types are more common in women than men.
Eating preferences and habits are established in childhood.
Poor eating habits are a risk factor for the development of eating disorders, obesity and osteoporosis.
However, simply urging overweight youth to be thin has not reduced the prevalence of obesity and may result in other problems including body dissatisfaction, low self-esteem, and eating disorders.
Therefore, effective interventions for promoting healthy eating behaviors in youth should promote healthy lifestyle and not inadvertently promote unhealthy weight management techniques.
The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To increase preventive health activities designed to promote the development of healthy eating habits and behaviors in youth.
To support research to develop and test educational curricula and intervention programs aimed at promoting healthy eating habits and behaviors in youth.
To identify and disseminate effective intervention programs aimed at promoting healthy eating habits and behaviors in youth.
Use of Allotments.--Section 1904(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300w-3) is amended by adding after subparagraph (G) the following: ``(H) Activities designed to address and prevent eating disorders, obesity, and osteoporosis through effective programs to promote healthy eating and exercise habits and behaviors in youth.''.
Part A of title XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300w et sequentes) is amended by adding after section 1910 the following: ``SEC.
GRANT PROGRAM FOR EATING DISORDERS, OBESITY, AND INADEQUATE CALCIUM INTAKE.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (hereafter the `Director'), shall award grants or cooperative agreements to accredited universities, colleges, or nonprofit organizations with demonstrated capability to conduct research to comprehensively promote healthy eating behaviors in youth.
Such grants or cooperative agreements may be awarded to target youth or specific at-risk populations, such as adolescent girls.
Duration.--Grants or cooperative agreements awarded under this section shall be awarded for a period of not more than 4 years.
Use of Funds.--A university, college, or nonprofit organization that receives a grant or cooperative agreement under this section shall use funds received to develop and test educational curricula and intervention programs designed to promote healthy eating behaviors and habits in youth, including science-based interventions with multiple components such as-- ``(1) nutritional content; ``(2) understanding and responding to hunger and satiety; ``(3) positive body image development; ``(4) positive self-esteem development; and ``(5) learning life skills, such as stress management, communication skills, problem solving and decision making skills, as well as consideration of cultural and developmental issues, and the role of family, school, and community.
In Addition.--Grants or cooperative agreements awarded under this section shall be awarded in addition to any grants awarded under section 1904.
Report.--The Director shall review the results of the grants or cooperative agreements awarded under this section and other related research and identify programs that have demonstrated effectiveness in promoting healthy eating behaviors and habits in youth.
Such programs shall be referred to as ``Programs that Work''.
Information about Programs that Work, including program curricula, shall be made readily available to the public.
Definition.--In this section, the term `healthy eating' means having regular eating habits, such as eating 3 meals a day to satisfy hunger, eating for nourishment, health, and energy, eating in such a manner as to acknowledge internal signals of appetite and satiety, and eating in a healthy manner in ordinary social environments to promote healthy social relationships with family, peers, and community.
Sunset.--The provisions of this section shall be effective for 5 years after the date of enactment of this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, $5,500,000 for fiscal year 2004, $6,000,000 for fiscal year 2005, $6,500,000 for year 2006, and $1,000,000 for year 2007.