This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Law Judge Act of 1994''.
AUTHORITY TO REFER TO MEMBERS OF BOARD OF VETERANS' APPEALS AS VETERANS LAW JUDGES.
Section 7101(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a member of the Board, including the Chairman and the Vice Chairman, shall be referred to as a veterans law judge.
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to a temporary member of the Board.''.
CLASSIFICATION AND PAY OF MEMBERS OF BOARD OF VETERANS' APPEALS.
In General.--Section 7101(b) of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(6) A member of the Board (other than the Chairman and Vice Chairman) shall receive compensation under the provisions of section 5372 of title 5 and other benefits equal to those payable to an administrative law judge.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the first day of the first pay period beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Savings Provision.--The rate of basic pay payable to an individual who is a member of the Board of Veterans' Appeals on the date of the enactment of this Act may not be reduced by reason of the amendment made by subsection (a) below the rate payable to such individual on the day before the effective date specified in subsection (b).
CONTINUATION OF SERVICE AND REAPPOINTMENT OF BOARD MEMBERS.
Chairman.--Paragraph (1) of section 7101(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(1)(A) The Chairman shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, for a term of six years.
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the Chairman may, upon the approval of the Secretary, serve after the expiration of the term of the Chairman under that subparagraph.
The Chairman may serve under this subparagraph until-- ``(i) the confirmation of the Chairman under subparagraph (A) for an additional term to which the Chairman is appointed under paragraph (3); or ``(ii) the confirmation of the successor to the Chairman.
The Chairman may be removed by the President for misconduct, inefficiency, neglect of duty, or engaging in the practice of law or for physical or mental disability which, in the opinion of the President, prevents the proper execution of the Chairman's duties.
The Chairman may not be removed from office by the President on any other grounds.
Any such removal may only be made after notice and opportunity for hearing.''.
Other Members of Board.--Paragraph (2) of such section is amended to read as follows: ``(2)(A) The other members of the Board (including the Vice Chairman) shall be appointed by the Secretary, with the approval of the President and based upon recommendations of the Chairman, for a term of nine years.
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), a member of the Board may, upon the recommendation of the Chairman and the approval of the Secretary, serve after the expiration of the term of the member under that subparagraph.
A member may serve under this subparagraph until-- ``(i) the appointment of the member to an additional term under paragraph (3); or ``(ii) the appointment of the successor to the member.
(i) The Secretary shall notify a member of the Board under this paragraph if-- ``(I) the Chairman decides not to recommend the member for appointment under paragraph (3) to an additional term; or ``(II) the Secretary decides not to appoint the member to an additional term under that paragraph.
The Secretary shall notify a member of the Board under clause (i) not later than 120 days before the expiration of the member's term.
A notification under clause (i) shall include an explanation of the Chairman's decision not to recommend the member for appointment or the Secretary's decision not to appoint the member, as the case may be.
The Secretary shall provide a member of the Board who receives a notice under this subparagraph an opportunity for a hearing on the matters in the notice.
The hearing shall occur not later than 60 days before the expiration of the member's term.
Upon completion of a hearing in the case of a member of the Board under clause (iv), the Secretary shall determine whether or not to appoint the member to an additional term under paragraph (3).
The Secretary's decision shall be final and shall not be subject to judicial review.
(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), if the Secretary fails to notify a member of the Board covered by clause (i) of subparagraph (C) by the time specified in clause (ii) of that subparagraph, the member shall be deemed appointed by the Secretary to an additional term under paragraph (3).
The President may disapprove the appointment of a member of the Board to an additional term under clause (i).
A member whose appointment is so disapproved shall not be deemed appointed to such term under that clause.
Upon the expiration of the term, including any service after such expiration under subparagraph (B), of a member of the Board (other than the Chairman) who was a career or career-conditional employee in the service before commencement of the term, the member shall revert to the civil service grade and series held by the member immediately before the appointment of the member to the Board.
(i) Reversion of a member of the Board under subparagraph (E) shall not affect the taking against the member of an action referred to in clause (ii) if the action was initiated before the expiration of the term of the member.
Clause (i) refers to the following actions: ``(I) Removal of a member of the Board.
Suspension of a member.
Reduction in grade of a member.
Reduction in pay of a member.
Furlough of a member for 30 days or less.
A reduction-in-force under section 3502 of title 5.
An action initiated under section 1215 of title 5.''.
Criteria for Reappointment of Board Members.--(1) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall prescribe criteria applicable to the appointment of members of the Board of Veterans' Appeals to a term on the Board under section 7101(b)(3) of title 38, United States Code.
The criteria prescribed under paragraph (1) shall not apply to the Chairman of the Board.
(A) The criteria prescribed under paragraph (1) shall take into consideration the timeliness of a member of the Board, the case management of a member, the extent to which substantive errors appear in the decisions of the Board issued by the member, and the conduct of a member as a member of the Board.
Such criteria shall not provide for an evaluation of a member of the Board in accordance with the granting or denying of appeals by the member.
Applicability.--Subparagraph (B) of section 7101(b)(2) of title 38, United States Code, as amended by subsection (b), shall apply to members of the Board of Veterans' Appeals appointed under section 201(d) of the Veterans' Judicial Review Act (division A of Public Law 100-687; 38 United States Code 7101 note).
BOARD MEMBERS HOLDING APPOINTMENTS IN THE SENIOR EXECUTIVE SERVICE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any member of the Board of Veterans' Appeals who, on the date of the enactment of this Act, is a member of the Senior Executive Service shall-- (1) continue as a member of the Senior Executive Service while serving as a member of the Board; and (2) during the term of office of the member under section 7101(b) of title 38, United States Code, receive the pay, leave, and other benefits (including benefits relating to reassignment) to which members of the Senior Executive Service are entitled.