This Act may be cited as the ``Work Force Diversity Partnership Act of 1993''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the United States is becoming the most diverse work- place in the world at a time of growing economic dissatisfaction and intense global competition; (2) people of color, caucasian women, and immigrants will account for 85 percent of the net growth in our Nation's labor force during the 1990's; (3) the expectations, characteristics, demands, beliefs, work values, motivating factors and educational backgrounds of individuals in the work force are becoming increasingly diverse; (4) employees, managers, administrators and government officials are inadequately prepared to deal effectively with increased diversity in the work force; (5) increased domestic and international competition require that business, industry and government leaders effectively motivate and manage this diverse work force; (6) as more parents join the work force, it has become increasingly difficult for employees to balance the demands of the workplace with the needs of families; and (7) by understanding and valuing diversity which respects differences, employers emphasize creativity, self initiative, leadership, innovation, and team-work, and thereby improve the working conditions of all Americans and the chances for economic success.
It is the purpose of this Act to establish a grant program within the Department of Labor to-- (1) study and address issues relating to work force and cultural diversity and their impact on economic competitiveness, employment opportunities, advancement and retention; and (2) develop collaborative public and private sector education and training materials that address the issues of work force and cultural diversity.
As used in this Act-- (1) Federal share.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term ``Federal share'' means 50 percent of the cost of each grant awarded under this Act.
Exception.--If the Secretary, after consultation with the peer review panel, determines that to do so will further the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may increase the amount of the Federal share.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the same meaning given that term by section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1141(a)).
Non-federal share.-- (A) In general.--The term ``non-Federal share'' means the amount required to be expended by the recipient of a grant under this Act.
In-kind services.--Amounts available to pay the non-Federal share under this paragraph may include in- kind services or other resources.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Labor.
WORK FORCE DIVERSITY GRANT PROGRAM.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share of the cost of programs established by such entities that are designed to-- (1) target and develop issues relating to work force and cultural diversity; (2) develop public and private sector education and training materials that focus on the issues of work force and cultural diversity; (3) foster research, scholarship, innovative curriculum development, development of teaching materials, and other practicable supportive academic activities relating to such issues; (4) assist in the dissemination and transfer of such materials for use in private sector training efforts as they relate to issues of work force and cultural diversity; and (5) develop and establish cooperative higher education- business training programs to assist public and private industry leaders and workers in addressing the issue of work force diversity.
Requirement.--The Secretary shall ensure that the recipient of a grant under this Act agrees to establish, operate, and provide the non-Federal share of the cost of the work force diversity programs for which the grant is made.
Duration of Grant.--No grant awarded under this Act may be for a period longer than 3 years.
Submission of Proposals.--To be eligible for a grant under this Act an entity shall prepare and submit to the Secretary a proposal, at such time, in such manner and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Participants.-- (1) In general.--An institution of higher education in partnership with one or more organizations described in paragraph (2), shall be eligible to receive a grant under this Act.
Organizations.--An organization referred to in paragraph (1) shall be-- (A) a corporation, business, or partnership, whether for profit or nonprofit; (B) a labor organization; or (C) an organization that has a demonstrated interest or expertise in work force diversity issues.
Criteria for Selection.-- (1) In general.--In determining whether to approve a proposal submitted under subsection (a), the Secretary shall take into account-- (A) the extent to which the grant applicant demonstrates a potential to achieve one or more of the purposes of this Act; (B) the level of participation and financial commitment of the participants; (C) the likelihood that a proposed program will foster the creation of increased diversity awareness programs in other institutional environments; (D) the likelihood that the proposed program will result in the development and dissemination of national or regional best practices; (E) the extent to which the project will impact the international competitiveness of the United States economy; and (F) such other criteria as the Secretary may prescribe.
Faculty participation.--The Secretary shall encourage partnerships desiring to receive a grant under this Act to submit proposals that are written by teams of faculty from multiple disciplines, student and academic affairs professional, or student organizations concerned with multicultural education, or any combination thereof.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this Act, the Secretary shall give priority to grant proposals that demonstrate the availability of sufficient amounts of non- Federal contributions or resources from non-governmental entities.
A recipient of a grant under this Act shall use amounts received under such grant to engage in activities in accordance with one or more of the following guidelines: (1) The development of instructional material concerning efforts designed to address cultural and work force diversity issues within the workplace setting.
The development of public and private sector education and training materials that will address the issues of work force and cultural diversity.
The development of new approaches to work force diversity issues and scholarship efforts to be integrated within the curriculum of business schools, ethnic and women's studies, engineering schools, social science disciplines, humanities and the arts and sciences.
In using grant funds under this paragraph, a grantee may employ approaches to be carried out in conjunction with corporate education and training programs.
The conduct of research concerning multicultural workplace interactions and team management and business in multicultural and multi-lingual marketplace settings.
The implementation of faculty development programs that focus on research, appropriate learning environments, and pedagogical approaches to teaching multicultural management and work diversity issues.
The development and dissemination of information concerning models for summer precollege business internship programs that aid in integrating the workplace and in giving students a better understanding of the private sector and of work force diversity issues.
The conduct of forums, workshops, and conferences in which representatives from academic, corporate, government, or other institutions with a demonstrated interest or expertise in work force diversity will focus on issues, attitudes and strategies that sensitize managers, employees, faculty, corporate, government and other leaders and workers to workplace diversity issues.
Any other activities that the Secretary determines to be appropriate to meet the purposes of this Act.
To assist the Secretary in carrying out this Act, the Secretary shall establish peer review panels to review the merits of grant proposals proposed under this Act.
In establishing such panels, the Secretary shall seek the widest participation of qualified individuals from participants, as defined in section 6(b).
Each peer review panel shall report the findings and recommendations of the panel to the Secretary.
Each recipient of a grant under this Act shall prepare and submit an annual report to the Secretary.
Each such report shall include a summary of the progress of the activities implemented under the grant to achieve the purposes of this Act, a summary of the expenditures involved, a plan describing the recipient's planned use of funds for the forthcoming year, an explanation of the uses made of the results of the grant program where appropriate, and any other information that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
The Secretary shall annually prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress, a report that shall include an evaluation of the progress made in achieving the purposes of this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998.