This Act may be cited as the ``Alaska Peninsula Wilderness Designation Act of 1993''.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``land'' means lands, waters, and interests therein; (2) The term ``public lands'' means land situated in Alaska which, after the date of enactment of this Act, the title is in the United States, except-- (A) land selections of the State of Alaska which have been tentatively approved or validly selected under the Alaska Statehood Act and lands which have been confirmed to, validly selected by, or granted to the Territory of Alaska or the State under any other provisions of Federal law; and (B) land selections of a Native Corporation made under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes) which have not been conveyed to a Native Corporation, unless any such selection is determined to be invalid or is relinquished.
The term ``Native Corporation'' means any Regional Corporation, any Village Corporation, any Native group and those Native entities which have incorporated pursuant to section 14(h)(3) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1613(h)(3)).
The term ``Regional Corporation'' has the same meaning as such term has under section 3(g) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.
The term ``Village Corporation'' has the same meaning as such term has under section 3(j) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.
The term ``Native group'' has the same meaning as such term has under sections 3(d) and 14(h)(2) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Alaska Statehood Act'' means the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the admission of the State of Alaska into the Union'', approved July 7, 1958 (72 United States Statutes at Large 339), as amended.
The term ``State'' means the State of Alaska.
The term ``Koniag'' means Koniag, Incorporated, a Regional Corporation.
The term ``Selection Rights'' means those rights granted to Koniag pursuant to sections 12(a), 12(b), and 14(h)(8) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (85 United States Statutes at Large 688), as amended, to receive title to the oil and gas rights and other interests in the subsurface estate of approximately two hundred and seventy-five thousand acres of public lands in the State of Alaska which lands are identified as ``Koniag Selections'' on the map entitled ``Koniag Interest Lands, Alaska Peninsula'', dated May 1989.
The term ``agency'' includes-- (A) any instrumentality of the United States; (B) any element of an agency; and (C) any wholly owned or mixed-owned corporation of the United States Government identified in chapter 91 of title 31, United States Code.
The term ``property'' has the same meaning as is provided the term in section 12(b)(7) of Public Law 94-9204 (43 United States Code 1611 note), as amended.''.
Designation of Wilderness.--The public lands within the boundaries depicted as ``Proposed Wilderness'' on the following identified maps are hereby designated as wilderness, and therefore as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System, with the nomenclature and approximate acreage as indicated below: (1) Aniakchak Wilderness of approximately five hundred and three thousand acres within the Aniakchak National Monument and Preserve and which is generally depicted upon the map entitled ``Aniakchak Wilderness'' dated July 1992.
Alaska Peninsula Wilderness of approximately one million eight hundred and seventy-six thousand acres within the Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge and which is generally depicted upon the map entitled ``Alaska Peninsula Wilderness'' dated July 1992.
Approximately three hundred and forty-seven thousand acres within the Becharof National Wildlife Refuge as an addition to the existing Becharof Wilderness, as generally depicted upon the map entitled ``Becharof Additional Wilderness'' dated July 1992.
Map and Legal Description.--As soon as practicable after the enactment of this Act, a map and legal description of each wilderness area designated by this Act shall be published in the Federal Register and filed with the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs and the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives and with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Each such legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal description and map.
A copy of each map shall be available for public inspection in an appropriate office of the National Park Service and the Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior.
Lands Included.--Except for those lands subject to Koniag Selection Rights which are subsequently relinquished pursuant to section 5, only those lands within the boundaries of any wilderness area which are public lands (as such term is defined in this Act) shall be deemed to be included as a portion of such area.
No lands within the boundaries of any wilderness area designated pursuant to section 3(a) hereof and which, before, on, or after the date of enactment of this Act, are conveyed to the State, to any Native Corporation, or to any private party, shall be subject to the regulations applicable solely to public lands within such wilderness areas.
Any lands subject to Koniag Selection Rights relinquished to the United States pursuant to section 5 which are within the boundaries of a wilderness area designated by this Act shall become part of such wilderness areas and be administered accordingly.
MANAGEMENT OF WILDERNESS AREAS.
Generally.--Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and subject to valid existing rights, the lands designated as Aniakchak Wilderness by this Act shall be managed by the Secretary of the Interior in the same manner as the lands designated as wilderness by section 701 of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 United States Code 3101 et sequentes), and the other lands designated as wilderness by this Act shall be managed by such Secretary in the same manner as the lands designated as wilderness by section 702 of such Act.
Permits.--(1) Any special use or concession permit which was in existence during 1991 for operations on lands designated as wilderness by this Act and which except for designation of such lands as wilderness could have remained in effect or been renewed by or reissued to the same permittee, may be renewed or reissued to such permittee, subject to the provisions of this subsection.
Nothing in this Act shall require renewal or reissuance of a permit if the Secretary, for reasons other than the designation of lands as wilderness, determines that such action would be inconsistent with applicable law or established regulations.
Nothing in this Act shall preclude the Secretary from canceling or otherwise restricting any permit for any reason other than the designation of lands as wilderness.
No renewal or reissuance of a permit described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be for a period longer than the lifetime of the permittee, and no such permit shall be transferable or assignable.
Designation of lands as wilderness shall not prevent any structures and other improvements authorized by a permit described in paragraph (1), including cabins, from continuing to be used, maintained, and if necessary, replaced, to the extent otherwise permissible, but no additional structures or other improvements shall be permitted on lands so designated.
ACQUISITION OF KONIAG SELECTION RIGHTS.
In General.--(1) If the Secretary receives from Koniag a timely tender of relinquishment of the Selection Rights, the Secretary shall accept such tender no later than 60 days after its receipt, and shall notify the Secretary of the Treasury of such acceptance.
For purposes of this subsection, a tender by Koniag shall be timely if it is received by the Secretary no later than 180 days after either-- (A) receipt by Koniag of the Secretary's determination of the value of the Selection Rights pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, or (B) the outcome of the procedures established by subsection (b) of this section for resolution of any dispute regarding such value, whichever last occurs, unless the Secretary and Koniag agree to modify his deadline.
Value.--(1) The value of the Selection Rights shall be equal to the fair market value of the oil and gas interests, and where appropriate the fair market value of the subsurface estate of the lands or interests in lands.
Within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, Koniag and the Secretary shall meet to determine the identity of a qualified appraiser who shall perform an appraisal of the Selection Rights in conformity with the standards of the Appraisal Foundation and utilizing the methodology customarily used by the Minerals Management Service of the Department of the Interior in valuing such interests.
Such appraiser shall be selected by the mutual agreement of Koniag and the Secretary, or if such agreement is not reached within 60 days after such initial meeting, then Koniag and the Secretary, no later than 90 days after such initial meeting, shall each designate an appraiser who is qualified to perform the appraisal.
The 2 appraisers so identified shall select a third qualified appraiser who shall perform the appraisal.
Within 180 days after the selection of the third appraiser, a written appraisal report setting out the value of the Selection Rights and the methodology used to arrive at it, shall be delivered to the Secretary and to Koniag.
Within 60 days after the receipt of the appraisal report described in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall determine the value of the Selection Rights and shall immediately notify Koniag of such determination.
If Koniag does not agree with the value as determined by the Secretary, the procedures specified in section 206(d) of Public Law 94-579, as amended, shall be used to establish the value, but the average value per acre of the Selection Rights shall not be more than $300.
Establishment.--(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, on October 1, 1996, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary, shall establish a Koniag Account.
Beginning on October 1, 1996, the balance of the account shall-- (A) be available to Koniag for bidding on and purchasing property sold at public sale, subject to the conditions described in paragraph (3); and (B) remain available until expended.
(A) Koniag may use the account established under paragraph (1) to bid as any other bidder for property (wherever located) at any public sale by an agency and may purchase the property in accordance with applicable laws and regulations of the agency offering the property for sale.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the right to draw against such account shall be assignable in whole or in part by Koniag, but no assignment shall be recognized by the Secretary of the Treasury until written notice thereof is filed with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of the Interior by Koniag.
In conducting a transaction described in subparagraph (A), an agency shall accept, in the same manner as cash, any amount tendered from the account established by the Secretary of the Treasury under paragraph (1).
The Secretary of the Treasury shall adjust the balance of the account to reflect the transaction.
The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, shall establish procedures to permit the account established under paragraph (1) to-- (i) receive deposits; (ii) make deposits into escrow when an escrow is required for the sale of any property; and (iii) reinstate to the account any unused escrow deposits in the event sales are not consummated.
Amount.--The initial balance of the account established in subsection (a) shall be equal to the value of the Selection Rights as determined pursuant to section 5 of this Act.
Treatment of Amounts From Account.--(1) The Secretary of the Treasury shall deem as cash payments any amount tendered from the account established pursuant to subsection (a) and received by agencies as proceeds from a public sale of property, and shall make any transfers necessary to allow an agency to use the proceeds in the event an agency is authorized by law to use the proceeds for a specific purpose.
(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary of the Treasury and the heads of agencies shall administer sales pursuant to this section in the same manner as is provided for any other Alaska native corporation authorized by law as of the date of enactment of this section (including the use of similar accounts for bidding on and purchasing property sold for public sale).
Amounts in an account created for the benefit of a specific Alaska native corporation may not be used to satisfy the property purchase obligations of any other Alaska native corporation.
Revenues.--The Selection Rights shall be deemed to be an interest in the subsurface for purposes of section 7(i) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes).