This Act may be cited as the ``Community Choice for Electricity Act of 1999''.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``aggregation'' means the purchase or acquisition of retail electricity on behalf of two or more consumers.
The term ``electric utility franchise'' means rights granted to a utility company by a local government which provide conditions under which the utility conducts its operations and services within the boundaries of the local government.
The term ``municipal electric utility'' means a city, county, irrigation district, drainage district, public utility district, or other political subdivision or agency of a State competent under the laws thereof to carry on the business of a retail electricity distributor and/or a retail electricity supplier.
The term ``opt-out aggregation plan'' means aggregation in which all customers within the jurisdiction of a local government unit are automatically included unless they affirmatively choose a supplier other than the supplier designated by the local government unit.
The term ``retail electric consumer'' means any person who purchases or offers to purchase any retail electric supply.
The term ``rural electric cooperative'' means an enterprise or organization owned by and operated for the benefit of those receiving retail electricity (usually distribution and supply) and other services from the cooperative.
The term ``State'' means a State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and Indian tribes as defined in section 102(2) of the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 United States Code 479a(2)).
The term ``State regulatory authority'' means any State agency which has ratemaking authority with respect to the provision of local electric energy distribution services by any local distribution company.
The term ``supplier'' means any person who produces, generates, manufactures, aggregates, markets, brokers, sells, or otherwise supplies electric energy.
Congress finds the following: (1) Many States are deregulating retail sales of electricity.
Deregulation of retail sales of electricity must benefit all customers, including residential and small business customers.
In States that have deregulated retail sales of electricity, large industrial and commercial customers are winning the best deals, and few choices are yet available to residential and small business consumers.
It is likely that most residential customers will not actively choose a new electricity supplier and instead will remain customers of their current electricity supplier for years to come; (5) All customers, especially residential and small business customers, will often find it difficult and frustrating to find the time and sufficient information to fully evaluate competing offers from electricity suppliers.
Aggregation into larger buying groups will enable consumers to achieve greater leverage and thus better prices and services in electricity markets.
Community choice is a particular type of aggregation in which a local government negotiates a contract for electric energy on behalf of all citizens within its boundaries.
Residents or businesses in the community who prefer to choose their own electricity suppliers would be free to ``opt out''.
All consumers taking part in community choice aggregation can benefit, including large customers, who can still receive price differentiation based on their larger usage.
Local governments are experienced in working with technical consultants to negotiate contracts and deliver services to their citizens.
Local governments are accountable to their constituents through elections, open meetings laws, fair bidding laws, and conflict of interest laws.
Because local governments exercising community choice must include all electricity customers within the jurisdiction who want to participate, all citizens and businesses who so choose can benefit, while other types of retail electricity suppliers will seek to serve the more profitable customers or specific types of customers.
Local governments can provide an electric load that has diversity and may be attractive to electricity suppliers.
In States that have deregulated retail sales of electricity, citizens should be able to use traditional public processes to determine whether their local governments should act as nonprofit aggregators for their communities.
In States in which they hold franchise powers for electricity, local governments should be able to use their franchise to exercise community choice.
Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal or State law, and subject to legitimate and nondiscriminatory State requirements imposed on retail electric suppliers, a group of customers or any entity, including a unit of State or local government, acting on behalf of such group may acquire retail electric energy on an aggregate basis if the group of customers is served by one or more local distribution companies that are subject to retail competition.
Title VI of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 is amended by adding the following new section at the end thereof: ``SEC.
Community Choice Aggregation of Electric Load.--Any State that permits any group of retail electric consumers to choose among competing suppliers of electric energy shall permit any general purpose local government unit for any political subdivision of the State, or group of such general purpose units of local government acting together, to offer to act as an agent for all purchasers that are within such group of retail electric consumers and that are located within the boundaries of such political subdivision for the purpose of purchasing electric energy on an aggregate basis if such local government, or group of local governments, comply with the requirements of subsection (b).
Requirements.-- ``(1) Approval by vote.--A local government shall be covered by the provisions of subsection (a) only if such government has approved the aggregation of electric energy purchases by a vote of its elected governing body or by a vote of its citizens.
Two or more local governments shall be covered by the provisions of subsection (a) only if such governments have approved the aggregation of electric energy purchases by a vote of the elected governing body or by a vote of the citizens of each local government.
Participation not mandatory.--A local government shall be covered by the provisions of subsection (a) only if all retail electric consumers permitted to choose among competing suppliers of electric energy that are located within the boundaries of such political subdivision are offered the opportunity to participate in the aggregation of purchases and any such consumer choosing not to participate is permitted to opt out and purchase electric energy from another agent acting as an aggregator or directly from any supplier or other person.
State regulatory authorities.--Each State regulatory authority for a State that permits any group of retail electric consumers to choose among competing suppliers of electric energy shall cooperate with local governments for the purpose of compliance with this subsection.
Each such State regulatory authority shall establish guidelines for local governments acting as community choice electricity aggregators.
No State regulatory authority may interfere with a local government's existing powers to procure competitive energy services under existing Federal and State law, city charter provisions, or local procurement practices.
Funds for renewable energy or energy efficiency.-- Each State that permits any group of retail electric consumers to choose among competing suppliers and that also authorizes or mandates the collection of funds for renewable energy or energy efficiency programs shall permit local governments that serve as community choice aggregators of electric energy purchases to collect and expend such funds in the case of consumers within the aggregated jurisdiction if the local government has prepared and approved a plan for such collection and expenditure at the local level and State regulators have reviewed and approved said plan as consistent with State energy goals and as providing an appropriate contribution to any statewide or regional renewable energy or energy efficiency fund that benefits the aggregated jurisdiction.
Federal Power Act Jurisdiction.--No local government that aggregates electric load as described in subsection (a) shall be considered a utility engaging in the wholesale purchase and resale of electricity for purposes of the Federal Power Act.
Providing electricity to aggregated customers within the boundaries of a local government as described in subsection (a) shall not be considered a wholesale transaction subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission under the Federal Power Act.
Enforcement.--The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission may bring an action in the appropriate United States District Court against any State to require compliance with the provisions of subsection (a).
Savings Provision.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the aggregation of electric load by local government units in a different manner under other authority of law.''.
Any State that has deregulated retail sales of electricity shall permit local governments to exercise local franchise powers.
A local government that has granted a franchise to a utility at a prior time may offer such franchise for competitive bidding and contract award, provided such measures are authorized by consumers in a public process.
Utilities Not Participating.--For municipal electric utilities and rural electric cooperatives that are not participating in retail electric competition, sections 4, 5, and 6 of this Act shall not apply.
Aggregation.--For States that have adopted retail competition by law or regulation prior to the date of enactment of this Act, sections 4, 5, and 6 of this Act shall not apply to the provisions of a State law or regulation, and any subsequent regulation implementing such State law or regulation as such law or regulation may pertain to an opt-out aggregation plan as it may be undertaken by any general purpose local government unit for any political subdivision of the State including a municipal corporation, county government or township.
If any provision of this Act (or the application of that provision to particular persons or circumstances) is held invalid, the remainder of this Act (or the application of that provision to other persons or circumstances) shall not be affected.