This Act may be cited as the ``Lyme and Infectious Disease Information and Fairness in Treatment (LIIFT) Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Lyme disease is a common but frequently misunderstood illness that, if not caught early and treated properly, can cause serious health problems.
Lyme disease is a bacterial infection that is transmitted by a tick bite.
Early signs of infection may include a rash and flu-like symptoms such as fever, muscle aches, headaches, and fatigue.
Although Lyme disease can be treated with antibiotics if caught early, the disease often goes undetected because it mimics other illnesses or may be misdiagnosed.
If an individual with Lyme disease does not receive treatment, such individual can develop severe heart, neurological, eye, and joint problems.
Although Lyme disease accounts for 90 percent of all vector-borne infections in the United States, the ticks that spread Lyme disease also spread other disorders, such as ehrlichiosis, babesiosis, and other strains of Borrelia.
All of these diseases in 1 patient makes diagnosis and treatment more difficult.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cases of this tick-borne disease have increased 25- fold since national surveillance of it began in 1982.
Although tick-borne disease cases have been reported in 49 States and the District of Columbia, about 90 percent of the 15,000 cases have been reported in the following 10 States: Connecticut, Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Delaware, and Wisconsin.
Studies have shown that the actual number of tick-borne disease cases are approximately 10 times the amount reported due to poor surveillance of the disease.
According to studies, Lyme disease costs our Nation between $1,000,000,000 to $2,000,000,000 each year in increased medical costs, lost productivity, prolonged pain and suffering, unnecessary testing, and costly delays in diagnosis and inappropriate treatment.
Patients with Lyme disease are increasingly having difficulty obtaining diagnosis and treatment for the disease, and being restored to health.
Because of differences in medical and scientific opinion, clinicians fear retaliation from insurance companies and medical licensure boards based on their diagnosis and treatment of patients.
A number of patients have difficulties in obtaining insurance coverage for treatment of Lyme disease.
Despite 14 years of Federal funding, there is still no test that can accurately determine infection so that proper treatment is adequately achieved.
Persistence of symptomatology in many patients without reliable testing makes treatment of patients more difficult.
According to the General Accounting Office, over the past 10 years, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has only increased its allocation for tick-borne research and education by 7 percent, from $6,900,000 to $7,400,000.
Over that same period, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's expenditures for infectious diseases rose 318 percent, from $70,800,000 to $296,000,000.
According to the General Accounting Office, over the past 10 years, the National Institutes of Health have increased expenditures almost every year, from $13,100,000 in fiscal year 1991 to $26,000,000 in fiscal year 2000.
The Lyme disease vaccine gained approval from the Food and Drug Administration in 1998.
Since that time, the Food and Drug Administration has received over 1,000 adverse event reports on the vaccine, including reports of severe arthritic symptoms and even Lyme disease.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a Tick-Borne Disorders Advisory Committee that will-- (1) provide a public voice regarding the direction and activities of the governmental agencies that deal with Lyme disease in order to create a better understanding and response by the government to the public need regarding the disease; (2) assure communication and coordination regarding tick- borne disorder issues between agencies of the Department of Health and Human Services, the biomedical community, and voluntary organizations concerned; and (3) promote coordination of activities with the Social Security Administration and Department of Defense.
TICK-BORNE DISORDERS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
Establishment of Committee.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, there shall be established an advisory committee to be known as the Tick-Borne Disorders Advisory Committee (referred to in this Act as the ``Committee'') organized in the Office of the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Duties.--The Committee shall advise the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') regarding how to-- (1) provide public input on the public's needs regarding tick-borne disorders, so that government agencies can more effectively plan and execute their activities, thus improving the response to public need; (2) assure interagency coordination and communication and minimize overlap regarding tick-borne disorder issues; (3) identify opportunities to coordinate efforts with other Federal agencies and tick-borne disorder national nonprofits; and (4) develop informed responses to constituency groups regarding the efforts and progress of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall appoint 11 voting members to the Committee of which-- (A) 3 shall be scientific community members, including a researcher or public health official, with demonstrated achievement in tick-borne education, research, or advocacy, and extensive experience in working with a diverse range of patients, patient groups, and tick-borne non-profits; (B) 3 shall be representatives of national tick- borne disorder voluntary organizations that advocate for the public, as well as those suffering from or providing medical care to patients with tick-borne disorders; (C) 3 shall be clinicians with extensive experience in the diagnoses and treatment of tick-borne diseases and with long-term experience, independent of an individual practice or research, in working with patients, patient groups, and tick-borne non-profits; and (D) 2 shall be patient representatives who are individuals who have been diagnosed with tick-borne illnesses or who have had an immediate family member diagnosed with such illness.
Ex-officio representatives.--The Committee shall have nonvoting ex-officio members of which-- (A) 2 shall be from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1 of which shall be from the Viral and Rickettsial Diseases Division of the Viral and Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch; (B) 1 shall be from the Food and Drug Administration, Office of Special Health Issues, in the Office of the Commissioner; (C) 3 shall be from the National Institutes of Health-- (i) 1 of which shall be from the Rocky Mountain Laboratories Microscopy Branch; and (ii) 1 of which shall be a pathologist with the National Institutes of Health who has extensive experience in Lyme disease research and a demonstrated ability to work well with diverse groups in the patient, public, and health care provider communities; (D) 1 shall be from the Health Resources and Services Administration; (E) 1 shall be from the Social Security Administration; (F) 1 shall be from the Department of Defense, United States Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine; (G) 1 shall be from the Health Care Financing Administration; and (H) any additional members shall be added from other Departments if necessary to aid the Committee in its overall goals.
Chairperson.--The Assistant Secretary for Health (Department of Health and Human Services) shall serve as the co-chairperson of the Committee with a public co-chairperson chosen by the members described under subsection (c)(1).
The public co-chairperson shall serve a 2-year term and retain all voting rights.
Term of Appointment.--All members shall be appointed to serve on the Committee for 4 year terms.
Vacancy.--If there is a vacancy on the Committee, such position shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term shall be appointed for the remainder of that term.
Members may serve after the expiration of their terms until their successors have taken office.
Meetings.--The Committee shall hold public meetings, except as otherwise determined by the Secretary, giving notice to the public of such, and meet at least twice a year with additional meetings subject to the call of the Chairperson.
Agenda items can be added at the request of the Committee members, as well as the Chairperson.
Meetings shall be conducted, and records of the proceedings kept as required by applicable laws and Departmental regulations.
Reports.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the activities carried out under this Act.
Content.--Such reports shall describe-- (A) progress in the development of more accurate diagnostic tools and tests; (B) the development of the other seven categories of case definitions; (C) the promotion of public awareness and physician education initiatives to improve the knowledge of health care providers and the public regarding the best and most effective methods to prevent, diagnose and treat tick-borne disorders; (D) the improved access to disability benefits policies for people living with tick-borne disorders; and (E) recommendations for resolving differences in medical and scientific opinion that have resulted in the exceptional number of reviews of Lyme disease clinicians by insurance companies and State medical licensure boards.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $250,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 and 2003.
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.
There are authorized to be appropriated for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention-- (1) $14,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 and 2003 to enable such Centers to focus on developing better diagnostic tools and tests, expanding educational efforts regarding other tick-borne disorders beyond Lyme disease, and re-educating clinicians, medical licensure boards, and health care insurers about the inappropriate uses of the Lyme disease case surveillance definition in the diagnosis and treatment of patients; and (2) $7,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 and 2003 to collaborate with the National Institutes of Health, the Department of Defense, and other appropriate agencies for further research on tick-borne disorders, including the study of preventive methods to decrease exposure to such disorders.
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.
The Director of the National Institutes of Health, in working with the Tick-Borne Disorders Advisory Committee established under this Act, and recognizing that tick-borne disorders affect multiple systems of the body, shall coordinate activities and research regarding tick-borne diseases across Institutes to encourage collaborative research.