REDUCTION IN LIMITATION AMOUNTS FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES FOR FEDERAL OFFICE.
Limitation Amount for Contributions by Persons Other Than Multicandidate Political Committees.--Section 315(a)(1)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(1)(A)) is amended by striking out ``$1,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$500''.
Limitation Amount for Contributions by Multicandidate Political Committees.--Section 315(a)(2)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(2)(A)) is amended by striking out ``$5,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$500''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply with respect to elections taking place after December 31, 1990.
INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES FOR PUBLIC OFFICE.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new section: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES FOR PUBLIC OFFICE.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed, subject to the limitations in subsection (b), as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year, an amount equal to 50 percent of all political contributions, payment of which is made by the taxpayer within the taxable year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for a taxable year shall not exceed $125 ($250 in the case of a joint return under section 6013).
Verification.--A credit shall be allowed by subsection (a) with respect to any political contribution only if the contribution is verified in the manner prescribed by the Secretary in regulations.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Political contribution.--The term `political contribution' means a contribution or gift of money to-- ``(A) an individual who is a candidate for nomination or election to any Federal, State, or local elective public office in any primary, general, or special election, for use by the individual to further the candidacy of the individual for nomination or election to the office, ``(B) any committee, association, or organization (whether or not incorporated) organized and operated exclusively for the purpose of influencing, or attempting to influence, the nomination or election of 1 or more individuals who are candidates for nomination or election to any Federal, State, or local elective public office, for use by the committee, association, or organization to further the candidacy of the individual or individuals for nomination or election to the office, ``(C) the national committee of a national political party, ``(D) the State committee of a national political party as designated by the national committee of the party, or ``(E) a local committee of a national political party as designated by the State committee of the party designated under subparagraph (D).
Candidate.--The term `candidate' means, with respect to any Federal, State, or local elective public office, an individual who-- ``(A) publicly announces before the close of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the contribution or gift is made that the individual is a candidate for nomination or election to the office, and ``(B) meets the qualifications prescribed by law to hold the office.
National political party.--The term `national political party' means-- ``(A) in the case of contributions made during a taxable year of the taxpayer in which the electors of President and Vice President are chosen, a political party presenting candidates or electors for such offices on the official election ballot of 10 or more States, or ``(B) in the case of contributions made during any other taxable year of the taxpayer, a political party which met the qualifications described in subparagraph (A) in the last preceding election of a President and Vice President.
State and local.--The term `State' means the various States and the District of Columbia.
The term `local' means a political subdivision or part thereof, or 2 or more political subdivisions or parts thereof, of a State.
Cross References.-- ``(1) For disallowance of credits to estates and trusts, see section 642(j).
For treatment of Indian tribal governments as States (and the subdivisions of Indian tribal governments as political subdivisions of States), see section 7871.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 642 of such Code (relating to special rules for credits and deductions) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Political Contribution Credit.--An estate or trust shall not be allowed the credit against tax for contributions to candidates for public office provided by section 24.''
Paragraph (6) of section 7871(a) of such Code (relating to Indian tribal governments treated as States for certain purposes) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (D) as subparagraphs (B) through (E), respectively, and by inserting before such subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph: ``(A) section 24(c)(4) (defining State for purposes of credit for contributions to candidates for public office),''.
The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 23 the following new item: ``Sec.
Contributions to candidates for public office.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.