This Act may be cited as the ``Census of Agriculture Act of 1996''.
TRANSFER TO THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE OF THE AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT THE CENSUS OF AGRICULTURE.
In General.--Section 526 of the Revised Statutes (7 United States Code 2204) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c)(1) The Secretary shall, in 1998 and in every 5th year beginning after 1998, take a census of agriculture.
In connection with each such census, the Secretary may conduct any survey or other data collection, and employ any sampling or other statistical method, that the Secretary determines is necessary and appropriate.
The data collected in each census taken under this subsection shall relate to the year immediately preceding the year in which the census is taken.
Any person who refuses or neglects to answer questions submitted to such person in connection with a census or survey under this subsection, or who answers any such questions falsely, shall be subject to section 221 of title 13, United States Code, to the same extent and in the same manner as if-- ``(A) section 142 of such title 13 had remained in effect; and ``(B) the census or survey were a census or survey under such section 142, rather than under this subsection.
The failure or refusal on the part of any person to disclose such person's social security number in response to a request made in connection with any census or other activity under this subsection shall not be a violation under the preceding sentence.
Each census under this subsection shall include each State, and as may be determined by the Secretary, the District of Columbia, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any such other possessions and areas over which the United States exercises jurisdiction, control, or sovereignty.
Inclusion of other areas over which the United States exercises jurisdiction, control, or sovereignty shall be subject to the concurrence of the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of Commerce may, upon written request of the Secretary of Agriculture, furnish any information collected under title 13, United States Code, which the Secretary of Agriculture considers necessary for the taking of a census or survey under this subsection.
Any information so furnished may not be used for any purpose other than the statistical purposes for which it is supplied.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall, upon written request of the Secretary of Commerce, furnish any information collected in a census taken under this subsection which the Secretary of Commerce considers necessary for the taking of a census or survey under title 13, United States Code.
Any information so furnished may not be used for any purpose other than the statistical purposes for which it is supplied.
Any rules or regulations necessary to carry out this subsection may be prescribed by-- ``(A) the Secretary, to the extent that matters within the jurisdiction of the Secretary are involved; and ``(B) the Secretary of Commerce, to the extent that matters within the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Commerce are involved.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Effective October 1, 1998-- (1) section 142 of title 13, United States Code, and the item relating to section 142 in the table of sections for chapter 5 of such title 13, are repealed; and (2) section 343(a)(11)(F) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 United States Code 1991(a)(11)(F)) is amended by inserting ``or section 526(c) of the Revised Statutes (7 United States Code 2204(c)), as the case may be,'' before ``except''.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.
Information Furnished to the Department of Agriculture.-- (1) Authority to furnish information.--Section 9(a) of title 13, United States Code, is amended by striking ``chapter 10 of this title--'' and inserting ``chapter 10 of this title or section 526(c)(5) of the Revised Statutes--''.
Confidentiality of information.--Section 1770(d)(5) of the Food Security Act of 1985 (7 United States Code 2276(d)(5)) is amended to read as follows: ``(5) subsections (a) and (c) of section 526 of the Revised Statutes (7 United States Code 2204(a) and (c));''.
Information Furnished to the Department of Commerce.-- (1) Authority to furnish information.--Section 1770 of the Food Security Act of 1985 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Nothing in this section shall be considered to prohibit any release of information under section 526(c)(6) of the Revised Statutes (7 United States Code 2204(c)(6)).''.
Confidentiality of information.--Information furnished under section 526(c)(6) of the Revised Statutes shall, for purposes of sections 9 and 214 of title 13, United States Code, be treated as if it were information furnished under the provisions of such title 13.
Passed the House of Representatives July 22, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.