This Act may be cited as the ``North Atlantic Right Whale Recovery Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) North Atlantic Right Whales are one of the most endangered large whales in the world, with fewer than 350 animals remaining in the western North Atlantic.
Anthropogenic causes remain the largest source of mortality for North Atlantic Right Whales.
Accidental collisions of ships with right whales have been identified as the leading cause of human-related mortality of right whales, with at least 16 deaths attributable to ship strikes along the east coast of the United States since 1970.
Entanglement in fishing gear is the other major cause of right whale mortality, estimated to account for at least 3 deaths from 1970 through 2000.
The Recovery Plan for Northern Right Whales lists other potential or known anthropogenic sources of mortality such as habitat degradation, contamination by pollutants, ocean noise, and climate change.
Although the mortality rate caused by these factors is unknown, they are potentially important and could affect Northern Right Whale birth rates, distribution patterns, and general health.
According to a recent study in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, unless human-related mortalities are reduced, the North Atlantic Right Whale is likely to become extinct.
The National Marine Fisheries Service of the Department of Commerce is the agency tasked with protecting and recovering right whales under both the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1361 et sequentes) and the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).
Recent research has led to limited success in reducing collisions with ships and interactions with fishing gear.
The Mandatory Ship Reporting System, implemented in 1999 by the National Marine Fisheries Service and the Coast Guard, and approved by the International Maritime Organization, has begun to provide mariners with necessary information to help prevent ship collisions in North Atlantic Right Whale critical habitat in northeast and southeast coastal waters.
The National Marine Fisheries Service along with the Atlantic Large Whale Take Reduction Team have begun to develop gear and methods to reduce right whale interactions with fishing gear along the Atlantic Coast.
Recent events have revealed the lack of a coordinated Federal plan for recovering North Atlantic Right Whales, in spite of large funding increases by the Congress over the past decade.
Greater management and research attention must be focused on reducing mortality caused by ship collisions, entanglement in fishing gear, and other causes of mortality if the population decline of North Atlantic Right Whales is to be reversed.
NORTH ATLANTIC RIGHT WHALE RECOVERY PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce shall institute a North Atlantic Right Whale Recovery Program, in coordination with the Secretary of Transportation and appropriate Federal agencies, States, the Southeast and Northeast Northern Right Whale Recovery Plan Implementation Teams, and the Atlantic Large Whale Take Reduction Team, pursuant to the authority provided under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes), the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1361 et sequentes), and the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1801 et sequentes).
Elements.--The program established under subsection (a) shall include the following research, management, and enforcement elements: (1) Activities to reduce mortality and injury due to collisions with vessel traffic.
Activities to reduce mortality and injury in fishing gear (including disentanglement and gear development).
Population monitoring, baseline surveys, assessment, and database management.
Support for regional recovery plan implementation teams, take reduction teams, and such meetings or workshops as are necessary to develop and provide expert advice on related research and management activities.
Secretary To Identify Agencies, Areas, and Activities.--The Secretary, in consultation with the teams described in subsection (a), shall identify the following: (1) The appropriate governmental agency or other entity to perform each activity covered by the program.
The geographic area or areas in which those activities should be conducted.
A timeline for initiation and completion of such activity.
The Secretary of Commerce, acting through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, shall-- (1) develop cooperative agreements under section 6 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1535) to support State agency involvement in recovery programs for North Atlantic Right Whales; and (2) determine annually the funding needs and levels appropriate for Federal support to encourage the establishment of, and to help maintain, such programs.
NORTH ATLANTIC RIGHT WHALE PRIORITY ACTION PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Southeast and Northeast Northern Right Whale Recovery Plan Implementation Teams and the Atlantic Large Whale Take Reduction Team, shall identify near-term demonstration projects to reduce, or promote reductions in, mortality caused by ship strikes and entanglement in fishing gear.
Demonstration Projects.--Within 9 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall institute demonstration projects determined, after consulting with the teams described in subsection (a), to have potential for immediate impact on reducing mortality of North Atlantic Right Whales in the following areas: (1) Detection and tracking of North Atlantic Right Whales in critical habitat, high use areas, or along their migration route.
Satellite tracking of individual whale movements.
Deployment of whale-friendly gear such as neutrally buoyant line and ``weak links'' in North Atlantic Right Whale critical habitat or high use areas to reduce the possibility of entanglements, including provision of such gear to fishermen.
Testing or developing innovative methods to increase the success of disentanglement efforts.
Other projects determined to have near-term potential of reducing right whale mortality.
Vessel Warning and Management.--The Secretaries of Commerce and Transportation shall, by January 1, 2003, develop a comprehensive program to prevent ship strikes of Northern Atlantic Right Whales.
The program shall include-- (1) an Atlantic Coast vessel early warning system, with participation by the United States Coast Guard, the United States Navy, the Army Corps of Engineers, and State and local government agencies, that includes-- (A) collection and analysis of data on Atlantic vessel traffic patterns and operations related to incidents involving ships striking whales; (B) a coordinated communications system for notifications to mariners; and (C) a clearinghouse for whale sightings, including plans for development of a real-time information system that utilizes existing systems such as aerial and shipboard surveillance and incorporates innovative techniques such as acoustic detection, satellite tags, and predictive modeling, to locate and track right whales; and (2) a coordinated vessel management system that provides-- (A) updated information to mariners to advise on best practices based on the analysis of vessel operations and incidents involving ships striking whales; (B) regional risk assessments to identify alternative routing opportunities or speed changes for vessels; (C) vessel management standards for high risk areas during North Atlantic Right Whale migration periods; and (D) for the applicability of standards to a variety of vessel types.
Detection Technologies Program.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and the Secretary of the Navy, shall create a detection technology program to develop, test, and evaluate technologies that can be used to detect and track North Atlantic Right Whales in critical habitat and along their migration routes during fiscal years 2002 and 2003.
The program should evaluate technologies that can be used to track long-term movements of whales, as well as technologies that could be used aboard ships to detect and avoid whales as the ships transit to ports and within shipping lanes.
Ship Strike Analysis.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall incorporate data from ``whale alert'' aircraft surveys, scientific survey data, confirmed right whale sightings, locations of observed ``close calls'', and ship traffic data from the mandatory ship reporting system into a geographic information system for analysis of interactions between whales and ships.
The Secretary shall use the information gained from that analysis for education and outreach to mariners, fishermen, and ports.
Gaps in Authority.--The Secretary of Transportation, within 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, shall identify any gaps in legislative authority preventing implementation of regulations affecting vessels in waters under United States jurisdiction necessary to promote recovery of North Atlantic Right Whales.
International Maritime Organization.--The Secretary of Transportation, acting through the Secretary of State, may propose regulations for adoption at the International Maritime Organization to further implement the recommendations contained within the North Atlantic Right Whale Recovery Plan.
NORTH ATLANTIC RIGHT WHALE RESEARCH GRANT PROGRAM.
Coordinated Research Framework.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Northeast and Southeast Northern Right Whale Recovery Plan Implementation Teams, the Atlantic Large Whale Take Reduction Team, and the Marine Mammal Commission, shall design a comprehensive and coordinated right whale research grant program.
The program shall include, at the minimum, research on the following subjects: (1) Detection and tracking of North Atlantic Right Whales, including the use of tagging and telemetry, to help ships avoid striking whales.
Behavior of right whales in proximity to ships.
Relationships between vessel speed, size, or design with whale collisions and mortality.
Modeling ship traffic in Atlantic shipping lanes and approaches to major United States ports along the Atlantic coast.
Reproduction and genetic studies.
Development of a geographic information system database to identify variables potentially associated with right whale distribution and migration, including temperature, other oceanographic parameters, and distribution and abundance of planktonic prey species.
Response of right whales to ship-avoidance deterrence methods.
Habitat quality studies including investigation of food quality, pollution levels, and interaction of ecological components with the food resources of Northern Right Whales.
Physiological condition studies, including reproductive fitness measures, and comparison with environmental conditions.
Peer Review.--The program shall provide for external peer review of grant applications.
Peer review teams shall include scientists, fishing, shipping, and other appropriate industry representatives, and technology experts appropriate to evaluate the feasibility and scientific merit of each application.
INTERAGENCY COORDINATION AND COST-SHARING.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Transportation shall ensure cooperation of Federal agencies and departments in sharing the costs, vessels, equipment, and other resources (including communications and monitoring equipment) to meet the needs of the updated North Atlantic Right Whale Recovery Plan, particularly with respect to tracking and surveillance of right whales in critical habitat and high use areas.
Report.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation, the Secretary of the Navy, and the Secretary of Commerce shall report to the Congress on any further funding requirements necessary to implement any requirements of this Act or regulations necessary to implement the North Atlantic Right Whale Recovery Plan.
INTERNATIONAL ACTION AND COORDINATION.
Canada.--The Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Secretary of State, shall initiate or continue discussions with Canada to coordinate programs concerning North Atlantic Right Whales, including-- (1) ship traffic management systems; (2) tracking whales in the Gulf of Maine and adjacent areas of the United States and Canadian Exclusive Economic Zone; (3) disentanglement efforts; and (4) sharing of relevant biological and maritime traffic information.
Fishery Interactions.--The Secretary of Commerce, working through the Department of State, shall begin discussions for the purpose of creating or amending bi- or multi-lateral agreements on management measures to reduce fishery interactions, with-- (1) all relevant management organizations; and (2) nations whose fleets may operate in North Atlantic Right Whales high use areas.
Scientific Information.--The Secretary of Commerce, working through the Department of State, shall begin discussions for the purpose of facilitating collection of information relevant to development of the priority action plan or recovery plan with-- (1) all relevant scientific organizations, including the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, Northwestern Atlantic Fisheries Organization, the Food and Agricultural Organization; and (2) countries that conduct research in areas with right whales, including Canada, Greenland (Denmark), and Iceland.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shall transmit a report to the Congress no later than March 1 of each year setting forth-- (1) actions taken pursuant to the updated North Atlantic Right Whale Recovery Plan; (2) the amount of Federal and State funds expended on activities under that Plan; (3) known or suspected incidents of-- (A) collisions between vessels and North Atlantic Right Whales; and (B) entanglements, injuries, or mortalities of North Atlantic Right Whales; (4) known or suspected causes of incidents described in paragraph (3); (5) actions taken to prevent or reduce the likelihood of such incidents in the preceding year; (6) any new information about calving, feeding, or other high-use areas of North Atlantic Right Whales; (7) the status of any litigation involving North Atlantic Right Whale recovery activity; (8) areas identified for additional action under the North Atlantic Right Whale Recovery Plan; (9) projects funded under section 7; (10) the funding needs and levels determined under paragraph (2) of section 4 appropriate for Federal support to encourage the establishment of, and to help maintain, recovery programs for North Atlantic Right Whales; and (11) the cost of implementing the demonstration projects under section 5(b).
Department of Commerce.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, for purposes of carrying out the Department of Commerce's functions and responsibilities under this Act, $4,500,000 for fiscal year 2002 and $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 and 2004.
Department of Transportation.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation, for purposes of carrying out the Department of Transportation's functions and responsibilities under this Act, $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004.
State Cooperative Agreements.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce $1,500,000 for fiscal year 2002 and $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 and 2004, for purposes of implementing agreements with Atlantic coastal States under section 6 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 as required by section 4 of this Act.
North Atlantic Right Whale Research Grant Program.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, for purposes of carrying out the research program under section 7 of this Act, $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 and 2004.