EXPEDITED HAZARDOUS FUELS REDUCTION PROCEDURES.
In General.--The Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior shall conduct immediately and to completion projects consistent with the Implementation Plan for the 10-year Comprehensive Strategy for a Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire Risks to Communities and the Environment, dated May 2002, developed pursuant to the Conference Report to the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001 (House Report 106-646) to reduce hazardous fuels.
Any project carried out pursuant to this section shall be consistent with the applicable forest plan, resource management plan, or other applicable agency plans.
Priority.--In implementing projects under this section, the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior shall give highest priority to-- (1) wildland urban interface areas; (2) municipal watersheds; or (3) forested or rangeland areas affected by disease, insect activity, or wind throw.
Acreage Limitation.--In implementing this section, the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior shall treat an aggregate area of not more than 3.75 million acres of federal land.
Process.--The Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior shall jointly develop a collaborative process with interested parties consistent with the Implementation Plan described in subsection (a) for the selection of projects carried out under this section consistent with subsection (b).
Such collaborative process may be the process set forth in title II of the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self- Determination Act, Public Law 106-393.
Administrative Process.-- (1) Review.--Projects implemented pursuant to this section shall not be subject to appeal requirements of the Appeals Reform Act (section 322 of Public Law 102-381) or Department of the Interior Board of Land Appeals Review.
Regulations.--The Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior, as appropriate, may promulgate such regulations as are necessary to implement this section.
Conclusive Presumption.--Subject to the requirements of subsection (h), unless there are extraordinary circumstances, hazardous fuels reduction actions authorized by subsection (g) are conclusively determined to be categorically excluded from further analysis under the National Environmental Policy Act, and the Secretary of Agriculture or the Secretary of the Interior as appropriate need not make any findings as to whether the projects individually or cumulatively have a significant effect on the human environment.
Categorical Exclusions.-- (1) Subject to paragraph (2), until September 30, 2003, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior may categorically exclude a proposed hazardous fuels reduction action, including prescribed fire, from documentation in an environmental impact statement or environmental assessment if the proposed hazardous fuels reduction action is located on lands identified as condition class 3 on the map attached to the Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station General Technical Report RMRS-87 dated April 2002 and removes no more than 250,000 board feet of merchantable wood products or removes as salvage 1,000,000 board feet or less of merchantable wood products and assures regeneration of harvested or salvaged areas.
Scoping is required on all actions proposed pursuant to this section.
Limitation on the Availability of Conclusive Presumption.-- The conclusive presumption authorized by subsection (f) shall apply only to projects located in areas identified as condition class 3 as defined in subsection (g), and that are located: (1) within wildland urban interface areas, or (2) within a municipal watershed, or (3) within forested or rangeland areas affected by disease, insect activity, or wind throw.
Extraordinary Circumstances.-- For all projects implemented pursuant to this section, if there are extraordinary circumstances, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall follow agency procedures related to categorical exclusions and extraordinary circumstances.
Reduce Fire Risk.-- In order to ensure that the agencies are implementing projects that reduce the risk of unnaturally intense wildfires, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior-- (1) shall not construct new roads as part of any project implemented pursuant to this section; (2) must maintain old and large trees appropriate for each ecosystem type and must focus on generally small diameter trees and brush for all projects implemented pursuant to this section; and (3) must deposit in the Treasury of the United States all revenues and receipts generated from projects implemented pursuant to this section.
Hazardous Fuels Reduction Funding Focus.-- In order to focus hazardous fuels reduction activities on the highest priority areas where critical issues of human safety and property loss are the most serious, the Forest Service and the Department of the Interior shall expend all of the hazardous fuels operations funds provided in this Act only on projects in areas identified as condition class 3 as defined in subsection (g).
Small Communities.-- At least ten percent of the hazardous fuels operations funds provided in this Act shall be spent on projects that benefit businesses that use hazardous fuels and that are located in small, economically disadvantaged communities.
Monitoring.-- (1) The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall jointly establish a commission to complete an assessment of the positive or negative impacts and effectiveness of projects implemented pursuant to this Act.
The commission shall be composed of 12 to 15 members with equal representation from conservation interests, local communities, and commodity interests.
The Commission shall submit a report to Congress within 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
The Secretaries shall establish a multiparty monitoring process in order to assess a representative sampling of the projects implemented pursuant to this section.
The Secretaries shall include any interested individual or organization in the monitoring and evaluation process.
Funds to implement this subsection shall be derived from hazardous fuels reduction funds.