FEDERAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS ADVISORY BOARD.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) There is a need for objective and neutral Federal Government accounting standards.
To be objective and neutral, standards must ensure that the resulting information is a faithful representation of the effects of Federal Government activities.
Objective and neutral mean free from bias, without placing any particular interest above the interest of individuals who rely on the information in financial reports of the Federal Government.
Accounting standards are essential to the efficient functioning of the Federal Government and the economy, as decisions about the allocation of resources rely heavily on credible, concise, and understandable financial information.
Financial information about the operations and financial position of the Federal Government is used by citizens, Congress, executives, and program managers.
The Joint Financial Management Improvement Program, established by the General Accounting Office, the Department of Treasury, and Office of Management and Budget, conducts a continuous program for improving accounting and financial reporting in the Federal Government.
The Comptroller General, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget have established an advisory board in accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), to consider and recommend accounting concepts and standards for the Federal Government.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to affirm the Memorandum of Understanding Among the General Accounting Office, the Department of the Treasury, and the Office of Management and Budget on Federal Government Accounting Standards and a Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board dated January 11, 2002, effective June 30, 2002.
Establishment of Board.--There is hereby established the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Board'').
The Board shall work under the general oversight of the Comptroller General, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Principals'').
Meetings; Procedures.--The Board shall-- (1) meet as necessary and at the request of one of the Principals; and (2) establish detailed working procedures for the Board.
Composition.--(1) The Board shall be comprised of nine members as follows: (A) One member who is a representative of the General Accounting Office appointed by the Comptroller General.
One member who is a representative of the Office of Management and Budget appointed by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
One member who is a representative of the Department of the Treasury appointed by the Secretary of the Treasury.
Six members appointed jointly by the Comptroller General, the Director, and the Secretary, who are-- (i) representatives of the financial community, the accounting and auditing community, and the academic community; and (ii) not representatives of the Federal Government.
In selecting members under paragraph (1)(D), the Principals shall-- (A) seek nominations from a wide variety of sources; (B) consider, among other criteria, an individual's-- (i) broad professional background; and (ii) expertise in Federal Government accounting, financial reporting, and financial management; and (C) consider the recommendations of a panel convened by the chairperson selected under subsection (c).
Terms.--(1) The members appointed under subparagraphs (A) through (C) of subsection (e)(1) shall serve at the discretion of the appointing agency head.
Members appointed under subsection (e)(1)(D) shall be appointed for an initial term of not more than five years, and may be reappointed for one additional term of not more than five years.
Chairperson.--The Principals shall select a chairperson of the Board from among members appointed under subsection (e)(1)(D).
Consideration of Accounting Concepts and Standards.--(1) The Board shall consider accounting concepts and standards for the Federal Government that provide a frame of reference for resolving accounting issues.
In considering accounting concepts and standards, consideration shall be given to the budgetary information needs of executive agencies and the needs of users of Federal financial information.
The Board shall not set or propose budget concepts, standards, or principles.
Process Required.--The Board shall take the following steps in carrying out the process for considering accounting standards: (1) Identification of accounting issues and agenda decisions.
Preparation of issues papers or discussion memorandums.
Release of documents to the public, holding public hearings, and consideration of comments.
Further deliberations, preparation of exposure draft, and consideration of comments.
General consensus of at least a majority of the Board members and submission of recommendations to the Principals.
Adoption of Recommendations.--Recommendations of the Board on proposed accounting concepts or standards shall be made to the Principals for review.
If, within 90 days after submission, any of the Principals objects to the proposed concept or standard, the concept or standard shall be returned to the Board for further consideration.
If, within 90 days after submission, none of the Principals objects to the proposed concept or standard, the concept or standard become final and shall be published in the Federal Register.
Standards set and promulgated following the Board's rules of procedure shall have substantial authoritative support, and accounting standards contrary to such promulgation shall not.
Proposed Interpretations and Technical Releases.--A proposed Interpretation or Technical Release shall be submitted to the members of the Board representing the three Principals for review.
If, within 45 days after submission, any one of such members objects to the proposed Interpretation or Technical Release, the proposed Interpretation or Technical Release shall be returned to the Board for further consideration.
If, within 45 days after submission, none of such members objects to the proposed Interpretation or Technical Release, the proposed Interpretation or Technical Release shall become final.
Final Interpretations and Technical Releases shall be published in the Federal Register.
Staff.--A core group of qualified technical staff shall support the Board in carrying out its duties and functions.
The staff shall spend its time working on Board matters and, from time to time, may be augmented with staff assigned from executive departments or agencies or other organizations.
Task Forces.--The Board may appoint task forces as necessary to-- (1) advise the Board on accounting matters; (2) provide expert views; and (3) recommend solutions to issues or problems in the accounting standard-setting process.
Transition Provisions.--The terms of members of the Board serving on the date of the enactment of this Act from the Congressional Budget Office, international organizations, defense agencies, and civilian and other Federal agencies shall expire on June 30, 2002.
The terms of any non-Federal members serving on the Board on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be extended until June 30, 2004, and such members shall be eligible to serve an additional term of up to five years to the extent that the total service of the member on the Board does not exceed 10 years.
Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as diminishing the authorities, separately or jointly, of the Principals to establish and adopt accounting standards for the Federal Government.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.