This Act may be cited as the ``Civilian Marksmanship Program Privatization Act''.
CONVERSION OF CIVILIAN MARKSMANSHIP PROGRAM TO NONAPPROPRIATED FUND INSTRUMENTALITY AND ACTIVITIES UNDER PROGRAM.
Conversion.--Section 4307 of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Promotion of rifle practice and firearms safety: administration ``(a) Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentality.--On and after October 1, 1995, the Civilian Marksmanship Program shall be operated as a nonappropriated fund instrumentality of the United States within the Department of Defense for the benefit of members of the armed forces and for the promotion of rifle practice and firearms safety among civilians.
National Board.--(1) The Civilian Marksmanship Program shall be under the general supervision of a National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice and Firearms Safety, which shall replace the National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice.
The National Board shall consist of nine members who are appointed by the Secretary of the Army.
The term of office of a member of the National Board shall be two years.
However, in the case of the initial National Board, the Secretary shall appoint four members who will have a one-year term.
Members of the National Board shall serve without compensation, except that members shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the National Board.
Director and Staff.--The National Board shall appoint a person to serve as director of the Civilian Marksmanship Program.
The compensation and benefits of the director and all other civilian employees of the Department of Defense utilized by the Civilian Marksmanship Program shall be paid from nonappropriated funds available to the Civilian Marksmanship Program.
Funding.--(1) Except as provided in section 4310 of this title, funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense in appropriation Acts may not be obligated or expended to benefit the Civilian Marksmanship Program or activities conducted by the Civilian Marksmanship Program.
The National Board and the director may solicit, accept, hold, use, and dispose of, in furtherance of the activities of the Civilian Marksmanship Program, donations of money, property, and services received by gift, devise, bequest, or otherwise.
Donations may be accepted from munitions and firearms manufacturers notwithstanding any legal restrictions otherwise arising from their procurement relationships with the Federal Government.
Amounts collected under the Civilian Marksmanship Program, including the proceeds from the sale of arms, ammunition, targets, and other supplies and appliances under section 4308 of this title, shall be credited to the Civilian Marksmanship Program and shall be available to carry out the Civilian Marksmanship Program.
Amounts collected by, and available to, the National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice before the date of the enactment of this section from rifle sales programs and from fees in connection with competitions sponsored by that Board shall be transferred to the National Board to be available to carry out the Civilian Marksmanship Program.
Funds held on behalf of the Civilian Marksmanship Program shall not be construed to be Government or public funds or appropriated funds and shall not be available to support other nonappropriated fund instrumentalities of the Department of Defense.
Funds held on behalf of other nonappropriated fund instrumentalities of the Department of Defense shall not be available to support the Civilian Marksmanship Program.
Expenditures on behalf of the Civilian Marksmanship Program, including compensation and benefits for civilian employees, may not exceed $5,000,000 during any fiscal year.
The approval of the National Board shall be required for any expenditure in excess of $50,000.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, funds held on behalf of the Civilian Marksmanship Program shall remain available until expended.
Definitions.--In this section and sections 4308 through 4313 of this title: ``(1) The term `Civilian Marksmanship Program' means the rifle practice and firearms safety program carried out by the National Board under section 4308 and includes the National Matches and small-arms firing schools referred to in section 4312 of this title.
The term `National Board' means the National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice and Firearms Safety.''.
Activities.--Section 4308 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Promotion of rifle practice and firearms safety: activities ``(a) Instruction, Safety, and Competition Programs.--(1) The Civilian Marksmanship Program shall provide for-- ``(A) the operation and maintenance of indoor and outdoor rifle ranges and their accessories and appliances; ``(B) the instruction of citizens of the United States in marksmanship, and the employment of necessary instructors for that purpose; ``(C) the promotion of practice in the use of rifled arms and the maintenance and management of matches or competitions in the use of those arms; and ``(D) the award to competitors of trophies, prizes, badges, and other insignia.
In carrying out this subsection, the Civilian Marksmanship Program shall give priority to activities that benefit firearms safety training and competition for youth and reach as many youth participants as possible.
Before a person may participate in any activity sponsored or supported by the Civilian Marksmanship Program under this subsection, the person shall be required to certify that the person has not violated any Federal or State firearms laws.
Sale and Issuance of Arms and Ammunition.--(1) The Civilian Marksmanship Program may issue, without cost, the arms, ammunition (including caliber .22 and caliber .30 ammunition), targets, and other supplies and appliances necessary for activities conducted under subsection (a).
Issuance shall be made only to gun clubs under the direction of the National Board that provide training in the use of rifled arms to youth, the Boy Scouts of America, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and other youth-oriented organizations for training and competition.
The Civilian Marksmanship Program may sell at fair market value caliber .30 rifles, caliber .22 rifles, and air rifles, and ammunition for such rifles, to gun clubs that are under the direction of the National Board and provide training in the use of rifled arms.
In lieu of sales, the Civilian Marksmanship Program may loan such rifles to such gun clubs.
The Civilian Marksmanship Program may sell at fair market value small arms, ammunition, targets, and other supplies and appliances necessary for target practice to citizens of the United States over 18 years of age who are members of a gun club under the direction of the National Board.
Before conveying any weapon or ammunition to a person, whether by sale or lease, the National Board shall provide for a criminal records check of the person with appropriate Federal and State law enforcement agencies.
Other Authorities.--The National Board shall provide for-- ``(1) the procurement of necessary supplies, appliances, trophies, prizes, badges, and other insignia, clerical and other services, and labor to carry out the Civilian Marksmanship Program; and ``(2) the transportation of employees, instructors, and civilians to give or to receive instruction or to assist or engage in practice in the use of rifled arms, and the transportation and subsistence, or an allowance instead of subsistence, of members of teams authorized by the National Board to participate in matches or competitions in the use of rifled arms.
Fees.--The National Board may impose reasonable fees for persons and gun clubs participating in any program or competition conducted under the Civilian Marksmanship Program for the promotion of rifle practice and firearms safety among civilians.
Receipt of Excess Arms and Ammunition.--(1) The Secretary of the Army shall reserve for the Civilian Marksmanship Program all remaining M-1 Garand rifles, and ammunition for such rifles, still held by the Army.
After the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary of the Army shall cease demilitarization of remaining M-1 Garand rifles in the Army inventory unless such rifles are determined to be irreparable by the Defense Logistics Agency.
Subject to section 1208 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Years 1990 and 1991 (Public Law 101-189; 10 United States Code 372 note) relating to the transfer of excess small arms and ammunition to support Government counter-drug activities, the Secretary of Defense shall give the National Board the right of first refusal to accept excess small arms and ammunition held by the Army or the Marine Corps and legally allowable for civilian use.
Transfers under this subsection shall be made without cost to the Civilian Marksmanship Program, except that the National Board shall assume the costs of transportation for the transferred small arms and ammunition.
Participation Conditions.--All participants in the Civilian Marksmanship Program and activities sponsored or supported by the National Board shall be required, as a condition of participation, to sign affidavits stating that-- ``(A) they have never been convicted of a firearms violation under State or Federal law; and ``(B) they are not members of any organization which advocates the violent overthrow of the United States Government.
Any person found to have violated this subsection shall be ineligible to participate in the Civilian Marksmanship Program and future activities sponsored or supported by the National Board.''.
Participation of Members of the Armed Forces in Instruction and Competition.--Section 4310 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Rifle instruction and competitions: participation of members ``(a) Participation Authorized.--The commander of a major command of the armed forces may detail regular or reserve officers and noncommissioned officers under the authority of the commander to duty as instructors at rifle ranges for training civilians in the safe use of military arms.
The commander of a major command may detail enlisted members under the authority of the commander as temporary instructors in the safe use of the rifle to organized rifle clubs requesting that instruction.
The commander of a major command may detail members under the authority of the commander to provide other logistical and administrative support for competitions and other activities conducted by the Civilian Marksmanship Program.
Members of a reserve component may be detailed only if the service to be provided meets a legitimate training need of the members involved.
Costs of Participation.--The commander of a major command of the armed forces may pay the personnel costs and travel and per diem expenses of members of an active or reserve component of the armed forces who participate in a competition sponsored by the Civilian Marksmanship Program or who provide instruction or other services in support of the Civilian Marksmanship Program.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 4312(a) of such title is amended by striking out `` as prescribed by the Secretary of the Army'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``as part of the Civilian Marksmanship Program''.
Section 4313 of such title is amended-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking out ``Secretary of the Army'' both places it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``National Board''; and (B) in subsection (b), by striking out ``Appropriated funds available for the Civilian Marksmanship Program (as defined in section 4308(e) of this title) may'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Nonappropriated funds available to the Civilian Marksmanship Program shall''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 401 of such title is amended by striking out the items relating to sections 4307, 4308, and 4310 and inserting in lieu thereof the following new items: ``4307.
Promotion of rifle practice and firearms safety: administration.
Promotion of rifle practice and firearms safety: activities.
Rifle instruction and competitions: participation of members.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 1995.