This Act may be cited as the ``Slamming Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 1997''.
TITLE I--IMPROVED COMMUNICATIONS ACT REMEDIES FOR SLAMMING SEC.
COMPLETION AND ENFORCEMENT OF FCC RULES.
Section 258 of the Communications Act of 1984 (47 United States Code 258) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Subscriber Changes.--The Commission's regulations under this section shall require any carrier that submits or executes a change in a subscriber's selection of a provider of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service in violation of the verification procedures prescribed by the Commission shall refund to the subscriber (or discharge the subscriber from liability for) any charges imposed for such service by such carrier during the 3-month period after the change in the subscriber's selection is effected.
Negative Option Selection Prohibited.--The Commission's regulations under this section shall prohibit any change in selection, or any verification of a change in selection, without the affirmative request of the subscriber.
A subscriber's failure to refuse a change in selection, or failure to refuse to verify a change in selection, shall not be deemed to be an affirmative request.
Completion of Rulemaking.--The Commission shall complete all actions necessary, including any reconsideration, to prescribe rules to implement and enforce this section within two years after the date of enactment of the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
Private Right of Action.-- ``(1) In general.--A subscriber whose selection of a provider of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service is changed in violation of the procedures prescribed under subsection (a) may, within one year after the change, if otherwise permitted by the laws or rules of court of a State, bring in an appropriate court of that State an action-- ``(A) for an order to revoke the change; ``(B) for an award of damages in an amount equal to the greater of-- ``(i) the actual monetary loss resulting from the change; or ``(ii) an amount not to exceed $500; or ``(C) for relief under both subparagraphs (A) and (B).
In any such action in which the plaintiff substantially prevails the court may assess reasonable costs, including attorneys' fees, against the defendant.
Increased award.--If the court finds that the defendant executed the change in willful and knowing violation of the procedures prescribed under subsection (a), the court may, in its discretion, increase the amount of the award under paragraph (1) to an amount equal to not more than three times the maximum amount awardable under subparagraph (B) of that paragraph.
No Preemption of State Law.--Nothing in this section shall preempt the availability of relief under State law for unauthorized changes of providers of intrastate telephone exchange service or telephone toll service.''.
TITLE II--REGULATION OF UNFAIR AND DECEPTIVE ACTS AND PRACTICES IN CONNECTION WITH SLAMMING SEC.
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION REGULATIONS.
In General.-- (1) Regulations required.--The Commission shall prescribe rules in accordance with this subsection to prohibit unfair and deceptive acts and practices in any advertisement for or solicitation of any change in a subscriber's selection of a provider of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service.
Such rules shall require that the person offering or soliciting any change in the subscriber's selection of the provider of a telephone exchange service or telephone toll service-- (A) clearly and conspicuously disclose-- (i) that the offer or solicitation seeks authority to change the subscriber's selection of the provider of a telephone exchange service or telephone toll service; and (ii) the cost of the use of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service, including the total cost or the cost per minute and any other fees for that service, including any cost imposed for changing the subscriber's selection of service providers; (B) not submit or execute a change in a subscriber's selection of the provider of any telephone exchange service or telephone toll service in violation of the verification procedures prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to section 258 of the Communications Act of 1934; (C) in the case of an advertisement or solicitation which offers a prize or award or a service or product at no cost or for a reduced cost, clearly and conspicuously disclose the odds of being able to receive such prize, award, service, or product at no cost or reduced cost, or, if such odds are not calculable in advance, disclose the factors determining such odds; and (D) comply with such additional standards as the Commission may prescribe to prevent unfair or abusive practices.
Access to information.--The Commission shall by rule require a common carrier that uses any person other than an employee of such carrier to solicit changes in the provider of any telephone exchange service or telephone toll service to make available to the Commission any contracts, records, and financial information maintained by such carrier relating to the use of such person to make such solicitations.
Evasions.--The rules issued by the Commission under this section shall include provisions to prohibit unfair or deceptive acts or practices that evade such rules or undermine the rights provided to telephone exchange service or telephone toll service subscribers under this title.
Treatment of rules.--A rule issued under this subsection shall be treated as a rule issued under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)(1)(B)).
Rulemaking.--The Commission shall prescribe the rules under subsection (a) within 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Such rules shall be prescribed in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
Enforcement.--Any violation of any rule prescribed under subsection (a) shall be treated as a violation of a rule respecting unfair or deceptive acts or practices under section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45).
Notwithstanding section 5(a)(2) of such Act (15 United States Code 45(a)(2)), communications common carriers shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission for purposes of this title.
In General.--Whenever an attorney general of any State has reason to believe that the interests of the residents of that State have been or are being threatened or adversely affected because any person has engaged or is engaging in a pattern or practice which violates any rule of the Commission under section 201(a), the State may bring a civil action on behalf of its residents in an appropriate district court of the United States to enjoin such pattern or practice, to enforce compliance with such rule of the Commission, to obtain damages on behalf of their residents, or to obtain such further and other relief as the court may deem appropriate.
Notice.--The State shall serve prior written notice of any civil action under subsection (a) upon the Commission and provide the Commission with a copy of its complaint, except that if it is not feasible for the State to provide such prior notice, the State shall serve such notice immediately upon instituting such action.
Upon receiving a notice respecting a civil action, the Commission shall have the right (1) to intervene in such action, (2) upon so intervening, to be heard on all matters arising therein, and (3) to file petitions for appeal.
Venue.--Any civil action brought under this section in a district court of the United States may be brought in the district wherein the defendant is found or is an inhabitant or transacts business or wherein the violation occurred or is occurring, and process in such cases may be served in any district in which the defendant is an inhabitant or wherever the defendant may be found.
Investigatory Powers.--For purposes of bringing any civil action under this section, nothing in this Act shall prevent the attorney general from exercising the powers conferred on the attorney general by the laws of such State to conduct investigations or to administer oaths or affirmations or to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documentary and other evidence.
Effect on State Court Proceedings.--Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit an authorized State official from proceeding in State court on the basis of an alleged violation of any general civil or criminal antifraud statute of such State.
Limitation.--Whenever the Commission has instituted a civil action for violation of any rule or regulation under this Act, no State may, during the pendency of such action instituted by the Commission, subsequently institute a civil action against any defendant named in the Commission's complaint for violation of any rule as alleged in the Commission's complaint.
Actions by Other State Officials.-- (1) Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit an authorized State official from proceeding in State court on the basis of an alleged violation of any general civil or criminal statute of such State.
In addition to actions brought by an attorney general of a State under subsection (a), such an action may be brought by officers of such State who are authorized by the State to bring actions in such State for protection of consumers and who are designated by the Commission to bring an action under subsection (a) against persons that the Commission has determined have or are engaged in a pattern or practice which violates a rule of the Commission under section 201(a).
ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICABILITY OF TITLE.
In General.--Except as otherwise provided in section 202, this title shall be enforced by the Commission under the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 41 et sequentes).
Consequently, no activity which is outside the jurisdiction of that Act shall be affected by this Act, except for purposes of this title.
Actions by the Commission.--The Commission shall prevent any person from violating a rule of the Commission under section 201 in the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 41 et sequentes) were incorporated into and made a part of this title.
Any person who violates such rule shall be subject to the penalties and entitled to the privileges and immunities provided in the Federal Trade Commission Act in the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, power, and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act were incorporated into and made a part of this title.
For purposes of this title: (1) The terms ``telephone exchange service'' and ``telephone toll service'' have the meaning provided in section 3 of the Communications Act of 1934.
The term ``attorney general'' means the chief legal officer of a State.
The term ``State'' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, and any territory or possession of the United States.
The term ``Commission'' means the Federal Trade Commission.