EXPANSION AND EXTENSION OF AMERICAN SAMOA ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CREDIT.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
AMERICAN SAMOA ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CREDIT.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a qualified domestic corporation, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter an amount equal to the portion of the tax which is attributable to the taxable income, from sources without the United States, from-- ``(1) the active conduct of a trade or business within American Samoa, or ``(2) the sale or exchange of substantially all of the assets used by the taxpayer in the active conduct of such trade or business.
Limitation.--The amount of the credit determined under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the sum of the following amounts (determined by treating American Samoa as the only possession of the United States): ``(1) 60 percent of the sum of-- ``(A) the aggregate amount of the qualified domestic corporation's qualified possession wages for such taxable year, plus ``(B) the allocable employee fringe benefit expenses of the qualified domestic corporation for such taxable year.
The sum of-- ``(A) 15 percent of the depreciation allowances for the taxable year with respect to short-life qualified tangible property, ``(B) 40 percent of the depreciation allowances for the taxable year with respect to medium-life qualified tangible property, and ``(C) 65 percent of the depreciation allowances for the taxable year with respect to long-life qualified tangible property.
Qualified Domestic Corporation.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified domestic corporation' means any domestic corporation which meets the conditions of both paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 30A(b).
Credit Not Allowed Against Certain Taxes.--The credit provided by subsection (a) shall not be allowed against any tax referred to in a paragraph of section 30A(c).
Treatment of Certain Foreign Taxes.--For purposes of this title, any tax of a foreign country or a possession of the United States which is paid or accrued with respect to taxable income which is taken into account in computing the credit under subsection (a) shall not be treated as income, war profits, or excess profits taxes paid or accrued to a foreign country or possession of the United States, and no deduction shall be allowed under this title with respect to any amounts so paid or accrued.
Administrative Provisions.--For purposes of this title-- ``(1) the credit under this section shall be treated in the same manner as the credit under section 936, and ``(2) a corporation to which this section applies shall be treated in the same manner as if it were a corporation electing the application of section 936.
Denial of Double Benefit.--Any wages or other expenses taken into account in determining the credit under this section may not be taken into account in determining the credit under section 41.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007, and before January 1, 2018.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 55(c) of such Code is amended by striking ``and the Puerto Rico economic activity credit under section 30A'' and inserting ``the Puerto Rico economic activity credit under section 30A, and the American Samoa economic development credit under section 30D''.
Subclause (I) of section 56(g)(4)(C)(ii) of such Code is amended by inserting ``30D,'' after ``30A,''.
Subclause (VI) of section 56(g)(4)(C)(iii) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(VI) Application to sections 30a and 30d corporations.--References in this clause to section 936 shall be treated as including references to sections 30A and 30D.''.
Subsection (b) of section 59 of such Code is amended by inserting ``, 30D,'' after ``30A'' each place it appears, including the heading.
The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
American Samoa economic development credit.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.