This Act may be cited as the ``Directed Energy Coordination and Consolidation Act of 2000''.
COORDINATION AND FACILITATION OF DEVELOPMENT OF DIRECTED ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES, SYSTEMS, AND WEAPONS.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Directed energy systems are available to address many current challenges with respect to military weapons, including offensive weapons and defensive weapons.
Directed energy weapons offer the potential to maintain an asymmetrical technological edge over adversaries of the United States for the foreseeable future.
It is in the national interest that funding for directed energy science and technology programs be increased in order to support priority acquisition programs and to develop new technologies for future applications.
It is in the national interest that the level of funding for directed energy science and technology programs correspond to the level of funding for such large-scale demonstration programs in order to ensure the growth of directed energy science and technology programs and to ensure the successful development of other weapons systems utilizing directed energy systems.
The industrial base for several critical directed energy technologies is in fragile condition and lacks appropriate incentives to make the large-scale investments that are necessary to address current and anticipated Department of Defense requirements for such technologies.
It is in the national interest that the Department of Defense utilize and expand upon directed energy research currently being conducted by the Department of Energy, other Federal agencies, the private sector, and academia.
It is increasingly difficult for the Federal Government to recruit and retain personnel with skills critical to directed energy technology development.
The implementation of the recommendations contained in the High Energy Laser Master Plan of the Department of Defense will address these critical issues and is in the national interest.
Implementation of the management structure outlined in the Master Plan will facilitate the development of revolutionary capabilities in directed energy weapons by achieving a coordinated and focused investment strategy under a new management structure featuring a joint technology office with senior-level oversight provided by a technology council and a board of directors.
Coordination and Oversight Under High Energy Laser Master Plan.--(1) Subchapter II of Chapter 8 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Joint Technology Office ``(a) Establishment.--(1) There is in the Department of Defense a Joint Technology Office (in this section referred to as the `Office').
The Office shall be part of the National Directed Energy Center at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico.
The Office shall be under the authority, direction, and control of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Science and Technology.
Staff.--(1) The head of the Office shall be a civilian employee of the Department of Defense in the Senior Executive Service who is designated by the Secretary of Defense for that purpose.
The head of the Office shall be known as the `Director of the Joint Technology Office'.
The Secretary of Defense shall provide the Office such civilian and military personnel and other resources as are necessary to permit the Office to carry out its duties under this section.
Duties.--The duties of the Office shall be to-- ``(1) develop and oversee the management of a Department of Defense-wide program of science and technology relating to directed energy technologies, systems, and weapons; ``(2) serve as a point of coordination for initiatives for science and technology relating to directed energy technologies, systems, and weapons from throughout the Department of Defense; ``(3) develop and manage a program (to be known as the `National Directed Energy Technology Alliance') to foster the exchange of information and cooperative activities on directed energy technologies, systems, and weapons between and among the Department of Defense, other Federal agencies, institutions of higher education, and the private sector; and ``(4) carry out such other activities relating to directed energy technologies, systems, and weapons as the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Science and Technology considers appropriate.
Coordination Within Department of Defense.--(1) The Director of the Office shall assign to appropriate personnel of the Office the performance of liaison functions with the other Defense Agencies and with the military departments.
The head of each military department and Defense Agency having an interest in the activities of the Office shall assign personnel of such department or Defense Agency to assist the Office in carrying out its duties.
In providing such assistance, such personnel shall be known collectively as `Technology Area Working Groups'.
Technology Council.--(1) There is established in the Department of Defense a council to be known as the `Technology Council' (in this section referred to as the `Council').
The Council shall be composed of 7 members as follows: ``(A) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Science and Technology, who shall be chairperson of the Council.
The senior science and technology executive of the Department of the Army.
The senior science and technology executive of the Department of the Navy.
The senior science and technology executive of the Department of the Air Force.
The senior science and technology executive of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
The senior science and technology executive of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization.
The senior science and technology executive of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency.
The duties of the Council shall be-- ``(A) to review and recommend priorities among programs, projects, and activities proposed and evaluated by the Office under this section; ``(B) to make recommendations to the Board regarding funding for such programs, projects, and activities; and ``(C) to otherwise review and oversee the activities of the Office under this section.
Technology Board of Directors.--(1) There is established in the Department of Defense a board to be known as the `Technology Board of Directors' (in this section referred to as the `Board').
The Board shall be composed of 8 members as follows: ``(A) The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, who shall serve as chairperson of the Board.
The Director of Defense Research and Engineering, who shall serve as vice-chairperson of the Board.
The senior acquisition executive of the Department of the Army.
The senior acquisition executive of the Department of the Navy.
The senior acquisition executive of the Department of the Air Force.
The Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
The Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization.
The Director of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency.
The duties of the Board shall be-- ``(A) to review and make funding recommendations regarding the programs, projects, and activities proposed and evaluated by the Office under this section; and ``(B) to otherwise review and oversee the activities of the Office under this section.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of subchapter II of chapter 8 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``204.
The Secretary of Defense shall locate the Joint Technology Office under section 204 of title 10, United States Code (as added by this subsection), at the National Directed Energy Center at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, not later than January 1, 2001.
Technology Area Working Groups Under High Energy Laser Master Plan.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall provide for the implementation of the portion of the High Energy Laser Master Plan relating to technology area working groups.
In carrying out activities under this subsection, the Secretary of Defense shall require the Secretary of the military department concerned to provide within such department, with such department acting as lead agent, technology area working groups as follows: (A) Within the Department of the Army-- (i) a technology area working group on solid state lasers; and (ii) a technology area working group on advanced technology.
Within the Department of the Navy, a technology area working group on free electron lasers.
Within the Department of the Air Force-- (i) a technology area working group on chemical lasers; (ii) a technology area working group on beam control; (iii) a technology area working group on lethality/ vulnerability; and (iv) a technology area working group on high power microwaves.
Enhancement of Industrial Base.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall develop and undertake initiatives, including investment initiatives, for purposes of enhancing the industrial base for directed energy technologies and systems.
Initiatives under paragraph (1) shall be designed to-- (A) stimulate the development by institutions of higher education and the private sector of promising directed energy technologies and systems; and (B) stimulate the development of a workforce skilled in such technologies and systems.
Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated by subsection (h), $20,000,000 shall be available for the initiation of development of the Advanced Tactical Laser (L) under the direction of the Joint Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate.
Enhancement of Test and Evaluation Capabilities.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall evaluate and implement proposals for modernizing the High Energy Laser Test Facility at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, in order to enhance the test and evaluation capabilities of the Department of Defense with respect to directed energy weapons.
Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense for each of fiscal years 2001 and 2002, not more than $2,000,000 shall be made available in each such fiscal year for purposes of the deployment and test at the High Energy Laser Test Facility at White Sands Missile Range of free electron laser technologies under development at Los Alamos National Laboratory, New Mexico.
Cooperative Programs and Activities.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall evaluate the feasibility and advisability of entering into cooperative programs or activities with other Federal agencies, institutions of higher education, and the private sector, including the national laboratories of the Department of Energy, for the purpose of enhancing the programs, projects, and activities of the Department of Defense relating to directed energy technologies, systems, and weapons.
The Secretary shall enter into any cooperative program or activity determined under the evaluation under paragraph (1) to be feasible and advisable for the purpose set forth in that paragraph.
Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated by subsection (h), $50,000,000 shall be available for cooperative programs and activities entered into under paragraph (2).
Participation of Joint Technology Council in Activities.--The Secretary of Defense shall, to the maximum extent practicable, carry out activities under subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f), through the Joint Technology Council established pursuant to section 204 of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (b) of this section).
Funding for Fiscal Year 2001.--(1)(A) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 2001, $150,000,000 for science and technology activities relating to directed energy technologies, systems, and weapons.
Amounts authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2001 by subparagraph (A) are in addition to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated for such fiscal year for the activities referred to in that subparagraph.
The Director of the Joint Technology Office established pursuant to section 204 of title 10, United States Code, shall allocate amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in paragraph (1) among appropriate program elements of the Department of Defense in accordance with such procedures as the Director shall establish.
In establishing procedures for purposes of the allocation of funds under paragraph (2), the Director shall provide for the competitive selection of programs, projects, and activities to be the recipients of such funds.
Directed Energy Defined.--In this section, the term ``directed energy'', with respect to technologies, systems, or weapons means technologies, systems, or weapons that provide for the directed transmission of energies across the energy and frequency spectrum, including high energy lasers and high power microwaves.