This Act may be cited as the ``Health Professionals Substance Abuse Education Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Illegal drugs and alcohol are responsible for thousands of deaths each year, and they fuel the spread of a number of communicable diseases, including AIDS and Hepatitis C, as well as some of the worst social problems in the United States, including child abuse, domestic violence, and sexual assault.
There are an estimated 14,800,000 current drug users in America, more than 4,000,000 of whom are addicts.
An estimated 14,000,000 Americans abuse alcohol or are alcoholic.
There is a significant treatment gap in the United States.
Nearly 4,000,000 drug users who are in need of immediate treatment are not receiving it.
This includes more than 1,200,000 children ages 12 to 25.
These numbers do not take into account the number of alcoholics in need of treatment.
There are more than 28,000,000 children of alcoholics in America, almost 11,000,000 of whom are under 18 years of age.
Countless other children are affected by substance abusing parents or other caretakers.
Health professionals are uniquely positioned to help reduce or prevent alcohol and other drug- related impairment by identifying affected families and youth and by providing early intervention.
Drug addiction is a chronic relapsing disease.
As with other chronic relapsing diseases (such as diabetes, hypertension and asthma), there is no cure, although a number of treatments can effectively control the disease.
According to an article published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, treatment for addiction works just as well as treatment for other chronic relapsing diseases.
Drug treatment is cost effective, even when compared with residential treatment, the most expensive type of treatment.
Residential treatment for cocaine addiction costs between $15,000 and $20,000 a year, a substantial savings compared to incarceration (costing nearly $40,000 a year), or untreated addiction (costing more than $43,000 a year).
Also, in 1998, substance abuse and addiction accounted for approximately $10,000,000,000 in Federal, State, and local government spending simply to maintain the child welfare system.
The economic costs associated with fetal alcohol syndrome were estimated at $1,900,000,000 for 1992.
Many doctors and other health professionals are unprepared to recognize substance abuse in their patients or their families and intervene in an appropriate manner.
Only 56 percent of residency programs have a required curriculum in preventing or treating substance abuse.
Fewer than 1 in 5 doctors (only 19 percent) feel confident about diagnosing alcoholism, and only 17 percent feel qualified to identify illegal drug use.
Most doctors who are in a position to make a diagnosis of alcoholism or drug addiction do not believe that treatment works (less than 4 percent for alcoholism and only 2 percent for drugs).
According to a survey by the National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University (referred to in this section as ``CASA''), 94 percent of primary care physicians and 40 percent of pediatricians presented with a classic description of an alcoholic or drug addict, respectively, failed to properly recognize the problem.
Another CASA report revealed that fewer than 1 percent of doctors presented with the classic profile of an alcoholic older woman could diagnose it properly.
Eighty-two percent misdiagnosed it as depression, some treatments for which are dangerous when taken with alcohol.
Training can greatly increase the degree to which medical and other health professionals screen patients for substance abuse.
It can also increase the manner by which such professionals screen children and youth who may be impacted by the addiction of a parent or other primary caretaker.
Boston University Medical School researchers designed and conducted a seminar on detection and brief intervention of substance abuse for doctors, nurses, physician's assistants, social workers and psychologists.
Follow-up studies reveal that 91 percent of those who participated in the seminar report that they are still using the techniques up to 5 years later.
According to the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information, drug and alcohol abuse account for more than $400,000,000,000 in health care costs each year.
Arming health care professionals with the information they need in order to intervene and prevent further substance abuse could lead to a significant cost savings.
A study conducted by doctors at the University of Wisconsin found a $947 net savings patient in health care, accident, and criminal justice costs for each individual screened and, if appropriate, for whom intervention was made, with respect to alcohol problems.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) improve the ability of health care professionals to identify and assist their patients with substance abuse; (2) improve the ability of health care professionals to identify and assist children and youth affected by substance abuse in their families; and (3) help establish an infrastructure to train health care professionals about substance abuse issues.
Secretary of Health and Human Services.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may enter into interagency agreements with the Health Resources Services Administration or the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration to enable each such Administration to carry out activities to train health professionals (who are generalists and not already specialists in substance abuse) so that they are competent to-- (1) recognize substance abuse in their patients or the family members of their patients; (2) intervene, treat, or refer for treatment those individuals who are affected by substance abuse; (3) identify and assist children of substance abusing parents; and (4) serve as advocates and resources for community-based substance abuse prevention programs.
Use of Funds.--Amounts received under an interagency agreement under this section shall be used-- (1) with respect to the Health Resources and Services Administration, to support the Association for Medical Education and Research in Substance Abuse (AMERSA) Interdisciplinary Project; and (2) with respect to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, to support the Addiction Technology Transfer Centers counselor training programs to train other health professionals.
Collaboration.--To be eligible to enter into an interagency agreement under this section the Health Resources and Services Administration or the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration shall demonstrate that such Administration will participate in interdisciplinary collaboration and collaborate with other nongovernmental organizations with respect to activities carried out under this section.
Evaluations.--The Health Resources and Services Administration and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration shall conduct a process and outcome evaluation of the programs and activities carried out with funds received under this section, and shall provide semi-annual reports to the Secretary of Health Human Services and the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy.
Definitions.--In this section-- (1) the term ``health professional'' means a doctor, nurse, physician assistant, nurse practitioner, social worker, psychologist, pharmacist, osteopath, or other individual who is licensed, accredited, or certified under State law to provide specified health care services and who is operating within the scope of such licensure, accreditation, or certification; and (2) the terms ``doctor'', ``nurse'', ``physician assistant'', ``nurse practitioner'', ``social worker'', ``psychologist'', ``pharmacist'', and ``osteopath'' shall have the meanings given such terms for purposes of titles VII and VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 292 et seq and 296 et sequentes).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $5,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006, of which $1,000,000 in each such fiscal year shall be made available to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration and $4,500,000 in each such fiscal year shall be made available to the Health Resources and Services Administration, to carry out this section.
Amounts made available under this subsection shall be used to supplement and not supplant amounts being used on the date of enactment of this Act for activities of the types described in this section.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE FACULTY FELLOWSHIP.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall establish and administer a substance abuse faculty fellowship program under which the Secretary shall provide assistance to eligible institutions to enable such institutions to employ individuals to serve as faculty and provide substance abuse training in a multi-discipline manner.
Eligibility.-- (1) Institutions.--To be eligible to receive assistance under this section, an institution shall-- (A) be an accredited medical school or nursing school, or be an institution of higher education that offers one or more of the following-- (i) an accredited physician assistant program; (ii) an accredited nurse practitioner program; (iii) a graduate program in pharmacy; (iv) a graduate program in public health; (v) a graduate program in social work; or (vi) a graduate program in psychology; and (B) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Individuals.--To be eligible to receive a fellowship from an eligible institution under this section, an individual shall prepare and submit to the institution an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the institution may require.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--An eligible institution shall utilize assistance received under this section to provide one or more fellowships to eligible individuals.
Such assistance shall be used to pay not to exceed 50 percent of the annual salary of the individual under such a fellowship for a 5-year period.
Fellowships.--Under a fellowship under paragraph (1), an individual shall-- (A) devote a substantial number of teaching hours to substance abuse issues (as part of both required and elective courses) at the institution involved during the period of the fellowship; and (B) attempt to incorporate substance abuse issues into the required curriculum of the institution in a manner that is likely to be sustained after the period of the fellowship ends.
Courses described in this paragraph should by taught as part of several different health care training programs at the institution involved.
Evaluations.--The Secretary shall conduct a process and outcome evaluation of the programs and activities carried out with amounts appropriated under this section and shall provide semi-annual reports to the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy and the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $3,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Amounts made available under this subsection shall be used to supplement and not supplant amounts being used on the date of enactment of this Act for activities of the types described in this section.
In General.--The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy shall convene an interagency oversight committee, composed of representatives of the Health Resources and Services Administration, as well as the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, and the National Institute on Mental Health, and non-governmental organizations determined to be experts in the field of substance abuse, to receive updates concerning and coordinate the Federal activities funded under this Act and the activities of various Federal agencies, toward the goal of educating health professionals about substance abuse.
Meetings.--The interagency oversight committee established under subsection (a) shall meet at least twice each year at the call of the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy.