This Act may be cited as the ``Vietnam Veterans Children's Disability Act''.
AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN OF VIETNAM VETERANS WITH CERTAIN DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH PARENTAL EXPOSURE TO HERBICIDE AGENTS.
Amendments to New Chapter 18.--The amendments made by this section are made to chapter 18 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 401 of the Veterans Benefits and Health Care Improvement Act of 2000 (Public Law 106-419; 114 United States Statutes at Large 1857), and take effect on-- (1) December 1, 2001 (the effective date of those amendments); or (2) if later, the date of the enactment of this Act.
Benefits for Certain Children.--(1) Chapter 18 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER IV--CHILDREN OF VIETNAM VETERANS WITH DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH PARENTAL EXPOSURE TO HERBICIDE AGENTS ``Sec.
Definitions In this subchapter: ``(1) The term `eligible child' means an individual, regardless of age or marital status, who-- ``(A) is the natural child of-- ``(i) a Vietnam veteran; or ``(ii) a veteran other than a Vietnam veteran who, as determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, was exposed before the child was conceived to herbicides during active military, naval, or air service; and ``(B) has one or more covered diseases.
The term `covered disease' means a disease identified by the Secretary under section 1832 of this title.
Covered diseases ``(a) Identification.--The Secretary shall by regulation identify diseases occurring in children that have a positive association with parental exposure to an herbicide agent before the date on which the child was conceived.
Diseases To Be Included.--The Secretary shall include acute myelogenous leukemia in the diseases identified under subsection (a).
Health care ``(a) Needed Care.--The Secretary shall provide an eligible child such health care as the Secretary determines is needed by the child for that child's covered diseases or any disability that is associated with those diseases.
Authority for Care To Be Provided Directly or by Contract.-- The Secretary may provide health care under this section directly or by contract or other arrangement with a health care provider.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the definitions in section 1803(c) of this title shall apply with respect to the provision of health care under this section, except that for such purposes-- ``(1) the reference to `specialized spina bifida clinic' in paragraph (2) of that section shall be treated as a reference to a specialized clinic treating the disease concerned under this section; and ``(2) the reference to `vocational training under section 1804 of this title' in paragraph (8) of that section shall be treated as a reference to vocational training under section 1834 of this title.
Vocational training ``(a) Authority.--The Secretary may provide a program of vocational training to an eligible child if the Secretary determines that the achievement of a vocational goal by the child is reasonably feasible.
Applicable Provisions.--Subsections (b) through (e) of section 1804 of this title shall apply with respect to any program of vocational training provided under subsection (a).
Monetary allowance ``(a) Monetary Allowance.--The Secretary shall pay a monthly allowance to an eligible child for any disability resulting from a covered disease.
Schedule for Rating Disabilities.--(1) The amount of the monthly allowance paid under this section shall be based on the degree of disability suffered by the child concerned, as determined in accordance with a schedule for rating disabilities resulting from covered diseases that is prescribed by the Secretary.
In prescribing a schedule for rating disabilities for the purposes of this section, the Secretary shall establish the levels of disability upon which the amount of the allowance provided by this section shall be based.
The levels of disability established may take into account functional limitations, including limitations on cognition, communication, motor abilities, activities of daily living, and employability.
Amount of Monthly Allowance.--(1) The Secretary shall prescribe the amount of the monthly allowance paid under this section for each level of disability established in the schedule of rating disabilities prescribed under subsection (b), except that an allowance under this section-- ``(A) may not be less than the amount in effect under section 1815(c)(1) of this title; and ``(B) may not be greater than the amount in effect under section 1815(c)(4) of this title.
(A) Benefits under this subchapter may be discontinued six months after the child has recovered fully from the disability.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `fully recovered from the disability' means that no signs or symptoms of disability are present and no treatment for the disability is warranted.
Benefits under this subchapter may be paid for any secondary disability which results from any disability associated with exposure to a herbicide or any disability resulting from treatment for such disability.
Indexing to Social Security Benefit Increases.--Amounts paid under subsection (c) shall be subject to adjustment from time to time under section 5312 of this title.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``subchapter iv--children of vietnam veterans with diseases associated with parental exposure to herbicide agents ``1831.
Definition of Vietnam Veteran.--Section 1821(3)(A) of such title is amended by striking ``subchapter I'' and inserting ``subchapters I and IV''.