This Act may be cited as the ``Prevention, Awareness, and Research Auto-Immune Disease Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) The Lupus Foundation of America estimates that at least 1.5 million Americans have a form of lupus, 9 out of 10 of these Americans are women, and 80 percent of all newly diagnosed cases of lupus are among women of childbearing age.
According to a Lupus Foundation of America survey, more than half of the people with lupus suffered for 4 or more years and visited 3 or more doctors before obtaining a diagnosis of lupus.
Early diagnosis of and commencement of treatment for lupus can prevent or reduce serious organ damage, disability, and death.
About 1 out of 5 lupus sufferers receives disability payments, costing the Government several billion dollars each year for social security disability benefits, lost taxes, and medical care provided through Medicare and Medicaid.
The average annual cost of medical treatment for an individual with lupus is $6,000 to $10,000; for some people, medical costs may exceed several thousand dollars every month.
Despite the prevalence of lupus, public awareness and understanding of lupus remains low.
According to a Lupus Foundation of America survey, only 1 out of 5 Americans can provide even basic information about lupus.
Awareness of lupus is lowest among adults ages 18 to 34, the age group most likely to develop symptoms of lupus.
Multiple sclerosis is a chronic and often disabling disease of the central nervous system which often first appears in people who are 20 to 50 years of age, with lifelong physical and emotional effects.
Multiple sclerosis is twice as common in women as in men.
An estimated 250,000 to 400,000 individuals have multiple sclerosis nationally.
The average annual cost of multiple sclerosis to each affected individual is approximately $50,000, and the total cost can exceed $3,000,000 over an individual's lifetime.
The annual cost of treating all people who suffer from multiple sclerosis in the United States is approximately $20,000,000,000.
Symptoms of multiple sclerosis can be mild (such as numbness in the limbs) or severe (such as paralysis or loss of vision).
The progress, severity, and specific symptoms of multiple sclerosis in any one individual cannot yet be predicted.
Arthritis is the number one cause of disability in the United States.
Among the 2,100,000 people with rheumatoid arthritis in the United States, women outnumber men 3 to 1.
The total direct costs of rheumatoid arthritis, including money spent on treatments, hospitalizations, medications, transportation, and specialist aids, is approximately $1,200,000,000 each year.
The average medical care expenditures over the course of a rheumatoid arthritis patient's lifetime is $225,000 to $370,000.
Fibromyalgia is believed to affect approximately 3,700,000 people (approximately 2 percent of the United States population) and occurs more commonly in women than men.
The exact cause of fibromyalgia is unknown, but may be triggered by stress, trauma, or possibly an infectious agent in susceptible people.
GRANTS TO INCREASE AWARENESS OF AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to increase awareness of autoimmune diseases, such as lupus, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia, in order to provide to the public a more complete understanding of these diseases, which affect 5 to 10 percent of the people in the United States.
Amendments.--Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by moving section 317R so that such section follows section 317Q; and (2) by inserting after section 317R (as so moved) the following: ``Sec.
Grants to Increase Awareness of Autoimmune Diseases.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall award grants to eligible entities to conduct public and professional awareness activities regarding autoimmune diseases, such as lupus, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia.
Use of Funds.--In conducting public and professional awareness activities with a grant under this section, an eligible entity may do any of the following: ``(1) Promote increased awareness of early intervention and treatment so as to significantly improve the quality of life for people with autoimmune diseases, such as lupus, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia.
Target minority communities that may be underserved or disproportionately affected by autoimmune diseases, such as lupus, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia.
Target women (who are disproportionately affected by autoimmune diseases, such as lupus, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia) so as to help reduce the amount of time taken for correct diagnosis of such diseases, which often takes more than 1 year.
Eligible Entity.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible entity' means a nonprofit organization, a consumer group, an institution of higher education (as defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001)), a Federal, State, or local governmental agency, or a media organization.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $18,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 and 2005.''.
GRANTS FOR EDUCATION ON RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES AND MENTAL ILLNESSES.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes), as amended by section 3 of this Act, is amended by inserting after section 317S the following: ``Sec.
Grants for Education on Relationship Between Autoimmune Diseases and Mental Illnesses.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award grants to eligible entities for the education of health care providers on potential links between autoimmune diseases, such as lupus, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia, and cognitive and mood disorders, such as depression.
Eligible Entity.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible entity' means a nonprofit organization, a consumer group, an institution of higher education (as defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001)), a Federal, State, or local governmental agency, or a media organization.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 and 2005.''.
LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM REGARDING PHYSICIAN RESEARCH ON AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES.
Title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 281 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the second section 487F as section 487G; and (2) by inserting after section 487G (as so redesignated) the following: ``SEC.
LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM REGARDING PHYSICIAN RESEARCH ON AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES.
Establishment.--To the extent and in the amounts provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall establish a program to enter into contracts with qualified physicians under which such qualified physicians agree to conduct research for a period of at least 3 years regarding autoimmune diseases, such as lupus, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia, in consideration of the Federal Government agreeing to repay, for each year of service conducting such research, not more than $35,000 of the principal and interest of the educational loans of such qualified physicians.
Application of Provisions.--Except as inconsistent with this section, the provisions of sections 338B, 338C, and 338E shall apply to the program established under this section to the same extent and in the same manner as such provisions apply to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established in subpart III of part D of title III.
Qualified Physician.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified physician' means any individual who has received, or will have received by the time of the research to be conducted under this section, a degree of doctor of medicine or its equivalent and is licensed to practice medicine in the United States.
Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated for carrying out this section shall remain available until the expiration of the second fiscal year beginning after the fiscal year for which the amounts were made available.