This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Education Tuition Support Act'' or the ``VETS Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) There is no more important cause than the defense of the United States.
Since 2003, nearly 1,300,000 members of the Armed Forces have served in Iraq or Afghanistan and over 420,000 members of the Armed Forces in the National Guard and Reserve have been called to active duty.
The men and women of the Armed Forces put their lives on hold, leave their families, jobs, and postsecondary education in order to serve the United States, and do so with distinction.
In 2005, 500,000 veterans claimed education benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs and approximately 47,000 of those veterans are members of the National Guard or Reserve and recently returned from serving in the Armed Forces in Iraq or Afghanistan.
Many members of the Armed Forces depend on various forms of financial aid in addition to their Montgomery GI Bill benefits to help fund their college education.
The 6 percent interest rate cap on all debts of members of the Armed Forces called to active duty guaranteed by the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 United States Code App.
501 et sequentes) has been interpreted narrowly by the Secretary of Education not to apply to Federal student loans.
Members of the Armed Forces who return from deployment overseas in the Armed Forces and who are unable to continue immediately a program of education that they were forced to discontinue because of such deployment are being forced to begin making payments on their private students loans only 1 month after such return.
The transition from service in the Armed Forces in a combat theater to a classroom is a difficult challenge and should not be rushed merely to avoid paying back student loans.
As of the date of the enactment of this Act, colleges are not required to make reasonable accommodations for students who are called to active duty in the Armed Forces, such as tuition reimbursement and relaxation of requirements for reenrollment.
Members of the Armed Forces who return from deployment overseas and attempt to reenroll in a program of education are overwhelmed with bureaucracy.
Studies have shown that symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and other non-apparent injuries may take up to a year to manifest.
Members of the Armed Forces deserve to have at least a full academic year to reintegrate into society before they are required to begin paying back student loans.
Members of the Armed Forces who fight to protect the United States deserve a Government that fights to protect them.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to assist members of the Armed Forces who return from a deployment to transition from military service to civilian life and to undertake programs of education they were forced to discontinue because of such deployment; (2) to provide a 13-month transition period for such members to reenroll in such a program of education and to begin paying back student loans undertaken for such program of education; (3) to institute a 6 percent interest rate cap on student loans of a member of the Armed Forces while such member is deployed on active duty; and (4) to require providers of programs of education to provide reasonable accommodations to their students who are members of the Armed Forces and who discontinue a program of education because of a deployment.
RELIEF FOR STUDENTS WHO DISCONTINUE EDUCATION BECAUSE OF MILITARY SERVICE.
In General.--Title VII of the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 United States Code App.
591 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
TUITION, REENROLLMENT, AND STUDENT LOAN RELIEF FOR POSTSECONDARY STUDENTS CALLED TO MILITARY SERVICE.
Tuition and Reenrollment.--In the case of a servicemember who because of military service discontinues a program of education at an institution of higher education that administers a Federal financial aid program, such institution of higher education shall-- ``(1) refund to such servicemember the tuition and fees paid by such servicemember from personal funds, or from a loan, for the portion of the program of education for which such servicemember did not receive academic credit because of such military service; and ``(2) provide such servicemember an opportunity to reenroll in such program of education with the same educational and academic status such servicemember had when such servicemember discontinued such program of education because of such military service.
Deferment of Repayment of Loans.--In the case of a servicemember who because of military service discontinues a program of education at an institution of higher education, the following rules shall apply to a provider of student loans who has provided a student loan to such servicemember that is not in payment status on the date the period of military service begins: ``(1) If such servicemember reenrolls in the program of education (or a comparable program) within 13 months following the period of military service, the provider shall disregard the entire period the program of education was discontinued in determining the date on which repayment of the student loan is to begin.
If such servicemember does not so reenroll, the provider shall not require repayment of the student loan to begin before the later of the last day of such 13-month period or the date the repayment was to begin without regard to this subsection.
Interest Rate Limitation on Student Loans.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a student loan shall be considered an obligation or liability for the purposes of section 207.
Exception.--Subsection (c) of section 207 shall not apply to a student loan.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `Federal financial aid program' means a program providing loans made, insured, or guaranteed under part B, D, or E of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1077 et sequentes, 1087a et sequentes, 1087aa et sequentes).
The term `institution of higher education' means a 2- year or 4-year institution of higher education as defined in section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1002).
The term `student loan' means any loan, whether Federal, State, or private, to assist an individual to attend an institution of higher education, including a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under part B, D, or E of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1077 et sequentes, 1087a et seq., 1087aa et sequentes).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section (1)(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Tuition, reenrollment, and student loan relief for postsecondary students called to military service.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect for periods of military service beginning after the date of the enactment of this section.