This Act may be cited as the ``Iran Intelligence Oversight Act''.
Submittal to Congress of Updated National Intelligence Estimate on Iran.-- (1) Submittal required.--As soon as is practicable, but not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of National Intelligence shall submit to Congress an updated National Intelligence Estimate on Iran.
Notice regarding submittal.--If the Director determines that the National Intelligence Estimate required by paragraph (1) cannot be submitted by the date specified in that paragraph, the Director shall submit to Congress a report setting forth-- (A) the reasons why the National Intelligence Estimate cannot be submitted by such date; and (B) an estimated date for the submittal of the National Intelligence Estimate.
Form.--The National Intelligence Estimate under paragraph (1) shall be submitted in classified form.
Consistent with the protection of intelligence sources and methods, an unclassified summary of the key judgments of the National Intelligence Estimate should be submitted.
Elements.--The National Intelligence Estimate submitted under paragraph (1) shall address the following: (A) The foreign policy and regime objectives of Iran.
The current status of the nuclear programs of Iran, including-- (i) an assessment of the current and projected capabilities of Iran to design a nuclear weapon, to produce plutonium, enriched uranium, and other weapons materials, to build a nuclear weapon, and to deploy a nuclear weapon; and (ii) an assessment of the intentions of Iran regarding possible development of nuclear weapons, the motivations underlying such intentions, and the factors that might influence changes in such intentions.
The military and defense capabilities of Iran, including any non-nuclear weapons of mass destruction programs and related delivery systems.
The relationship of Iran with terrorist organizations, the use by Iran of terrorist organizations in furtherance of its foreign policy objectives, and the factors that might cause Iran to reduce or end such relationships.
The prospects for support from the international community for various potential courses of action with respect to Iran, including diplomacy, sanctions, and military action.
The anticipated reaction of Iran to the courses of action set forth under subparagraph (E), including an identification of the course or courses of action most likely to successfully influence Iran in terminating or moderating its policies of concern.
The level of popular and elite support within Iran for the Iran regime, and for its civil nuclear program, nuclear weapons ambitions, and other policies, and the prospects for reform and political change within Iran.
The views among the populace and elites of Iran with respect to the United States, including views on direct discussions with or normalization of relations with the United States.
The views among the populace and elites of Iran with respect to other key countries involved in nuclear diplomacy with Iran.
The likely effects and consequences of any military action against the nuclear programs or other regime interests of Iran.
The confidence level of key judgments in the National Intelligence Estimate, the quality of the sources of intelligence on Iran, the nature and scope of any gaps in intelligence on Iran, and any significant alternative views on the matters contained in the National Intelligence Estimate.
Presidential Report on Policy Objectives and United States Strategy Regarding Iran.-- (1) Report required.--As soon as is practicable, but not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to Congress a report on the following: (A) The objectives of United States policy on Iran.
The strategy for achieving such objectives.
Form.--The report under paragraph (1) shall be submitted in unclassified form with a classified annex, as appropriate.
Elements.--The report submitted under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) address the role of diplomacy, incentives, sanctions, other punitive measures and incentives, and other programs and activities relating to Iran for which funds are provided by Congress; and (B) summarize United States contingency planning regarding the range of possible United States military actions in support of United States policy objectives with respect to Iran.
Director of National Intelligence Report on Process for Vetting and Clearing Administration Officials' Statements Drawn From Intelligence.-- (1) Report required.--As soon as is practicable, but not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of National Intelligence shall submit to Congress a report on the process for vetting and clearing statements of Administration officials that are drawn from or rely upon intelligence.
Elements.--The report shall-- (A) describe current policies and practices of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence and the intelligence community for-- (i) vetting and clearing statements of senior Administration officials that are drawn from or rely upon intelligence; and (ii) how significant misstatements of intelligence that may occur in public statements of senior public officials are identified, brought to the attention of any such officials, and corrected; (B) assess the sufficiency and adequacy of such policies and practices; and (C) include any recommendations that the Director considers appropriate to improve such policies and practices.