This Act may be cited as the ``Family Planning Amendments Act of 1993''.
PROJECT GRANTS AND CONTRACTS FOR FAMILY PLANNING SERVICES.
Requiring Certain Nondirective Counseling and Referral Services.--Section 1001 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (b) through (d) as subsections (d) through (f), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following subsection: ``(b)(1) The Secretary may not make an award of a grant or contract under this section unless the applicant for the award agrees that the family planning project involved will provide to individuals information regarding pregnancy management options upon request of the individuals, and that such information will be provided only through individuals holding professional degrees in medicine or osteopathic medicine, nursing, clinical psychology, the allied health professions, or social work, through individuals meeting such other criteria as the Secretary determines to be appropriate for providing such information, or through individuals allowed under State law to provide such information.
With respect to compliance with the agreement made under paragraph (1), the family planning project involved, and any provider of services in the project, may not be required to provide information regarding a pregnancy management option if-- ``(A) the project or provider (as the case may be) objects to doing so on grounds of religious beliefs or moral convictions; and ``(B) the project refers the individual seeking services to another provider in the project, or to another project in the geographic area involved, as the case may be, that will provide such information.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `information regarding pregnancy management options' means nondirective counseling and referrals regarding-- ``(A) prenatal care and delivery; ``(B) infant care, foster care, and adoption; and ``(C) termination of pregnancy.''.
Compliance With State Laws on Parental Notification and Consent.--Section 1008 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300a-6) is amended by inserting ``(a)'' before ``None'' and by adding at the end the following: ``(b)(1) No public or nonprofit entity that performs abortions may receive an award of a grant or contract under section 1001 unless the entity has certified to the Secretary that the entity is in compliance with State law regarding parental notification of or consent for the performance of an abortion on a minor which is enforced in the State in which the entity is located.
Paragraph (1) shall not be construed to require or prohibit a State's adoption of parental notification or parental consent laws regarding the performance of an abortion on a minor, or to require or prohibit the enforcement by a State of such laws.''.
Information on Condoms.--Section 1001 of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by subsection (a) of this section, is amended by inserting after subsection (b) the following subsection: ``(c) The Secretary may not make an award of a grant or contract under this section unless the applicant for the award agrees that the family planning project involved will-- ``(1) distribute only those condoms meeting current requirements for quality control and labeling, and any subsequently developed standards, established by the Food and Drug Administration for the prevention of pregnancy and the prevention of the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases; and ``(2) advise individuals of the benefits of the proper use of condoms, of the extent of risk that still exists with condom usage, and of the fact that condoms currently available do not completely eliminate the risk of pregnancy or the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 1001(f) of the Public Health Service Act, as redesignated by subsection (a) of this section, is amended to read as follows: ``(f) For the purpose of grants and contracts under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $220,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and $250,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR TRAINING GRANTS AND CONTRACTS.
Section 1003(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300a- 1(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) For the purpose of grants and contracts under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $6,250,000 for fiscal year 1994, and $7,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR INFORMATIONAL AND EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS.
Section 1005(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300a- 3(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) For the purpose of grants and contracts under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $12,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and $13,500,000 for fiscal year 1995.''.
SENSE OF CONGRESS; REQUIREMENT REGARDING NOTICE.
Sense of Congress Regarding Purchase of American-Made Equipment and Products.--In the case of any equipment or products that may be authorized in title X of the Public Health Service Act to be purchased with an award of a grant or contract under such title, it is the sense of the Congress that entities receiving such an award should in expending the award purchase only American-made equipment and products.
Notice to Recipients of Awards.--In making awards of grants and contracts under title X of the Public Health Service Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide to each recipient of such an award a notice describing the statement made in subsection (a) by the Congress.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act take effect upon the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives March 25, 1993.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.