This Act may be cited as the ``United Houma Nation Recognition and Land Claims Settlement Act of 1996''.
DECLARATION OF POLICY, CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
Findings.--The Congress declares and finds the following: (1) It is the policy of the United States to promote tribal self-determination and economic self-sufficiency and to support the resolution of disputes over historical claims through settlements mutually agreed to by Indian and non-Indian parties.
The United Houma Nation have used, occupied, and possessed vast tracts of lands within the State of Louisiana and adjacent States, and by this use, occupancy, and possession have laid claim to these lands.
The significant historical events which have led to the present state of affairs include (but are not limited to) the following: (A) The United Houma Nation have an unbroken tribal existence from time immemorial and before recorded history.
The United Houma Nation enters recorded history in 1682, when the explorer Robert Cavalier, Sieur de La Salle encountered this tribe at the intersection of the Mississippi and Red Rivers.
By 1706, the United Houma Nation reacted to the rivalry between the French and English by migrating south, in order to be closer to their French allies.
During the early 1700's, the United Houma Nation fought with other Indian tribes, and the French, over lands.
The United States assumed sovereignty over these lands with the purchase of the Louisiana Territory in 1803 and promised all Indian tribes inhabiting the newly acquired territory that their land ownership and possession would be protected and honored as such ownership was protected and honored by the former sovereigns of Spain and France.
In order to protect themselves from threats presented by non-Indian peoples, portions of the United Houma Nation sought refuge and safety in the then remote wetlands and bayous of southern Louisiana where they continued their social life and existence as a tribal entity.
Members of the United Houma Nation have always been accorded the status of Indians as evidenced by-- (i) receiving educational support from the Federal Government; and (ii) recognition of the United Houma Nation as an Indian tribe by the State of Louisiana.
The United Houma Nation reorganized their government under a corporate form in the 1970's, which culminated in the creation of a corporate entity known as the ``United Houma Nation'' in 1979.
The assertion of the land claims of the United Houma Nation through litigation will lead to substantial economic and social hardship for a large number of landowners, citizens, and communities in the State of Louisiana, including the United Houma Nation itself.
Congress recognizes that if these claims are not resolved-- (A) litigation against thousands of landowners would be likely; (B) any final resolution of these disputes through a process of litigation would-- (i) take many years and entail great expenses to all parties; (ii) continue economically and socially damaging controversies; (iii) prolong uncertainty as to the ownership of property; and (iv) seriously impair long-term economic planning and development for all parties.
The settlement of these land claims and the avoidance of costly, protracted, and uncertain litigation-- (A) will advance the goals of the Federal policy of Indian self-determination; and (B) in recognition of the obligation of the United States as a guardian and trustee, will be in furtherance of the Federal policy of settling historical Indian claims through legislation rather than confrontation.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to recognize the United Houma Nation, the historical descendant of the group known in history as the Houma Tribe, as a federally recognized tribe on a sovereign-to-sovereign basis, with all rights, benefits, and responsibilities thereto; (2) to authorize and direct the Secretary of the Interior to implement the terms and provisions of this Act; (3) to remove the cloud on titles in the State of Louisiana resulting from any land claims which have been asserted, are being asserted, or may be asserted, by the United Houma Nation; and (4) to confirm and recognize the trust relationship between the United Houma Nation and the United States.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Tribe'' means the United Houma Nation, as described in the ``Constitution of the United Houma Nation, Inc.'', and the ``United Houma Nation By-Laws'', dated 1979 and 1983, respectively, and the successor in interest to the former ``Houma Tribe, Inc.'', the former ``The Houma Alliance, Inc.'', and the historic Houma Tribe.
The term ``claim'' means any claim which was asserted, is being asserted presently, or could be asserted, by the Tribe, or by individuals as a tribal claim, or any other claim, of any species or origin whatsoever, of a right, title, or interest in or to real property (and improvements thereon), to trespass or damages to real property (and improvements thereon), to mesne profits, or of seasonal subsistence hunting, fishing, or other rights to natural resources, if such claim is based or premised upon-- (A) original aboriginal title; or (B) aboriginal title based upon-- (i) use, occupancy, or possession for a number of years, or (ii) title confirmed or guaranteed by Articles III and VI of the Treaty of Purchase between the United States of America and France, dated April 30, 1803.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``State'' means the State of Louisiana.
ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL TRUST RELATIONSHIP.
Federal Recognition.--Federal recognition is hereby extended to the Tribe.
All laws and regulations of general application to Indians and nations, tribes, or bands of Indians that are not inconsistent with any specific provision of this Act shall be applicable to the Tribe and its members.
Federal Benefits and Services.-- (1) In general.--The Tribe and its members shall be eligible for all Federal benefits and services furnished to federally recognized Indian tribes and their members because of their status as Indians.
Service area.--In the case of Federal services available to members of federally recognized Indian tribes residing on a reservation, members of the Tribe residing in the Tribe's service area shall be deemed to be residing on a reservation.
For the purposes of this paragraph, the term ``service area'' means the area comprised by the civil parishes of Terrebonne, Lafourche, Jefferson, St. Mary, Plaquemines, Orleans, and St. Bernard, in the State of Louisiana.
Indian Reorganization Act Applicability.--The Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 461 et sequentes), shall be applicable to the Tribe and its members.
Effect on Property Rights and Other Obligations.--Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, this Act shall not affect any property right or obligation, or any contractual right or obligation in existence before the date of the enactment of this Act, or for any obligation for taxes assessed before that date.
RATIFICATION OF PRIOR TRANSFERS; EXTINGUISHMENT OF ABORIGINAL TITLE, RIGHTS AND CLAIMS.
Ratification of Transfers.--Any transfer before the date of enactment of this Act of real property (and improvements thereon) or natural resources located anywhere within the United States-- (1) from, by, or on behalf of the Tribe, any one or more of its members, or anyone purporting to be a member, including (but not limited to) any transfer pursuant to any treaty, compact, or statute of any State, and (2) from, by, or on behalf of the United States to the State of Louisiana, shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with the Constitution and all laws of the United States, and Congress hereby approves and ratifies any such transfer effective as of the date of such transfer.
Aboriginal Title.--Aboriginal title to real property or natural resources described in subsection (a) of the Tribe, any of its members, or anyone purporting to be a member, or any other Indian, Indian Nation, or Tribe or band of Indians is hereby extinguished as of the date of such transfer or conveyance.
Extinguishment of Claims.--By virtue of the approval and ratification of any transfer or conveyance of real property (and improvements thereon) or natural resources effected by this section, and the extinguishment of aboriginal title effected thereby, all claims against the United States, any State or subdivision thereof, or any other person or entity, by the Tribe, any of its members, or anyone purporting to be a member, or any Indian Nation, or tribe or band of Indians, arising at the time of or subsequent to the transfer or conveyance, and based on any interest in or right involving such real property or natural resources shall be extinguished as of the date of the transfer.
Extinguishment of Title.-- (1) In general.--All claims and all right, title and interest that-- (A) the Tribe or any person or group of persons purporting to be the Houma Indians, or (B) any person or group of persons purporting to be any other Indian, Indian Nation, Tribe, or band of Indians who are descendants from any of the progenitors analyzed in Section VIII of the Benealogical Report (including Appendices A and B thereto)--Proposed Finding--United Houma Nation, December 13, 1994, United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Branch of Acknowledgment and Research, may have to aboriginal title, recognized title, or title by grant, patent, or treaty, to the lands or interests in real property (and improvements thereon) located anywhere in the United States, are hereby extinguished.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any right, title, or interest in or to property in the possession of any such person or group on the date of enactment of this Act.
Bar to Future Claims.--The United States is hereby barred from asserting by or on behalf of the Tribe any claim arising before the date of enactment of this Act, from the transfer or conveyance of any real property (and improvements thereon) or natural resources by deed, act of sale, or other grant, or by treaty, compact, or act of law, on the grounds that such transfer or conveyance was not made in accordance with the laws of the State of Louisiana or laws of the United States.
Personal Claims Not Affected.--Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, diminish, or eliminate the personal claim of any individual member of the Tribe, or Indian, which is pursued under any law of general applicability (other than Federal common law fraud) that protects non-Indians as well as Indians.
In General.--Within one year after the date of enactment of this section, the Tribe shall submit to the Secretary its base membership roll.
The base membership roll shall be developed and based upon the criteria set out in Article III, Section 1 of the ``Constitution of the United Houma Nation, Inc.'' (b) Future Membership.--The Tribe shall have the right to determine future membership in the Tribe; however, in no event may an individual be enrolled as a member of the Tribe unless the individual is a lineal descendant of a person on the base membership roll, and has continued to maintain political relations with the tribe.
Member.--For the purposes of this section, the term ``member'' means an enrolled member of the Tribe, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, or an individual who has been placed on the membership rolls of the Tribe in accordance with this section.
TRIBAL CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNANCE.
Indian Reorganization Act.--If the Tribe so elects, it may organize a tribal government under the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 461 et sequentes), commonly referred to as the ``Indian Reorganization Act''.
Pursuant to any such election, the Tribe shall adopt any new constitution or other organic law in accordance with such Act.
Scope of Constitution.--Whether or not the tribe elects under subsection (a) to organize under such Act, the Tribe may exercise such authority as is consistent with this Act and its constitution.