This Act may be cited as the ``Recruiting, Retention, and Reservist Promotion Act of 2000''.
PER DIEM ALLOWANCE FOR LENGTHY OR NUMEROUS DEPLOYMENTS.
Expedited Implementation.--(1) Section 435 of title 37, United States Code, as added by section 586(b) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000 (Public Law 106-65; 113 United States Statutes at Large 638), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Implementation.--This section shall take effect on the first day of the first month beginning after the date of the enactment of this subsection.
For purposes of determining the eligibility of a member for the high-deployment per diem allowance on and after that date, the Secretary concerned shall consider days on which the member was deployed before that date.''.
Section 586(d) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000 (Public Law 106-65; 113 United States Statutes at Large 639) is amended-- (A) by striking ``(1)'' before ``Section 991''; and (B) by striking paragraph (2).
Inclusion of Coast Guard.--(1) Subsection (a) of section 435 of title 37, United States Code, is amended by inserting after ``military department concerned'' the following: ``, and the Secretary of Transportation, with respect to members of the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Department of the Navy,''.
Section 991 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subsection (c), by striking ``of each military department'' and inserting ``concerned''; (B) in subsection (d), by striking ``of the military department''; and (C) in subsection (e), by striking ``This section'' and inserting ``Subsection (a)''.
Evaluation of Eligibility Threshold.--(1) Beginning six months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, shall conduct a study regarding-- (A) the extent to which the high-deployment per diem allowance authorized by section 435 of title 37, United States Code, is being paid to members of the regular and reserve components of the Armed Forces; (B) the effect of the availability of the allowance on the morale of members and on retention and recruitment rates; and (C) the feasibility of establishing a reduced eligibility threshold for a members of National Guard and Reserve units serving on active duty for a period of more than 30 days, at possibly a reduced per diem rate, to address the disruption of the member's civilian employment.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report containing the results of the study and the Secretary's recommendations regarding-- (A) appropriate changes to the eligibility threshold for the allowance and the per diem amount specified in such section 435; and (B) the establishment of a separate eligibility threshold and per diem rate for members of National Guard and Reserve units serving on active duty for a period of more than 30 days.
If the Secretary of Defense determines that the threshold of 251 days of deployment during the preceding 365 days is too high a threshold for eligibility for the high-deployment per diem allowance, the Secretary may reduce the threshold to such days of deployment as the Secretary considers appropriate.
The Secretary shall notify the Congress in writing of any change in the eligibility threshold made under the authority of this paragraph.
STUDY OF TAX CREDITS AND SMALL BUSINESS LOAN CHANGES TO ASSIST BUSINESSES THAT EMPLOY GUARD AND RESERVE MEMBERS.
Study Required.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a study to determine-- (1) whether members of the National Guard and Reserve comprise a disproportionately large portion of the employees of any size or type of business, including small business concerns; (2) the amount of Federal tax benefit which would be appropriate to compensate such a business for costs associated with employing members of National Guard and Reserve units and having such members called to active duty; and (3) whether changes can be made to the small business loan program, such as a targeted level of loans, reduced interest rates, and reduced paperwork burdens for loan applications, to assist small business concerns to deal with the costs associated with employing members of National Guard and Reserve units and having such members called to active duty.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report containing the results of the study.
The report shall include legislative proposals-- (1) to provide the recommended tax benefit identified in the study; and (2) to modify the small business loan program to assist small business concerns that employ members of National Guard and Reserve units.
REPORT ON EXPANSION OF JUNIOR ROTC AND SIMILAR MILITARY PROGRAMS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps, the Civil Air Patrol, the Naval Sea Cadet Corps, and the Young Marines of the Marine Corps League provide significant benefits for the Armed Forces, including significant public relations benefits; and (2) there is substantial interest in expanding the scope of these programs.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report providing the Secretary's assessment of the feasibility and desirability of expanding the Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps program of each of the military departments, the Civil Air Patrol, the Naval Sea Cadet Corps, and the Young Marines of the Marine Corps League.
The report shall include such recommendations as the Secretary considers appropriate for expansion of these programs through an increase in the number of units or participants in these programs, increased funding for these programs, or such other means as the Secretary determines.