DEAUTHORIZATION OF THE BLUNT RESERVOIR FEATURE OF THE OAHE IRRIGATION PROJECT, SOUTH DAKOTA; CONVEYANCE.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Blunt reservoir feature.--The term ``Blunt Reservoir feature'' means the Blunt Reservoir feature of the Oahe Irrigation Project authorized by section 9 of the Act of December 22, 1944 (58 United States Statutes at Large 891, chapter 665), as part of the Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin Program.
Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Commission of Schools and Public Lands of the State of South Dakota.
Preferential leaseholder.--The term ``preferential leaseholder'' means a leaseholder of a parcel of land who is-- (A) the person from whom the Secretary purchased the parcel for use in connection with the Blunt Reservoir feature; (B) the original operator of the parcel at the time of acquisition; or (C) a descendant of a person described in subparagraph (A) or (B).
Preferential lease parcel.--The term ``preferential lease parcel'' means a parcel of land that-- (A) was purchased by the Secretary for use in connection with the Blunt Reservoir feature; and (B) is under lease to a preferential leaseholder as of the date of enactment of this Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Commissioner of Reclamation.
Deauthorization.--The Blunt Reservoir feature is deauthorized.
Conveyance.--The Secretary shall convey all of the preferential lease parcels to the Commission, without consideration, on the condition that the Commission honor the purchase option provided to preferential leaseholders under subsection (d).
Purchase Option.-- (1) In general.--A preferential leaseholder shall have an option to purchase from the Commission the preferential lease parcel that is the subject of the lease.
Terms.--A preferential leaseholder may elect to purchase a parcel on 1 of the following terms: (A) Cash purchase for the amount that is equal to-- (i) the value of the parcel determined under paragraph (4); minus (ii) 10 percent of that value.
Installment purchase, with 20 percent of the value of the parcel determined under paragraph (4) to be paid on the date of purchase and the remainder to be paid over 30 years at 3 percent annual interest.
Option exercise period.-- (A) In general.--A preferential leaseholder shall have until the date that is 10 years after the date of the conveyance under subsection (c) to exercise the option under paragraph (1).
Continuation of leases.--Until the date specified in subparagraph (A), a preferential leaseholder shall be entitled to continue to lease from the Commission, under the same terms and conditions as under the lease as in effect as of the date of conveyance, the parcel leased by the preferential leaseholder.
Valuation.-- (A) In general.--The value of a preferential lease parcel shall be determined to be, at the election of the preferential leaseholder-- (i) the amount that is equal to 110 percent of the amount that is equal to-- (I) the number of acres of the preferential lease parcel; multiplied by (II) the amount of the per-acre assessment of adjacent parcels made by the Director of Equalization of the county in which the preferential lease parcel is situated; or (ii) the amount of a valuation of the preferential lease parcel for agricultural use made by an independent appraiser.
Cost of appraisal.--If a preferential leaseholder elects to use the method of valuation described in subparagraph (A)(ii), the cost of the valuation shall be paid by the preferential leaseholder.
Conveyance of Nonpreferentially Leased Parcels.--The Secretary shall convey to the South Dakota Department of Game, Fish, and Parks the Blunt Reservoir parcels that are leased on a nonpreferential basis.
These lands shall be used by the South Dakota Department of Game, Fish, and Parks for the purpose of mitigating the wildlife habitat that was lost as a result of the development of the Pick-Sloan project.