Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Pacific Insular Areas Fisheries Empowerment Act of 1995''.
Reference.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1801 et sequentes).
FINDINGS, PURPOSES AND POLICY.
Findings.--Section 2(a) (16 United States Code 1801(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(9) The Pacific Insular Areas of the United States contain a unique historical, cultural, legal, political, and geographic circumstance, including the importance of fisheries resources to their economic growth.''.
Policy.--Section 2(c) (16 United States Code 1801) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (5); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (6) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) to assure that the fishery resources adjacent to Pacific Insular Areas, including those within the exclusive economic zone of such areas and any Continental Shelf fishery resources of such areas, be explored, exploited, conserved, and managed for the benefit of the people of each such areas.''.
Section 3 (16 United States Code 1802) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(34) The term `Pacific Insular Area' means American Samoa, Guam, or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.''.
FOREIGN FISHING AND INTERNATIONAL FISHERY AGREEMENTS.
Authority for Foreign Fishing Under a Pacific Insular Area Agreement.--Section 201(a)(1) (16 United States Code 1821(a)(1)) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) is authorized under subsection (b) or (c) or under a permit issued under section 204(d);''.
Authority To Enter Into a Pacific Insular Areas Agreement.-- Section 202(c)(2) (16 United States Code 1822(c)(2)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or section 204(e)''.
Pacific Insular Area Agreements.--Section 204 (26 United States Code 1824) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Pacific Insular Areas.--(1) Upon the request of the Governor of a Pacific Insular Area, the Secretary of State in concurrence with the Secretary (the appropriate Council, and the Governor of such Pacific Insular Area) may negotiate and agree to a Pacific Insular Area Fishery Agreement (in this subsection referred to as a ``PIAFA'') to authorize foreign fishing within the exclusive economic zone adjacent to such Insular Area or for Continental Shelf fishery resources beyond such zone.
It is the sense of the Congress that the Secretary of State should not negotiate a PIAFA to authorize foreign fishing within the exclusive economic zone adjacent to an Insular Area, or Continental Shelf fishery resources beyond such zone, without the concurrence of and consultation with the Governor of such Insular Area.
(A) Fees pursuant to a PIAFA shall be paid to the Treasury of the Pacific Insular area concerned by the owner or operator of any foreign fishing vessel for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this section.
The Governor, with the concurrence of the Secretary and the Secretary of State, shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees that shall apply nondiscriminatorily to each foreign nation.
The prescription of such fees is not subject to section 9701 of title 31, United States Code.
Amounts received by the United States as fees under this paragraph shall be deposited in the general fund of the treasury of the Insular Area, and shall be used for fishery conservation and management purposes.
Foreign fishing under a PIAFA shall not be subject to subsections (d) through (g) of section 201 or subsection (i) of section 201.
A PIAFA shall become effective according to the procedures of section 203.
The Secretary of State may not negotiate a PIAFA with a country that is in violation of a governing international fishery agreement in effect under this Act.
This subsection shall not be considered to supersede and governing international fishery agreement in effect under this Act.''.
Section 304 (16 United States Code 1854) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Pacific Insular Area Fees.-- ``(1) The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with the Governor of a Pacific Insular Area, under which the Pacific Insular Area may administer a permit system and collect fees authorized under a fishery management plan for fisheries in the exclusive economic zone off the Pacific Insular Area pursuant to section 303(b)(1).
A cooperative agreement under this paragraph may provide that all or part of the fees collected under the Pacific Insular Area permit system shall be deposited into the treasury of the affected Pacific Insular Area and used for fishery conservation and management purposes.
The Secretary, in concurrence with the Governor of the Pacific Insular Area, may establish by regulation the level of any fees which are authorized to be charged.
The amount of any fees collected under this subsection shall be reasonable, fair, and equitable to all participants in the fisheries.
The prescription of such fees is not subject to section 9701(b) of title 31, United States Code.''.
Section 311 (16 United States Code 1861) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Enforcement in the Insular Areas.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Governors of the Pacific Insular Areas shall, to the greatest extent practicable, support cooperative enforcement agreements between Federal and Pacific Insular Area authorities.''.
Section 307(2)(B) (16 United States Code 1857(2)(B)) is amended by striking ``204(b) or (c)'' and inserting ``204(b), (c), or (e)''.
Section 311(g)(1) (16 United States Code 1861(g)(1)) is amended by inserting after the citation ``201(b) or (c)'' the words ``or section 204(d)''.