This Act may be cited as the ``Child Support Reform Amendments Act of 1994''.
GARNISHMENT OF PAY OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.
Subsection (i) of section 5520a of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking out ``The provisions'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the provisions''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(2)(A) Each agency, upon receipt of legal process relating to an employee's legal obligation to provide child support that is regular on its face shall-- ``(i) within five working days after the date pay would have been paid or credited to the employee by the agency, comply with the order, notwithstanding subsection (f); ``(ii) forward the amount withheld pursuant to the order to the State or custodial parent specified in the order; and ``(iii) keep records of the amounts so withheld.
In addition to service provided for under subsection (c), such an order may be served on the agency by first-class mail.
Each agency shall be subject to, and comply with, any civil fine of not more than $1,000 imposed by a State if the agency receives such an order and fails to comply with the order within 10 working days after the date wages would have been paid or credited to the employee by the agency.''.
ELIMINATION OF SECOND COURT ORDER TO ATTACH RETIREMENT FUNDS FOR CHILD SUPPORT.
CSRS.--Subsection (j) of section 8345 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), an individual owed a child support arrearage (determined under a court order or an order of an administrative process established under State law) may attach any interest in payments under this subchapter which would otherwise be payable to an employee, Member, or annuitant who owes the support, without the requirement of a separate order, but only if the State provides procedures for notice and an expedited hearing if requested by such employee, Member, or annuitant.
Payments attached under this paragraph shall be held in escrow pending a determination pursuant to such a hearing (if any).''.
TSP.--Paragraph (3) of section 8437(e) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``An individual owed a child support arrearage (determined under a court order or an order of an administrative process established under State law) may attach any interest in moneys due or payable from the Thrift Savings Fund which would otherwise be payable to an employee, Member, or annuitant who owes the support, without the requirement of a separate order, but only if the State provides procedures for notice and an expedited hearing if requested by such employee, Member, or annuitant.
Amounts due or payable which are attached under this paragraph shall be held in escrow pending a determination pursuant to such a hearing (if any).''.
FERS.--Section 8467 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), an individual owed a child support arrearage (determined under a court order or an order of an administrative process established under State law) may attach any interest in payments under this subchapter which would otherwise be payable to an employee, Member, or annuitant who owes the support, without the requirement of a separate order, but only if the State provides procedures for notice and an expedited hearing if requested by such employee, Member, or annuitant.
Payments attached under this paragraph shall be held in escrow pending a determination pursuant to such a hearing (if any).''.
DENIAL OF FEDERAL BENEFITS AND EMPLOYMENT TO CERTAIN PERSONS WITH LARGE CHILD SUPPORT ARREARAGES.
Benefits.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an agency of the Federal Government may not provide a Federal benefit to any person-- (1) who is in arrears by more than 3 months in the payment of child support, determined under a court order or an order of an administrative process established under State law; and (2) who has not entered into or is not in compliance with a plan or an agreement to pay the arrearages.
Employment.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an individual who is in arrears by more than 3 months in the payment of child support, determined under a court order or an order of an administrative process established under State law, must, as a condition of accepting employment in any position in an agency, enter into or be in compliance with a plan or agreement to pay the arrearages.
Regulations.--Regulations to carry out paragraph (1) shall-- (A) with respect to positions in the executive branch, be prescribed by the President (or designee); and (B) with respect to positions in the legislative branch, be prescribed jointly by the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives (or their designees) and in consultation with the heads of the agencies of the legislative branch.
Study.--With respect to the judicial branch, the Director of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall assess the feasibility of denying Federal benefits and employment to persons with child support arrears exceeding three months.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``child support'' has the meaning given such term in section 462 of the Social Security Act; (2) the term ``Federal benefit'' means a grant, loan, professional license, or commercial license provided by an agency of the United States, but does not include-- (A) any benefit eligibility for which, or the amount of which, is based, in whole or in part, on the financial means of the applicant or recipient; (B) loans or grants made for educational purposes; or (C) loans or grants for job training; and (3) the term ``agency'' means any department, agency, or instrumentality in the executive or legislative branches of the Federal Government.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect as of November 1, 1995.
DENIAL OF PASSPORTS TO NONCUSTODIAL PARENTS SUBJECT TO STATE ARREST WARRANTS IN CASES OF NONPAYMENT OF CHILD SUPPORT.
The Secretary of State is authorized to refuse a passport or revoke, restrict, or limit a passport in any case in which the Secretary of State determines or is informed by competent authority that the applicant or passport holder is a noncustodial parent who is the subject of an outstanding State warrant of arrest for nonpayment of child support, where the amount in controversy is not less than $10,000.
Passed the House of Representatives October 4, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.