Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Theodore Roosevelt Commemorative Coin Act''.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Theodore Roosevelt, the 26th President of the United States, inspired and led the people of the United States toward the goal of natural resource conservation.
The protection and conservation of the Nation's natural heritage requires the acquisition by the United States of habitat and rights to the use of habitat.
Allowing those persons who benefit from and support conservation efforts to participate in the funding of those efforts is desirable and achievable through the sale of collectors' commemorative coins.
Denominations.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary) shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) $5 gold coins.--5 dollar coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 8.359 grams; (B) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
$1 silver coins.--1 dollar coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Half dollar clad coins.--Half dollar coins which shall-- (A) weigh 11.34 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) be minted to the specifications for half dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
Amounts of coins.-- (1) Gold coins.--The Secretary shall issue coins under subsection (a)(1) with the dates and in the amounts as follows: Year Amount 1997........................... Not more than 500,000.
1998........................... Not more than 500,000.
Silver coins.--The Secretary shall issue coins under subsection (a)(2) with the dates and in the amounts as follows: Year Amount 1997........................... Not more than 1,000,000.
1998........................... Not more than 1,000,000.
Clad coins.--The Secretary shall issue coins under subsection (a)(3) with the dates and in the amounts as follows: Year Amount 1997........................... Not more than 1,000,000.
1998........................... Not more than 1,250,000.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain gold for minting coins under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under other provisions of law.
Silver.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) Obverse.--The obverse side of the coins minted under this Act shall bear the likeness of Theodore Roosevelt.
Reverse.--The reverse side of the coin shall be emblematic of the Nation's natural resources.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the date of the coin as specified in section 2(b); and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning January 1, 1997.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this Act after December 31, 1998.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of-- (1) $35 per coin for the $5 coin; (2) $7 per coin for the $1 coin; and (3) $2 per coin for the half dollar coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
Administration of Endangered Species Act of 1973.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall, to the extent and in amounts provided in advance in appropriation Acts, be promptly made available by the Secretary to the Secretary of the Interior for use by such Secretary in connection with the administration of the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Excess Amounts.--If, after the sale of all coins minted under this Act, the amount of surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act exceeds the amount of such surcharges which have been appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior in accordance with subsection (a), such excess amount shall be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.