This Act may be cited as the ``Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area Protection and Enhancement Act of 2002''.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Corporation.--The term ``Corporation'' means The Howard Hughes Corporation, an affiliate of the Rouse Company, with its principal place of business at 10000 West Charleston Boulevard, Las Vegas, Nevada.
Red rock.--The term ``Red Rock'' means the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area, consisting of approximately 195,780 acres of public lands in Clark County, Nevada, specially designated for protection in the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area Establishment Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 460ccc et sequentes), as depicted on the Red Rock Map.
Red rock map.--The term ``Red Rock Map'' means the map entitled ``H.R.
4141-Boundary Modifications'', dated July 1, 2002.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Red Rock is a natural resource of major significance to the people of Nevada and the United States.
It must be protected in its natural state for the enjoyment of future generations of Nevadans and Americans, and enhanced wherever possible.
In 1998, the Congress enacted the Southern Nevada Public Lands Management Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-263), which provided among other things for the protection and enhancement of Red Rock.
The Corporation owns much of the private land on Red Rock's eastern boundary, and is engaged in developing a large- scale master-planned community.
Included in the Corporation's land holdings are 1,071 acres of high-ground lands at the eastern edge of Red Rock.
These lands were intended to be included in Red Rock, but to date have not been acquired by the United States.
The protection of this high-ground acreage would preserve an important element of the western Las Vegas Valley view-shed.
The Corporation has volunteered to forgo development of the high-ground lands, and proposes that the United States acquire title to the lands so that they can be preserved in perpetuity to protect and expand Red Rock.
Purposes.--This Act has the following purposes: (1) To accomplish an exchange of lands between the United States and the Corporation that would transfer certain high- ground lands to the United States in exchange for the transfer of other lands of approximately equal value to the Corporation.
To protect Red Rock and to expand its boundaries as contemplated by the Bureau of Land Management, as depicted on the Red Rock Map.
To further fulfill the purposes of the Southern Nevada Public Lands Management Act of 1998 and the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area Establishment Act of 1990.
RED ROCK LAND EXCHANGE.
Acquisition Requirement.--If the Corporation offers to convey to the United States all right, title, and interest in and to the approximately 1,082 acres of nonfederal land owned by the Corporation and depicted on the Red Rock Map as ``OFFERED LANDS TO BE INCORPORATED INTO NCA'', the Secretary shall accept such offer on behalf of the United States, and not later than 90 days after the date of the offer, except as otherwise provided in this Act, shall make the following conveyances: (1) To the Corporation, the approximately 998 acres of Federal lands depicted on the Red Rock Map as ``BLM LANDS SELECTED FOR EXCHANGE''.
To Clark County, Nevada, the approximately 1,221 acres of Federal lands depicted on the Red Rock Map as ``BLM LANDS FOR CLARK COUNTY PARK''.
Simultaneous Conveyances.--Title to the private property and the Federal property to be conveyed pursuant to this section shall be conveyed at the same time.
Map.--The Secretary shall keep the Red Rock Map on file and available for public inspection in the Las Vegas District Office of the Bureau of Land Management in Nevada, and the State Office of the Bureau of Land Management, Reno, Nevada.
Conditions-- (1) Hazardous materials.--As a condition of the conveyance under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall require that the Corporation be responsible for removal of and remediation related to any hazardous materials that are present on the property conveyed to the United States under subsection (a).
Survey.--As a condition of the conveyance under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall require that not later than 90 days after the date of the offer referred to in subsection (a), the Corporation shall provide a metes and bounds survey, that is acceptable to the Corporation, Clark County, and the Secretary, of the common boundary between the parcels of land to be conveyed under subsection (a).
Lands conveyed to clark county.--As a condition of the conveyance under subsection (a)(2), the Secretary shall require that-- (A) the lands transferred to Clark County by the United States must be held in perpetuity by the County for use only as a public park or as part of a public regional trail system; and (B) if the County attempts to transfer the lands or to undertake a use on the lands that is inconsistent with their preservation and use as described in subparagraph (A), such lands shall revert to the United States.
STATUS AND MANAGEMENT OF LANDS.
Inclusion of Basin Lands.--Upon the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall administer the lands depicted on the Red Rock Map as ``Flood Control Detention Basin Lands'', exclusive of those lands used for the Corps of Engineers R-4 Detention Basin, as part of Red Rock and in accordance with the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area Establishment Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 460ccc et sequentes), the Southern Nevada Public Lands Management Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-263), and all other applicable laws.
Inclusion of Acquired Lands; Maps Reflecting Boundary Adjustments.--Upon acquisition by the United States of lands under this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) administer the lands as part of Red Rock and in accordance with the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area Establishment Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 460ccc et sequentes), the Southern Nevada Public Lands Management Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-263), and all other applicable laws; and (2) create new maps showing the boundaries of Red Rock as modified by or pursuant to this Act, and make such maps available for review at the Las Vegas District Office of the Bureau of Land Management and the State Office of the Bureau of Land Management, Reno, Nevada.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 3(a)(2) of the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area Establishment Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 460ccc- 1(a)(2)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, and such additional areas as are included in the conservation area pursuant to the Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area Protection and Enhancement Act of 2002''.
Review of Appraisal.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete a review of the appraisal entitled ``Complete Self-Contained Appraisal Red Rock Exchange, Las Vegas, Nevada'', completed on or about June 3, 2002.
The difference in appraisal values shall be reimbursed to the Secretary by the Corporation in accordance with the Southern Nevada Public Lands Management Act of 1998.
Valid Existing Rights.--The land exchange under this Act shall be subject to valid existing rights.
Each party to which property is conveyed under this Act shall succeed to the rights and obligations of the conveying party with respect to any lease, right-of-way, permit, or other valid existing right to which the property is subject.
Technical Corrections.--Nothing in this Act prohibits the parties to the conveyances under this Act from agreeing to the correction of technical errors or omissions in the Red Rock Map.
Withdrawal of Affected Lands.--To the extent not already accomplished under law or administrative action, the Secretary shall withdraw from operation of the public land and mining laws, subject to valid existing rights-- (1) those Federal lands acquired by the United States under this Act; and (2) those Federal lands already owned by the United States on the date of the enactment of this Act but included within the Red Rock National Conservation Area boundaries by this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives October 1, 2002.