This Act may be cited as the ``Torture Survivors Support Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The American people abhor torture by any government or person.
The existence of torture creates a climate of fear and international insecurity that affects all people.
Torture is the deliberate mental and physical damage caused by governments to individuals to destroy individual personality and terrorize society.
The effects of torture are long term.
Those effects can last a lifetime for the survivors and affect future generations.
By eliminating leadership of their opposition and frightening the general public, repressive governments often use torture as a weapon against democracy.
Torture survivors remain under physical and psychological threats, especially in communities where the perpetrators are not brought to justice.
In many nations, even those who treat torture survivors are threatened with reprisals, including torture, for carrying out their ethical duties to provide care.
Both the survivors of torture and their treatment providers should be accorded protection from further repression.
A significant number of refugees and asylees entering the United States have been victims of torture.
Those claiming asylum deserve prompt consideration of their applications for political asylum to minimize their insecurity and sense of danger.
Many torture survivors now live in the United States.
They should be provided with the rehabilitation services which would enable them to become productive members of our communities.
The development of a treatment movement for torture survivors has created new opportunities for action by the United States and other nations to oppose state-sponsored and other acts of torture.
There is a need for a comprehensive strategy to protect and support torture victims and their treatment providers, together with overall efforts to eliminate torture.
By acting to heal the survivors of torture and protect their families, the United States can help to heal the effects of torture and prevent its use around the world.
As used in this Act: (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided, the terms used in this Act have the meanings given those terms in section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)).
Torture.--The term ``torture'' has the meaning given the term in section 2340(l) of title 18, United States Code, and includes the use of rape and other forms of sexual violence by a person acting under the color of law upon another person under his custody or physical control.
UNITED STATES POLICY WITH RESPECT TO THE INVOLUNTARY RETURN OF PERSONS IN DANGER OF SUBJECTION TO TORTURE.
Policy.--It shall be the policy of the United States not to expel, extradite, or otherwise effect the involuntary return of any person to a country in which there are substantial grounds for believing the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture, regardless of whether the person is physically present in the United States.
Regulations.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the heads of the appropriate agencies shall prescribe regulations to implement the obligations of the United States under Article 3 of the United Nations or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, subject to any reservations, understandings, declarations, and provisos contained in the United States Senate resolution of ratification of the Convention.
Exclusion of Certain Aliens.--To the maximum extent consistent with the obligations of the United States under the Convention, subject to any reservations, understandings, declarations, and provisos contained in the United States Senate resolution of ratification of the Convention, the regulations described in subsection (b) shall exclude from the protection of such regulations aliens described in section 241(b)(3)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1231(b)(3)(B)).
Review and Construction.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and except as provided in the regulations described in subsection (b), no court shall have jurisdiction to review the regulations adopted to implement this section, and nothing in this section shall be construed as providing any court jurisdiction to consider or review claims raised under the Convention or this section, or any other determination made with respect to the application of the policy set forth in subsection (a), except as part of the review of a final order of removal pursuant to section 242 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1252).
Authority To Detain.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the authority of the Attorney General to detain any person under any provision of law, including, but not limited to, any provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Definitions.-- (1) Convention defined.--In this section, the term ``Convention'' means the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Forms of Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment, done at New York on December 10, 1984.
Same terms as in the convention.--Except as otherwise provided, the terms used in this section have the meanings given those terms in the Convention, subject to any reservations, understandings, declarations, and provisos contained in the United States Senate resolution of ratification of the Convention.
IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES FOR TORTURE VICTIMS.
Covered Aliens.--An alien described in this section is any alien who presents a claim of having been subjected to torture, or whom there is reason to believe has been subjected to torture.
Consideration of the Effects of Torture.--In considering an application by an alien described in subsection (a) for refugee status under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, asylum under section 208 of that Act, or withholding of removal under section 241(b)(3) of that Act, the appropriate officials shall take into account-- (1) the manner in which the effects of torture might affect the applicant's responses in the application and in the interview process or other immigration proceedings, as the case may be; (2) the difficulties torture victims often have in recounting their suffering under torture; and (3) the fear victims have of returning to their country of nationality where, even if torture is no longer practiced or the incidence of torture is reduced, their torturers may have gone unpunished and may remain in positions of authority.
Expedited Processing of Refugee Admissions.--For purposes of section 207(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1157(c)), refugees who have been subjected to torture shall be considered to be refugees of special humanitarian concern to the United States and shall be accorded priority for resettlement at least as high as that accorded any other group of refugees.
Processing for Asylum and Withholding of Removal.--Section 235(b)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1225(b)(1)(A)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iv) Special procedures for aliens who are the victims of torture.-- ``(I) Expedited procedures.--With the consent of the alien, an asylum officer or immigration judge shall expedite the scheduling of an asylum interview or a removal proceeding for any alien who presents a claim of having been subjected to torture, unless the evidence indicates that a delay in making a determination regarding the granting of asylum under section 208 of the Immigration and Nationality Act or the withholding of removal under section 241(b)(3) of that Act with respect to the alien would not aggravate the physical or psychological effects of torture upon the alien.
Delay of proceedings.--With the consent of the alien, an asylum officer or immigration judge shall postpone an asylum interview or a removal proceeding for any alien who presents a claim of having been subjected to torture, if the evidence indicates that, as a result of the alien's mental or physical symptoms resulting from torture, including the alien's inability to recall or relate the events of the torture, the alien will require more time to recover or be treated before being required to testify.''.
Parole in Lieu of Detention.--The finding that an alien is a person described in subsection (a) shall be a strong presumptive basis for a grant of parole, under section 212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1182(d)(5)), in lieu of detention.
Exemption From Expedited Removal.--Section 235(b)(1)(F) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1225(b)(1)(F)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, or to an alien described in section 5(a) of the Survivors of Torture Support Act''.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the Attorney General should allocate resources sufficient to maintain in the Resource Information Center of the Immigration and Naturalization Service current information relating to the use of torture in foreign countries.
SPECIALIZED TRAINING FOR CONSULAR, IMMIGRATION, AND ASYLUM PERSONNEL.
In General.--The Attorney General shall provide training for immigration inspectors and examiners, immigration officers, asylum officers, immigration judges, and all other relevant officials of the Department of Justice, and the Secretary of State shall provide training for consular officers, with respect to-- (1) the identification of torture; (2) the identification of the surrounding circumstances in which torture is most often practiced; (3) the long-term effects of torture upon a victim; (4) the identification of the physical, cognitive, and emotional effects of torture, and the manner in which these effects can affect the interview or hearing process; and (5) the manner of interviewing victims of torture so as not to retraumatize them, eliciting the necessary information to document the torture experience, and understanding the difficulties victims often have in recounting their torture experience.
Gender-Related Considerations.--In conducting training under subsection (a) (4) or (5), gender-specific training shall be provided on the subject of interacting with women and men who are victims of torture by rape or any other form of sexual violence.