SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES TO TITLE 38, UNITED STATES CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Adjudication Procedures Act of 1993''.
References to Title 38, United States Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 38, United States Code.
WORK RATE STANDARDS FOR ADJUDICATIVE EMPLOYEES.
In General.--(1) Chapter 7 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Work rate standards for adjudicative employees ``(a) The Secretary shall provide that under the work rate standards that apply to employees of the Department who adjudicate claims for benefits that have been submitted to the Secretary, those employees do not receive credit for work on a claim until the decision on the claim becomes final.
Such a decision shall not be considered to have become final until the claimant has exhausted, or failed to timely exercise, the right to appellate review by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``713.
Work rate standards for adjudicative employees.''.
Effective Date.--Section 713 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall apply with respect to claims for benefits that are submitted to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs after the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
ANNUAL REPORT ON STATUS OF CLAIMS FOR BENEFITS.
In General.--(1) Chapter 5 is amended by inserting after section 529 the following new section: ``Sec.
Annual report on status of claims for benefits ``(a) The Secretary shall submit to Congress an annual report on the status of claims for benefits before the Department during the preceding fiscal year.
The report for any fiscal year shall be submitted in conjunction with the report under section 7101(d) of this title for that year.
(1) Each report under subsection (a) shall separately set forth, with regard to claims for benefits in which a decision of the agency of original jurisdiction or the Board of Veterans' Appeals became final during the preceding fiscal year, the average number of days that passed from the date on which the claim was initially received by the Department until the following dates, as applicable: ``(A) The date on which the notice of decision was provided to the claimant, for those cases in which the claimant did not file a timely notice of disagreement (along with the number of such cases).
The date on which the statement of the case was provided to the claimant, for those cases in which the claimant filed a timely notice of disagreement, and the agency of original jurisdiction did not conduct a hearing, and the claimant did not file a timely substantive appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (along with the number of such cases).
The date on which the statement of the case was provided to the claimant or the date on which the notice of the decision rendered after the conduct of a hearing of the agency of original jurisdiction, whichever is later, for those cases in which the claimant filed a timely notice of disagreement, and agency of original jurisdiction conducted a hearing, and the claimant did not file a timely substantive appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (along with the number of such cases).
The date on which the notice of the Board of Veterans' Appeals decision was provided to the claimant, for those cases in which the Board of Veterans' Appeals did not remand to the agency of original jurisdiction before issuing its decision and neither the agency of original jurisdiction nor the Board of Veterans' Appeals conducted a formal hearing (along with the number of such cases).
The date on which the notice of the Board of Veterans' Appeals decision was provided to the claimant, for those cases in which the agency of original jurisdiction conducted a hearing, and the Board of Veterans' Appeals issued a decision on the appeal of the claim without conducting a formal hearing and without remanding the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction before issuing its decision (along with the number of such cases).
The date on which the notice of the Board of Veterans' Appeals decision was provided to the claimant, for those cases in which the agency of original jurisdiction conducted a hearing and the Board of Veterans' Appeals issued a decision on the appeal of the claim after conducting a formal hearing and without remanding the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction before issuing its decision (along with the number of such cases).
The date on which the notice of the Board of Veterans' Appeals decision was provided to the claimant, for those cases in which the agency of original jurisdiction did not conduct a hearing, and the Board of Veterans' Appeals issued a decision on the appeal of the claim after conducting a formal hearing and without remanding the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction before issuing its decision (along with the number of such cases).
The date on which the notice of the Board of Veterans' Appeals final decision was provided to the claimant, for those cases in which the Board of Veterans' Appeals did not conduct a formal hearing and remanded the case on one or more occasions to the agency of original jurisdiction before issuing its final decision (along with the number of such cases).
The date on which the notice of the Board of Veterans' Appeals final decision was provided to the claimant, for those cases in which the Board of Veterans' Appeals conducted a formal hearing and remanded the case on one or more occasions to the agency of original jurisdiction before issuing its final decision (along with the number of such cases).
Each report under subsection (a) shall also set forth the number of claims for benefits pending a final decision as of the end of the fiscal year preceding the submission of the report.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 529 the following new item: ``530.
Annual report on status of claims for benefits.''.
Effective Date.--(1) Section 530 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall apply only with respect to claims for benefits that are received by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs more than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit the first annual report under subsection (a) of such section 530, as so added, for the third fiscal year ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
OFFICIALS DETERMINING ORIGINAL AND REOPENED CLAIMS FOR BENEFITS.
In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 51 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Officials acting on behalf of the Secretary ``(a) The functions of the Secretary under this chapter in making determinations on a claim for benefits filed under this chapter shall be carried out in each case by a single official (known as a `rating official').
A single rating official (rather than a board of officials) shall make the initial determination of the Secretary on all original and reopened claims filed with the Secretary.
Whenever a hearing is requested following a decision of a rating official denying (in whole or in part) a claim for benefits, the official who conducts the hearing shall make a determination in the case without referring the case back to the rating official who initially decided the case (or another rating official) and shall issue a decision on the case in the manner prescribed in section 5104 of this title.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5109 the following new item: ``5109A.
Officials acting on behalf of the Secretary.''.
BOARD OF VETERANS' APPEALS PROCEDURES.
Termination of Action by BVA Through Sections.--(1) Sections 7102 and 7103 are amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Decisions by the Board ``A proceeding instituted before the Board shall be assigned to an individual member of the Board (other than the Chairman).
A member who is assigned a proceeding shall make a determination thereon, including any motion filed in connection therewith.
The member shall make a report under section 7104(d) of this title on any such determination, which report shall constitute the member's final disposition of the proceeding.
Reconsideration; correction of obvious errors ``(a) The decision of the member of the Board determining a matter under section 7102 of this title is final unless the Chairman orders reconsideration of the case.
Such an order may be made on the Chairman's initiative or upon motion of the claimant.
If the Chairman orders reconsideration in a case, the case shall upon reconsideration be heard by a section of the Board.
Any such section shall consist of not less than three members of the Board (and may include the Chairman).
The member of the Board who made the decision under reconsideration may not serve as a member of the section.
When a case is heard by a section of the Board after such an order for reconsideration, the decision of a majority of the members of the section shall constitute the final decision of the Board.
The Board on its own motion may correct an obvious error in the record, without regard to whether there has been a motion or order for reconsideration.''.
The items relating to sections 7102 and 7103 in the table of sections at the beginning of chapter 71 are amended to read as follows: ``7102.
Decisions by the Board.
Reconsideration; correction of obvious errors.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 7110 is amended by striking out ``section'' both places it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``member''.
(A) The heading of section 7110 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
The item relating to section 7110 in the table of sections at the beginning of chapter 71 is amended to read as follows: ``7110.
REVISION OF DECISIONS BASED ON CLEAR AND UNMISTAKABLE ERROR.
Original Decisions.--(1) Chapter 51 is amended by inserting after section 5109A, as added by section 4, the following new section: ``Sec.
Revision of decisions on grounds of clear and unmistakable error ``(a) A decision by the Secretary under this chapter is subject to revision on the grounds of clear and unmistakable error.
If evidence establishes the error, the prior decision shall be reversed or revised.
For the purposes of authorizing benefits, a rating or other adjudicative decision that constitutes a reversal or revision of a prior decision on the grounds of clear and unmistakable error has the same effect as if the rating or decision had been made on the date of the prior decision.
Review to determine whether clear and unmistakable error exists in a case may be instituted by the Secretary on the Secretary's own motion or upon request of the claimant.
A request for revision of a decision of the Secretary based on clear and unmistakable error may be made at any time after that decision is made.
Such a request shall be submitted to the Secretary and shall be decided in the same manner as any other claim.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5109A, as added by section 4, the following new item: ``5109B.
Revision of decisions on grounds of clear and unmistakable error.''.
BVA Decisions.--(1) Chapter 71 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Revision of decisions on grounds of clear and unmistakable error ``(a) A decision by the Board is subject to revision on the grounds of clear and unmistakable error.
If evidence establishes the error, the prior decision shall be reversed or revised.
For the purposes of authorizing benefits, a rating or other adjudicative decision of the Board that constitutes a reversal or revision of a prior decision of the Board on the grounds of clear and unmistakable error has the same effect as if the rating or decision had been made on the date of the prior decision.
Review to determine whether clear and unmistakable error exists in a case may be instituted by the Board on the Board's own motion or upon request of the claimant.
A request for revision of a decision of the Board based on clear and unmistakable error may be made at any time after that decision is made.
Such a request shall be submitted directly to the Board and shall be decided by the Board on the merits, without referral to any adjudicative or hearing official acting on behalf of the Secretary.
A claim filed with the Secretary that requests reversal or revision of a previous Board decision due to clear and unmistakable error shall be considered to be a request to the Board under this section, and the Secretary shall promptly transmit any such request to the Board for its consideration under this section.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``7111.
Revision of decisions on grounds of clear and unmistakable error.''.
Effective Date.--(1) Section 5109B and 7110 of title 38, United States Code, apply to any determination made before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Notwithstanding section 402 of the Veterans Judicial Review Act (38 United States Code 7251 note), chapter 72 of title 38, United States Code, shall apply with respect to any decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals on a claim alleging that a previous determination of the Board was the product of clear and unmistakable error if that claim is filed after, or was pending before the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Court of Veterans Appeals, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, or the Supreme Court on the date of the enactment of this Act.