The National Academies of Practice organized and incorporated under the laws of the District of Columbia, is hereby recognized as such and is granted a Federal charter.
The National Academies of Practice (hereafter referred to in this Act as the ``corporation'') shall have only those powers granted to it through its bylaws and articles of incorporation filed in the State in which it is incorporated and subject to the laws of such State.
The purposes of the corporation shall be to honor persons who have made significant contributions to the practice of applied psychology, dentistry, medicine, nursing, optometry, osteopathy, podiatry, social work, veterinary medicine, and other health care professions, and to improve the practices in such professions by disseminating information about new techniques and procedures.
With respect to service of process, the corporation shall comply with the laws of the State in which it is incorporated and those States in which it carries on its activities in furtherance of its corporate purposes.
Eligibility for membership in the corporation and the rights and privileges of members shall be as provided in the bylaws of the corporation.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS; COMPOSITION; RESPONSIBILITIES.
The composition and the responsibilities of the board of directors of the corporation shall be as provided in the articles of incorporation of the corporation and in conformity with the laws of the State in which it is incorporated.
OFFICERS OF THE CORPORATION.
The officers of the corporation and the election of such officers shall be as provided in the articles of incorporation of the corporation and in conformity with the laws of the State in which it is incorporated.
Use of Income and Assets.--No part of the income or assets of the corporation shall inure to any member, officer, or director of the corporation or be distributed to any such person during the life of this charter.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to the officers of the corporation or reimbursement for actual necessary expenses in amounts approved by the board of directors.
Loans.--The corporation shall not make any loan to any officer, director, or employee of the corporation.
Political Activity.--The corporation, any officer, or any director of the corporation, acting as such officer or director, shall not contribute to, support, or otherwise participate in any political activity or in any manner attempt to influence legislation.
Issuance of Stock and Payment of Dividends.--The corporation shall have no power to issue any shares of stock nor to declare or pay any dividends.
Claims of Federal Approval.--The corporation shall not claim congressional approval or Federal Government authority for any of its activities.
The corporation shall be liable for the acts of its officers and agents when acting within the scope of their authority.
MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
Books and Records of Account.--The corporation shall keep correct and complete books and records of account and shall keep minutes of any proceeding of the corporation involving any of its members, the board of directors, or any committee having authority under the board of directors.
Names and Addresses of Members.--The corporation shall keep at its principal office a record of the names and addresses of all members having the right to vote in any proceeding of the corporation.
Right To Inspect Books and Records.--All books and records of the corporation may be inspected by any member having the right to vote, or by any agent or attorney of such member, for any proper purpose, at any reasonable time.
Application of State Law.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to contravene any applicable State law.
AUDIT OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS.
The first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for audit of accounts of private corporations established under Federal law'', approved August 30, 1964 (36 United States Code 1101), is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (72) as paragraph (71); (2) by designating the paragraph relating to the Non Commissioned Officers Association of the United States of America, Incorporated, as paragraph (72); (3) by redesignating paragraph (60), relating to the National Mining Hall of Fame and Museum, as paragraph (73); and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``(75) National Academies of Practice.''.
The corporation shall report annually to the Congress concerning the activities of the corporation during the preceding fiscal year.
Such annual report shall be submitted at the same time as is the report of the audit for such fiscal year required by section 3 of the Act referred to in section 11 of this Act.
The report shall not be printed as a public document.
RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO AMEND OR REPEAL CHARTER.
The right to alter, amend, or repeal this Act is expressly reserved to the Congress.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the territories and possessions of the United States.
The corporation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation as provided in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or any corresponding similar provision.
If the corporation fails to comply with any of the restrictions or provisions of this Act the charter granted by this Act shall terminate.