This Act may be cited as the ``Megan's Law Implementation Act''.
GRANTS TO STATES TO OFFSET COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE JACOB WETTERLING CRIMES AGAINST CHILDREN AND SEXUALLY VIOLENT OFFENDER REGISTRATION ACT.
In General.--Section 170101 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 14071) is amended by-- (1) redesignating the second subsection (g) as subsection (h); and (2) adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Grants to States To Comply With the Wetterling Act.-- ``(1) Program authorized.-- ``(i) In general.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall award a grant to each eligible State to offset costs directly associated with complying with the Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act.
Such grant program shall be known as the ``Sex Offender Management Assistance Program (SOMA)''.
Uses of funds.--Grants awarded under this subsection shall be-- ``(I) distributed directly to the State for distribution to State and local entities; and ``(II) used for training, salaries, equipment, materials, and other costs directly associated with complying with the Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act.
Eligibility.-- ``(i) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this subsection, the chief executive of a State shall, on an annual basis, submit an application to the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance (in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require) assuring that-- ``(I) the State complies with (or made a good faith effort to comply with) the Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act; and ``(II) where applicable, the State has penalties comparable to or greater than Federal penalties for crimes listed in such Act.
The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance may waive the requirement of subclause (II) if a State demonstrates an overriding need for assistance under this subsection.
Regulations.-- ``(I) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Director shall promulgate regulations to implement this subsection (including the information that must be included and the requirements that the States must meet) in submitting the applications required under this subsection.
In allocating funds under this subsection, the Director may consider the annual number of sex offenders registered in each eligible state's monitoring and notification programs.
Certain training programs.--Prior to implementing this subsection, the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall study the feasibility of incorporating into the SOMA program the activities of any technical assistance or training program established as a result of section 40152 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-322).
In a case in which incorporating such activities into the SOMA program will eliminate duplication of efforts or administrative costs, the Director shall take administrative actions, as allowable, and make recommendations to Congress to incorporate such activities into the SOMA program prior to implementing the SOMA program.''.
Study.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall conduct a study to assess the efficacy of the SOMA program and submit recommendations to Congress not later than March 1, 2000.
Authorization for Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out subsection (i) of section 170101 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 14211), $25,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1999 and 2000.