This Act may be cited as the ``Trademark Law Treaty Implementation Act''.
REFERENCE TO THE TRADEMARK ACT OF 1946.
For purposes of this Act, the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the registration and protection of trademarks used in commerce, to carry out the provisions of certain international conventions, and for other purposes'', approved July 5, 1946 (15 United States Code 1051 et sequentes), shall be referred to as the ``Trademark Act of 1946''.
APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION; VERIFICATION.
Application for Use of Trademark.--Section 1(a) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1051(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``Section 1.
(1) The owner of a trademark used in commerce may request registration of its trademark on the principal register hereby established by paying the prescribed fee and filing in the Patent and Trademark Office an application and a verified statement, in such form as may be prescribed by the Commissioner, and such number of specimens or facsimiles of the mark as used as may be required by the Commissioner.
The application shall include specification of the applicant's domicile and citizenship, the date of the applicant's first use of the mark, the date of the applicant's first use of the mark in commerce, the goods in connection with which the mark is used, and a drawing of the mark.
The statement shall be verified by the applicant and specify that-- ``(A) the person making the verification believes that he or she, or the juristic person in whose behalf he or she makes the verification, to be the owner of the mark sought to be registered; ``(B) to the best of the verifier's knowledge and belief, the facts recited in the application are accurate; ``(C) the mark is in use in commerce; and ``(D) to the best of the verifier's knowledge and belief, no other person has the right to use such mark in commerce either in the identical form thereof or in such near resemblance thereto as to be likely, when used on or in connection with the goods of such other person, to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive, except that, in the case of every application claiming concurrent use, the applicant shall-- ``(i) state exceptions to the claim of exclusive use; and ``(ii) shall specify, to the extent of the verifier's knowledge-- ``(I) any concurrent use by others; ``(II) the goods on or in connection with which and the areas in which each concurrent use exists; ``(III) the periods of each use; and ``(IV) the goods and area for which the applicant desires registration.
The applicant shall comply with such rules or regulations as may be prescribed by the Commissioner.
The Commissioner shall promulgate rules prescribing the requirements for the application and for obtaining a filing date herein.''.
Application for Bona Fide Intention To Use Trademark.-- Subsection (b) of section 1 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1051(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1) A person who has a bona fide intention, under circumstances showing the good faith of such person, to use a trademark in commerce may request registration of its trademark on the principal register hereby established by paying the prescribed fee and filing in the Patent and Trademark Office an application and a verified statement, in such form as may be prescribed by the Commissioner.
The application shall include specification of the applicant's domicile and citizenship, the goods in connection with which the applicant has a bona fide intention to use the mark, and a drawing of the mark.
The statement shall be verified by the applicant and specify-- ``(A) that the person making the verification believes that he or she, or the juristic person in whose behalf he or she makes the verification, to be entitled to use the mark in commerce; ``(B) the applicant's bona fide intention to use the mark in commerce; ``(C) that, to the best of the verifier's knowledge and belief, the facts recited in the application are accurate; and ``(D) that, to the best of the verifier's knowledge and belief, no other person has the right to use such mark in commerce either in the identical form thereof or in such near resemblance thereto as to be likely, when used on or in connection with the goods of such other person, to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive.
Except for applications filed pursuant to section 44, no mark shall be registered until the applicant has met the requirements of subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
The applicant shall comply with such rules or regulations as may be prescribed by the Commissioner.
The Commissioner shall promulgate rules prescribing the requirements for the application and for obtaining a filing date herein.''.
Consequence of Delays.--Paragraph (4) of section 1(d) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1051(d)(4)) is amended to read as follows: ``(4) The failure to timely file a verified statement of use under paragraph (1) or an extension request under paragraph (2) shall result in abandonment of the application, unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the delay in responding was unintentional, in which case the time for filing may be extended, but for a period not to exceed the period specified in paragraphs (1) and (2) for filing a statement of use.''.
REVIVAL OF ABANDONED APPLICATION.
Section 12(b) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1062(b)) is amended in the last sentence by striking ``unavoidable'' and by inserting ``unintentional''.
DURATION OF REGISTRATION; CANCELLATION; AFFIDAVIT OF CONTINUED USE; NOTICE OF COMMISSIONER'S ACTION.
Section 8 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1058) is amended to read as follows: ``duration ``Sec.
Each registration shall remain in force for 10 years, except that the registration of any mark shall be canceled by the Commissioner for failure to comply with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, upon the expiration of the following time periods, as applicable: ``(1) For registrations issued pursuant to the provisions of this Act, at the end of 6 years following the date of registration.
For registrations published under the provisions of section 12(c), at the end of 6 years following the date of publication under such section.
For all registrations, at the end of each successive 10-year period following the date of registration.
During the 1-year period immediately preceding the end of the applicable time period set forth in subsection (a), the owner of the registration shall pay the prescribed fee and file in the Patent and Trademark Office-- ``(1) an affidavit setting forth those goods or services recited in the registration on or in connection with which the mark is in use in commerce and such number of specimens or facsimiles showing current use of the mark as may be required by the Commissioner; or ``(2) an affidavit setting forth those goods or services recited in the registration on or in connection with which the mark is not in use in commerce and showing that any such nonuse is due to special circumstances which excuse such nonuse and is not due to any intention to abandon the mark.
The owner of the registration may make the submissions required by this section, or correct any deficiency in a timely filed submission, within a grace period of 6 months after the end of the applicable time period set forth in subsection (a).
Such submission must be accompanied by a surcharge prescribed therefor.
If any submission required by this section filed during the grace period is deficient, the deficiency may be corrected within the time prescribed after notification of the deficiency.
Such submission must be accompanied by a surcharge prescribed therefor.
Special notice of the requirement for affidavits under this section shall be attached to each certificate of registration and notice of publication under section 12(c).
The Commissioner shall notify any owner who files 1 of the affidavits required by this section of the Commissioner's acceptance or refusal thereof and, in the case of a refusal, the reasons therefor.
If the registrant is not domiciled in the United States, the registrant shall designate by a written document filed in the Patent and Trademark Office the name and address of some person resident in the United States on whom may be served notices or process in proceedings affecting the mark.
Such notices or process may be served upon the person so designated by leaving with that person or mailing to that person a copy thereof at the address specified in the last designation so filed.
If the person so designated cannot be found at the address given in the last designation, such notice or process may be served upon the Commissioner.''.
Section 9 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1059) is amended to read as follows: ``renewal of registration ``Sec.
Subject to the provisions of section 8, each registration may be renewed for periods of 10 years at the end of each successive 10-year period following the date of registration upon payment of the prescribed fee and the filing of a written application, in such form as may be prescribed by the Commissioner.
Such application may be made at any time within 1 year before the end of each successive 10-year period for which the registration was issued or renewed, or it may be made within a grace period of 6 months after the end of each successive 10-year period, upon payment of a fee and surcharge prescribed therefor.
If any application filed during the grace period is deficient, the deficiency may be corrected within the time prescribed after notification of the deficiency, upon payment of a surcharge prescribed therefor.
If the Commissioner refuses to renew the registration, the Commissioner shall notify the registrant of the Commissioner's refusal and the reasons therefor.
If the registrant is not domiciled in the United States, the registrant shall designate by a written document filed in the Patent and Trademark Office the name and address of some person resident in the United States on whom may be served notices or process in proceedings affecting the mark.
Such notices or process may be served upon the person so designated by leaving with that person or mailing to that person a copy thereof at the address specified in the last designation so filed.
If the person so designated cannot be found at the address given in the last designation, such notice or process may be served upon the Commissioner.''.
RECORDING ASSIGNMENT OF MARK.
Section 10 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1060) is amended to read as follows: ``assignment ``Sec.
A registered mark or a mark for which an application to register has been filed shall be assignable with the good will of the business in which the mark is used, or with that part of the good will of the business connected with the use of and symbolized by the mark.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, no application to register a mark under section 1(b) shall be assignable prior to the filing of an amendment under section 1(c) to bring the application into conformity with section 1(a) or the filing of the verified statement of use under section 1(d), except for an assignment to a successor to the business of the applicant, or portion thereof, to which the mark pertains, if that business is ongoing and existing.
In any assignment authorized by this section, it shall not be necessary to include the good will of the business connected with the use of and symbolized by any other mark used in the business or by the name or style under which the business is conducted.
Assignments shall be by instruments in writing duly executed.
Acknowledgment shall be prima facie evidence of the execution of an assignment, and when the prescribed information reporting the assignment is recorded in the Patent and Trademark Office, the record shall be prima facie evidence of execution.
An assignment shall be void against any subsequent purchaser for valuable consideration without notice, unless the prescribed information reporting the assignment is recorded in the Patent and Trademark Office within 3 months after the date of the subsequent purchase or prior to the subsequent purchase.
The Patent and Trademark Office shall maintain a record of information on assignments, in such form as may be prescribed by the Commissioner.
An assignee not domiciled in the United States shall designate by a written document filed in the Patent and Trademark Office the name and address of some person resident in the United States on whom may be served notices or process in proceedings affecting the mark.
Such notices or process may be served upon the person so designated by leaving with that person or mailing to that person a copy thereof at the address specified in the last designation so filed.
If the person so designated cannot be found at the address given in the last designation, such notice or process may be served upon the Commissioner.''.
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS; COPY OF FOREIGN REGISTRATION.
Section 44 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1126) is amended-- (1) in subsection (d)-- (A) by striking ``23, or 44(e) of this Act'' and inserting ``or 23 of this Act or under subsection (e) of this section''; and (B) in paragraphs (3) and (4), by striking ``this subsection (d)'' and inserting ``this subsection''; and (2) in subsection (e), by striking the second sentence and inserting the following: ``Such applicant shall submit, within such time period as may be prescribed by the Commissioner, a certification or a certified copy of the registration in the country of origin of the applicant.''.
Cancellation of Functional Marks.--Section 14(3) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1064(3)) is amended by inserting ``or is functional,'' before ``or has been abandoned''.
Incontestability Defenses.--Section 33(b) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1115(b)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (9); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following: ``(8) That the mark is functional; or''.
Remedies in Cases of Dilution of Famous Marks.-- (1) Injunctions.--(A) Section 34(a) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1116(a)) is amended in the first sentence by striking ``section 43(a)'' and inserting ``subsection (a) or (c) of section 43''.
Section 43(c)(2) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1125(c)(2)) is amended in the first sentence by inserting ``as set forth in section 34'' after ``relief''.
Damages.--Section 35(a) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1117(a)) is amended in the first sentence by striking ``or a violation under section 43(a),'' and inserting ``a violation under section 43(a), or a willful violation under section 43(c),''.
Destruction of articles.--Section 36 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 United States Code 1118) is amended in the first sentence-- (A) by striking ``or a violation under section 43(a),'' and inserting ``a violation under section 43(a), or a willful violation under section 43(c),''; and (B) by inserting after ``in the case of a violation of section 43(a)'' the following: ``or a willful violation under section 43(c)''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect-- (1) on the date that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, or (2) upon the entry into force of the Trademark Law Treaty with respect to the United States, whichever occurs first.
Passed the House of Representatives July 22, 1997.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.