This Act may be cited as the ``Defense Counterproliferation Act of 1994''.
For purposes of this legislation, weapons of mass destruction are considered to include chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, their associated components and production facilities, and their delivery systems.
PROGRAM TO COUNTER THE PROLIFERATION OF WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION.
Program.--The United States shall establish an integrated program in the Department of Defense to counter potential threats to United States interests that arise from the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The program will improve the capabilities of the United States to identify, monitor, and respond to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Management.--The Secretary of Defense shall designate the Deputy Secretary of Defense as the manager for the program referred to in section (3)(a).
The Secretary shall prescribe the duties of the Deputy Secretary regarding management of such activities and programs.
The duties shall include coordination of counterproliferation activities across all relevant government agencies.
Funds are authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1995 for the program referred to in section (3)(a) in the amount of $100,000,000.
The amount appropriated pursuant to such authorization of appropriations is authorized to be made available for correcting aspects of such activities and programs that are characterized as shortfalls in the report of the Deputy Secretary of Defense entitled ``Report on Nonproliferation and Counterproliferation Activities and Programs'', dated May 1994.
JOINT COMMITTEE FOR REVIEW OF COUNTERPROLIFERATION PROGRAMS OF THE UNITED STATES.
Establishment.--(1) There is hereby established a Counterproliferation Program Review Committee composed of the following members: (A) The Secretary of Defense.
The Secretary of State.
The Secretary of Energy.
The Director of Central Intelligence.
The Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The Secretary of Defense shall chair the committee.
A member of the committee may designate a representative to perform routinely the duties of the member.
A representative shall be in a position of Deputy Assistant Secretary or a position equivalent to or above the level of Deputy Assistant Secretary.
A representative of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall be a person in a grade equivalent to that of Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense.
The Secretary of Defense may delegate to the Deputy Secretary of Defense the performance of the duties of the Chairman of the committee.
The members of the committee shall first meet not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Upon designation of working level officials and representatives, the members of the committee shall jointly notify the appropriate committees of Congress that the committee has been constituted.
The notification shall identify the representatives designated pursuant to paragraph (3) and the working level officials of the committee.
Purposes of the Committee.--The purposes of the committee are-- (1) to optimize funding for, and ensure the development and deployment of highly effective technologies and capabilities for the counterproliferation of weapons of mass destruction; and (2) to identify and eliminate undesirable redundancies or uncoordinated efforts in the development and deployment of such technologies and capabilities.
Duties.--The committee shall-- (1) identify and review existing and proposed capabilities and technologies for support of United States counterproliferation policy with regard to-- (A) intelligence; (B) battlefield surveillance; (C) passive defenses; (D) active defenses; and (E) counterforce capabilities; (2) as part of the review pursuant to paragraph (1), identify deficiencies in existing capabilities and technologies; (3) formulate near-term, mid-term, and long-term programmatic options for meeting requirements established by the committee and eliminating deficiencies identified by the committee; and (4) in carrying out the other duties of the committee, ensure that all types of counterproliferation actions are considered.
Access to Information.--The committee shall have access to information on all programs, projects, and activities of the Department of Defense, the Department of State, the Department of Energy, the intelligence community, and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency that are pertinent to the purposes and duties of the committee.
Budget Recommendations.--The committee may submit to the officials referred to in subsection (a) any recommendation regarding existing or planned budgets as the committee considers appropriate to encourage funding for capabilities and technologies at the level necessary to support United States counterproliferation policy.