This Act may be cited as the ``Electronic Reporting Streamlining Act of 1996''.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To streamline governmentwide use of electronic data transmissions in place of paperwork submissions to Federal agencies from non-Federal persons, including businesses and State and local governments.
To ensure that full advantage is taken of private- sector standard setting for electronic data transmission for the benefit of small and large organizations alike.
To reduce costs to business and government by avoiding further proliferation of incompatible formats and methods for transmitting data in an electronic format.
To stimulate Government adoption of comprehensive standards for electronic data exchange.
To increase effective public access to data and other forms of information transmitted to or from Federal agencies, through electronic means.
To minimize costs to the public of reviewing, obtaining, and searching for data and other forms of information that are available in electronic form.
NEGOTIATED RULEMAKING FOR DATA STANDARDS FOR ELECTRONIC INTERCHANGE OF DATA.
Section 15 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 App.
United States Code) is amended to read as follows: ``electronic data management advisory committee ``Sec.
In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall establish and appoint a negotiated rulemaking committee in accordance with subchapter III of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, for the purpose of establishing electronic data reporting standards for the electronic interchange of certain data that is required to be reported under existing Federal law.
The committee shall be known as the Electronic Data Management Advisory Committee.
The Director shall designate the subject matter of the negotiated rulemaking to be conducted by the Committee, which shall consist of an existing data reporting requirement that applies to 3 or more agencies and that relates to the reporting of data commonly managed by the private sector in accordance with uniform standards.
Membership of Committee.--In addition to the membership requirements for the Committee under section 565(b) of title 5, United States Code-- ``(1) one-third of the membership of the Committee shall be composed of individuals representing private industry; ``(2) the membership of the Committee shall include-- ``(A) at least one representative of each Federal agency having regulatory authority with respect to the subject matter; and ``(B) representatives of organizations devoted to the public interest in the subject matter; and ``(3) not more than one-quarter of the membership of the Committee may be composed of individuals representing a particular department or agency.
Negotiated Rulemaking by Committee.-- ``(1) In general.--The Committee shall conduct a negotiated rulemaking in accordance with subchapter III of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, for the purpose set forth in subsection (a) and on the subject matter.
In conducting the rulemaking, the Committee shall seek comment and participation from all persons interested in the subject matter.
Requirements for proposed rule.--Any proposed rule promulgated by the Committee shall-- ``(A) provide data necessary to satisfy existing regulatory reporting requirements comprising the subject matter, under a format and protocol that will reasonably accommodate future or revised data element specifications without requiring users to make costly or substantial modifications to hardware or software that they use to submit electronic data; ``(B) give deference to existing, operational, comprehensive electronic data interchange standards for reporting under the subject matter; ``(C) establish data standards that use electronic file formats that are nonproprietary, royalty free, or in the public domain; ``(D) include a list of data elements to be used under the rule, including a description of the characteristics of each data element; ``(E) use data elements that are suitable for placing in publicly accessible electronic databases, to the extent such placement is not otherwise prohibited by law; ``(F) provide for electronic dissemination of data reported under the proposed rule through one or more publicly accessible, searchable databases identified by the Committee, to the extent such dissemination is not otherwise prohibited by law; ``(G) include a schedule for implementation of electronic data interchange for each Federal program to which the proposed rule would apply; and ``(H) set forth a schedule for the dissemination of all publicly releasable information obtained under the proposed rule through electronic data interchange in accordance with chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code, and Office of Management and Budget Circular A- 130 (as in effect on the date of the enactment of this section).
Participation of nongovernmental persons.--In developing standards under this section, the Committee shall-- ``(A) solicit the participation of nongovernmental persons; ``(B) solicit from such persons proposals for meeting the requirements set forth in paragraph (2); and ``(C) authorize demonstrations by such persons of the operational capacity of any standard proposed to be adopted under this section.
Demonstration of proposed standards.--Before issuing a proposed rule under this section, the Committee shall provide for the demonstration and thorough testing of the proposed standard included in the proposed rule.
Report of Committee.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this section, the Committee shall transmit to the Director, the Committee on Government Reform and Oversight of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report under section 566(f) of title 5, United States Code, on the rulemaking required by this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Committee.--The term `Committee' means the Electronic Data Management Advisory Committee established under subsection (a).
Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Subject matter.--The term `subject matter' means the subject matter designated by the Director under subsection (a).