Redesignation.--Sections 10 and 11 of the Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental and Native American Public Policy Act of 1992 (20 United States Code 5608, 5609) are redesignated as sections 12 and 13 of that Act, respectively.
Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund.--The Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental and Native American Public Policy Act of 1992 (20 United States Code 5601 et sequentes) (as amended by subsection (a)) is amended by inserting after section 9 the following: ``SEC.
ENVIRONMENTAL DISPUTE RESOLUTION FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States an Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund to be administered by the Foundation.
The Fund shall consist of amounts appropriated to the Fund under section 13(b) and amounts paid into the Fund under section 11.
Expenditures.--The Foundation shall expend from the Fund such sums as the Board determines are necessary to establish and operate the Institute, including such amounts as are necessary for salaries, administration, the provision of mediation and other services, and such other expenses as the Board determines are necessary.
Distinction From Trust Fund.--The Fund shall be maintained separately from the Trust Fund established under section 8.
Investment of Amounts.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the Fund as is not, in the judgment of the Secretary, required to meet current withdrawals.
Interest-bearing obligations.--Investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States.
Acquisition of obligations.--For the purpose of investments under paragraph (1), obligations may be acquired-- ``(A) on original issue at the issue price; or ``(B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Sale of obligations.--Any obligation acquired by the Fund may be sold by the Secretary of the Treasury at the market price.
Credits to fund.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Fund.''.
USE OF THE INSTITUTE BY A FEDERAL AGENCY.
The Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental and Native American Public Policy Act of 1992 (20 United States Code 5601 et sequentes) (as amended by section 6) is amended by inserting after section 10 the following: ``SEC.
USE OF THE INSTITUTE BY A FEDERAL AGENCY.
Authorization.--A Federal agency may use the Foundation and the Institute to provide assessment, mediation, or other related services in connection with a dispute or conflict related to the environment, public lands, or natural resources.
Payment.-- ``(1) In general.--A Federal agency may enter into a contract and expend funds to obtain the services of the Institute.
Payment into environmental dispute resolution fund.-- A payment from an executive agency on a contract entered into under paragraph (1) shall be paid into the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund established under section 10.
Notification and Concurrence.-- ``(1) Notification.--An agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government shall notify the chairperson of the President's Council on Environmental Quality when using the Foundation or the Institute to provide the services described in subsection (a).
Notification descriptions.--A notification under paragraph (1) shall include a written description of-- ``(A) the issues and parties involved; ``(B) prior efforts, if any, undertaken by the agency to resolve or address the issue or issues; and ``(C) other relevant information.
Concurrence.-- ``(A) In general.--In a case that involves a dispute or conflict between 2 or more agencies or instrumentalities of the Federal Government (including branches or divisions of a single agency or instrumentality), an agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government shall obtain the concurrence of the chairperson of the President's Council on Environmental Quality before using the Foundation or Institute to provide the services described in subsection (a).
Indication of concurrence or nonconcurrence.--The chairperson of the President's Council on Environmental Quality shall indicate concurrence or nonconcurrence under subparagraph (A) not later than 20 days after receiving notice of the dispute or conflict.''.
In General.--Section 13 of the Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental and Native American Public Policy Act of 1992 (as redesignated by section 6(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund'' and inserting the following: ``(a) Trust Fund.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Trust Fund''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund established under section 10-- ``(1) $4,250,000 for fiscal year 1998, of which-- ``(A) $3,000,000 shall be for capitalization; and ``(B) $1,250,000 shall be for operation costs; and ``(2) $1,250,000 for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002 for operation costs.''.
The second sentence of section 8(a) of the Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental and Native American Public Policy Act of 1992 (20 United States Code 5606) is amended-- (1) by striking ``fund'' and inserting ``Trust Fund''; and (2) by striking ``section 11'' and inserting ``section 13(a)''.
Sections 7(a)(6), 8(b), and 9(a) of the Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental and Native American Public Policy Act of 1992 (20 United States Code 5605(a)(6), 5606(b), 5607(a)) are each amended by striking ``Fund'' and inserting ``Trust Fund'' each place it appears.
Passed the Senate October 9, 1997.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.