This Act may be cited as the ``Independence Hall Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) for 150 years, the historic buildings in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, known as Congress Hall, the Old City Hall, and Independence Hall which housed the Liberty Bell, the symbol of the heritage of free people in the United States, were under the occasional care of local government units; (2) the Federal Government decided that it was its responsibility to preserve and maintain these sites and others related to it for generations of Americans alive and yet to be born; (3) the recent years of financial exigency and growth of the responsibility and sphere of service of the National Park Service has prevented the ability to provide current capital needs for these historic sites; (4) in 1994, the people of the United States will mark the anniversary of the adoption of the National Park Service of the responsibility for the care and maintenance of Independence Hall, the Liberty Bell, and other historic buildings which were the birthplace of the United States of America; and (5) the minting and issuance of a United States coin to commemorate the ongoing maintenance and preservation of these shrines is an appropriate method by which to commemorate this action.
Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 1,000,000 $1 coins each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of the coins issued under subsection (a) shall be emblematic of the shrines of liberty and shall show the Liberty Bell on one side and the Independence Hall on the other.
On each coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1994'', and inscription of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Numismatic Items.--The coins issued under subsection (a) shall be numismatic items for purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under subsection (a) shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins authorized under section 3 from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
The design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Advisory Committee in accordance with section 5135 of title 31, United States Code.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the coins authorized under section 3 shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the face value, plus the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses), and the surcharge provided for in subsection (d).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins authorized under section 3 at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins authorized under section 3 prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of the coins authorized under section 3 shall include a surcharge of $7 per coin.
In General.--The coins authorized under section 3 may be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities, except that not more than 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue the coins authorized under section 3 beginning on July 4, 1994.
Period of Authority.--Coins authorized under section 3 may be minted beginning 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act and for a period of not more than 1 year after such date.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT RELATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services required to carry out this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
Of the total surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins in accordance with section 6 of this Act-- (1) 50 percent shall be returned to the Federal Treasury for the purpose of reducing the national debt; and (2) 50 percent shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Independence Hall Preservation Fund for the purposes of-- (A) creating an endowment fund moneys from which shall be used to meet the needs for capital improvements in Independence National Historic Park; (B) funding projects of capital replacement in buildings in Independence National Historic Park; and (C) funding those needs deemed appropriate by the Directors of the fund to foster and increase the respect and admiration of visitors to Independence National Historic Park.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Independence Hall Preservation Fund as may be related to the expenditure of amounts paid under section 9.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of the coins referred to in section 3 will not result in any net cost to the Federal Government.
Payment for Issuance of Coins.--No coin shall be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for such coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment for such coin; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration.