This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Administrative Simplification Act of 1993''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Uniform Claim Commission.
The Commission shall develop a universal paper claims processing form containing standard data elements for use by all health service providers that furnish services for which a claim may be submitted under a Federal program that provides for payments for health care services.
The Commission shall develop such form in a manner that will permit the form to serve as a model for claims processing forms used in the private sector.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 17 members appointed by the director of the Office of Technology Assessment not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The members of the Commission shall be appointed from among individuals with expertise in health care claims administration, enrollment and eligibility administration, health care financial management, health care reimbursement, and other related fields.
The Commission shall include individuals from various geographic areas of the United States, representatives from public and private health benefit plans involved in payment under such plans, administrators of such plans, and health service providers.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled not later than 30 days after the date of the creation of the vacancy in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--11 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings, take testimony, or receive evidence.
Chairperson.--The chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by a majority vote of the members of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson of the Commission.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Director.--The Commission shall have a director appointed by the Commission and paid at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-9 of the General Schedule.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel as it considers appropriate, except that-- (1) not more than 2 individuals may be appointed under this subsection; and (2) an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-7 of the General Schedule.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except as provided in subsections (a) and (b).
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a nonreimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-12 of the General Schedule.
Administrative Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of the Federal agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any information that the Commission is prohibited to secure or request by another law.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies or services without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Publication in Federal Register.--The Commission may publish a notice and request for comments in the Federal Register in the same manner as a Federal agency.
PROMULGATION OF UNIFORM CLAIMS PROCESSING FORM.
Development of Preliminary Form.--The Commission shall develop a preliminary version of the form required to be developed under section 3 not later than the expiration of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the appointment of the last member of the Commission to be appointed under section 4(a).
Publication.--The Commission shall publish a copy of the preliminary version of the form required to be developed under subsection (a) in the Federal Register, along with a notice of the comment period established in subsection (c) and a request for comments, promptly after the date on which such preliminary version is completed.
Comment Period.--The Commission may receive comments concerning the preliminary version of the form required to be developed under subsection (a) during the 30-day period beginning on the date the preliminary version appears in the Federal Register.
Revision of Form and Final Report.--Not later than the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date following the closing date of the comment period under subsection (c), the Commission shall-- (1) revise the preliminary version of the form required to be developed under subsection (a), taking into consideration any comments received pursuant to subsection (c); (2) develop a final version of the form required to be developed under section 3; and (3) submit to the Congress, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs a report containing-- (A) a copy of the final version of the form; (B) a summary of the activities of the Commission; and (C) any other findings, conclusions, or recommendations that the Commission determines to be appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate not later than the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 7.
PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS CONCERNING UNIFORM CLAIMS PROCESSING FORM.
Notice of Regulations.--Promptly upon receipt of the report submitted under section 7(d), the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs each shall publish in the Federal Register a notice of rulemaking in which the Secretary announces the promulgation of a regulation that will-- (1) take effect 90 days after the date of the publication of the notice; and (2) require all health service providers that furnish health care services for which a claim for payment may be submitted under a Federal program within the jurisdiction of the Secretary to submit any such claim using the universal paper claims processing form developed by the Commission under section 3.
Promulation and Implementation of Regulations.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs each shall promulgate and implement a regulation described in subsection (a).
From funds appropriated for salaries and expenses with respect to the Department of Health and Human Services for fiscal year 1995, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall expend such amounts as may be necessary to ensure that the Commission is able to carry out its duties under this Act, except that such amounts shall not exceed $500,000.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Uniform Claims Commission established by section 2.
Health service provider.--The term ``health service provider'' includes a provider of services (as defined in section 1861(u) of the Social Security Act), physician, supplier, and other person furnishing health care services but does not include a Federal program that provides directly for the provision of health care services to beneficiaries.
Any spending authority (as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 401(c)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 651(c)(2)(A))) authorized by this Act shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.