This Act may be cited as the ``Enterprise Zone Environmental Restoration Act of 1993''.
As used in this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Impacted site.--The term ``impacted site'' means-- (A) an area that has been designated as an enterprise zone pursuant to section 701 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987 (42 United States Code 11501); or (B) an area that receives a similar designation under any other Federal law.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
In General.--The Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary, shall establish a grant program to award grants for environmental testing and characterization on land owned by municipalities or other political subdivisions of States that the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
Subject to the availability of funds, the Administrator shall award a grant to any municipality (or other political subdivision of a State that the Administrator determines to be appropriate) that submits an approved application concerning environmental testing and characterization for an impacted site.
Administration of Grant Program.--The Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary, shall promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out the grant program established under subsection (a).
In promulgating the regulations, the Administrator shall-- (1) determine which activities constitute environmental testing and characterization; (2) establish a procedure for the submission and approval of an application for a grant; and (3) establish criteria for approving a grant application, including, to the extent known, consideration of-- (A) the potential environmental and human health risks posed by the area to be characterized; (B) the availability of other sources of funding to perform the environmental testing and characterization in the absence of funding from a grant under this Act; (C) the economic benefits that would flow from the development of the area; (D) the minimization of any economic benefit to parties liable for response actions at the area; and (E) other factors that the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
State Grant Program.--The Administrator may, in consultation with the Secretary, authorize the Governor of a State to carry out a State grant program to award grants to carry out the purposes of this Act.
The Administrator may promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this subsection.
Repayment.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Payment.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the recipient of a grant under this section must, as a condition to receiving a grant award under this section, enter into an agreement with the Administrator that states that the recipient of the grant shall pay to the Administrator the net proceeds resulting from any transfer, lease, development, or conveyance of all or part of the area that is the subject of the grant.
Total payment.--The total amount of payments made by a grant recipient under this subsection shall not exceed an amount equal to the sum of-- (i) the amount of the grant; and (ii) any accrued interest (as determined pursuant to paragraph (2)).
Interest.--The interest payable under this section shall accrue at the same rate as is specified for interest earned pursuant to section 107(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9607(a)).
Schedule for payment.--A payment required under paragraph (1) from the net proceeds of any transfer, lease, development, or conveyance shall be paid not later than 30 days after the recipient of the grant receives the net proceeds.
Evaluation and Report.-- (1) Evaluation.--Not later than December 31, 1994, the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary, shall conduct an evaluation of the grant program under this section.
The evaluation shall be based on information available at the time of the evaluation.
The Administrator shall require that, as a condition to receiving a grant under this section, each grant recipient must submit data indicating the actual cost, benefits, sources, and use of all funds associated with the environmental testing and characterization of the area that is the subject of the grant award.
Report.--On completion of the evaluation referred to in paragraph (1), but not later than December 31, 1994, the Administrator shall submit a report to Congress that describes the findings and recommendations of the Administrator.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996 to carry out the purposes of this Act.