This Act may be cited as the ``Neighborhood Security Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to provide for the establishment of demonstration projects designed to determine the effectiveness of-- (1) certain activities by community residents in coordination with the local police department in preventing and removing violent crime and drug trafficking from the community; (2) such activities in increasing economic development in the community; and (3) such activities in preventing or ending retaliation by perpetrators of crime against community residents engaged in these activities.
Demonstration Authority.--Not later than 16 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall award grants under this Act.
Grants shall be awarded annually under this section and shall be for a period of 4 years.
Limitation on Grant Amounts.--The amount of each grant awarded under this Act shall not be less than $25,000 nor more than $100,000.
Reduction in Amount.--Amounts provided under a grant awarded under this Act for a fiscal year shall be reduced in proportion to any reduction in the amounts appropriated under this Act for such fiscal year as compared to the amounts appropriated for the prior fiscal year.
Unused Portion of Grant Funds.--Any unused portion of a grant awarded under this section shall, upon the termination of such grant, be transferred to the Secretary for redistribution in the subsequent fiscal year or for repayment to the Department of the Treasury.
Submission.--To be eligible to receive a grant under section 3, a qualified entity shall, not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act, submit to the Secretary an application to conduct a demonstration project under this Act.
Content.--An application submitted under subsection (a) shall be in such form and contain such information as the Secretary shall require, including-- (1) an agreement with the local police department to coordinate and assist in the prevention and removal of violent crime and drug trafficking from the target community; (2) a plan detailing the nature and extent of coordination and assistance to be provided by the local police department, project participants, and the applicant; and (3) a description of the strategy of the community for the physical and economic development of the community.
Criteria.--In considering whether to approve an application submitted under this section, the Secretary shall consider-- (1) the degree to which the project described in the application will support existing community economic development activities by preventing and removing violent crime and drug trafficking from the community; (2) the demonstrated record of project participants with respect to economic and community development activities; (3) the ability of the applicant to responsibly administer the project; (4) the ability of the applicant to assist and coordinate with project participants to achieve economic development and prevent and remove violent crime and drug trafficking in the community; (5) the adequacy of the plan to assist and coordinate with the local police department in preventing and removing violent crime and drug trafficking in the community; (6) the consistency of the application with the eligible activities and the uses for the grant under this Act; (7) the aggregate amount of funds from non-Federal (public and private sector) sources that are formally committed to the project; (8) the adequacy of the plan for providing information relevant to an evaluation of the project to the independent research organization; and (9) such other factors as may be determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Preferences.--In considering an application submitted under this section, the Secretary shall give preference to an applicant that demonstrates a commitment to work with project participants and a local police department in a community with-- (1) an enterprise zone or enterprise community designation or an area established pursuant to any consolidated planning process for use of Federal housing and community development funds; (2) significant rates of violent crime and drug trafficking, as determined by the Secretary; and (3) at least one non-profit community development corporation or similar organization that is willing to and capable of increasing economic development.
Approval.--Not later than 15 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, on competitive basis, approve or disapprove of the applications submitted under this section.
Activities.--Amounts provided under a grant awarded under this Act shall be used for the following activities: (1) Citizen patrols by car or by foot intended to prevent violent crime and eradicate open market or street sales of controlled substances.
Block watch activities, including identification of property for purposes of retrieving stolen goods, camera surveillance to identify drug traffickers and their customers, protection of evidence to ensure evidence is not lost or destroyed prior to police arrival, and computer linkages among organizations and the police to identify hot spots and speed the dissemination of information.
Property modification programs, including securing buildings and residences to prevent burglary, and structural changes, such as the construction of fences, to parks or buildings to prevent drug sales or other criminal activity in those areas.
Squatter eviction programs aimed at notifying public authorities of trespassers in abandoned buildings used as crack houses or heroin shooting galleries and increasing efforts to remove such squatters.
Expansion of community liaisons with the police, including expanding the community's role in community policing activities.
Developing and expanding programs to prevent or end retaliation by perpetrators of crime against project participants.
Other activities consistent with the purposes of this Act.
Additional Activities.--Amounts provided under a grant awarded under this Act may be used for additional activities in support of the activities described in subsection (a), including-- (1) the purchase of equipment or supplies, including cameras, video cameras, walkie-talkies, and computers; (2) the training of project participants; and (3) the hiring of staff for grantees or project participant organizations to assist in coordinating activities among project participants and with the local police department.
LOCAL CONTROL OVER PROJECTS.
Except as provided in regulations promulgated under the succeeding sentence, each organization authorized to conduct a demonstration project under this Act shall have exclusive authority over the administration of the project.
The Secretary may prescribe such regulations with respect to such demonstration projects as are expressly authorized or as are necessary to ensure compliance with approved applications and this Act.
In General.--The Secretary shall monitor grantees to ensure that the projects conducted under the grants are being carried out in accordance with this Act.
Each grantee, and each entity which has received funds from a grant made under this Act, shall make appropriate books, documents, papers, and records available to the Secretary for examination, copying, or mechanical reproduction on or off the premises of the entity upon a reasonable request therefore.
Withholding, Termination or Recapture.--The Secretary shall, after adequate notice and an opportunity for a hearing, withhold, terminate, or recapture any funds due, or provided to and unused by, an entity under a grant awarded under this Act if the Secretary determines that such entity has not used any such amounts in accordance with the requirements of this Act.
The Secretary shall withhold, terminate, or recapture such funds until the Secretary determines that the reason for the withholding, termination, or recapture has been removed and there is reasonable assurance that it will not recur.
Complaints.--The Secretary shall respond in an expeditious manner to complaints of a substantial or serious nature that an entity has failed to use funds provided under this Act in accordance with the requirements of this Act.
Reports.--Not later than 3 months after the termination of a grant under this Act, the grantee shall prepare and submit to the Secretary a report containing such information as may be required by the Secretary.
Audits.--The Secretary shall annually audit the expenditures of each grantee under this Act from payments received under grants awarded under this Act.
Such audits shall be conducted by an entity independent of any agency administering a program funded under this Act and, in so far as practical, in accordance with the Comptroller General's standards for auditing governmental organizations, programs, activities, and functions.
In General.--Not later than 16 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall enter into a contract with an independent research organization under which such organization, in accordance with this section, conducts an evaluation of the demonstration projects, individually and as a group, conducted under this Act.
Research Questions.--In evaluating a demonstration project conducted under this Act, the organization described in subsection (a) shall address the following: (1) What activities and uses most effectively involve project participants in the activities and uses under this Act (with effectiveness measured, for example, by duration of participation, frequency of participation, and intensity of participation).
What activities and uses are most effective in preventing or removing violent crime and drug trafficking from a target community.
What activities and uses are most effective in supporting or promoting economic development in a target community.
What activities and uses are most effective in increasing coordination and assistance between project participants and with the local police department.
What activities and uses are most effective in preventing or ending retaliation by perpetrators of crime against project participants.
Funding.--Of the funds appropriated under this Act, the Secretary shall set aside not less than 1 percent and not more than 3 percent for the evaluations required under this section.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 6 months after the date on which the last grant under this Act terminates, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of the Congress a summary of each evaluation conducted under this section.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000.
As used in this Act: (1) Community.--The term ``community'' means a contiguous geographic area within a large urban district or encompassing a small urban or other nonurban area.
Drug trafficking.--The term ``drug trafficking'' means any offense that could be prosecuted under the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 801, et sequentes).
Economic development.--The term ``economic development'' means revitalization and development activities, including business, commercial, housing, and employment activities, that benefit a community and its residents.
Grantee.--The term ``grantee'' means a qualified entity that receives a grant under this Act.
Project participant.--The term ``project participant'' means any individual or private-sector group in a community participating in any of the activities established under a demonstration grant under this Act.
Qualified entity.--The term ``qualified entity'' means a non-profit organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Violent crime.--The term ``violent crime'' has the same meaning as the term ``crime of violence'' in title 18 of the United States Code.