This Act may be cited as the ``Women and Alcohol Research Equity Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds as follows with respect to the United States: (1) One of every 4 alcoholics receiving treatment is a woman.
In fiscal year 1995, the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism had a total research budget of $191,186,000, and $43,997,080 of the budget (approximately 23 percent) was available for research on alcohol abuse and alcoholism among women.
There are selected areas where alcohol contributes to a more rapid and severe development of disease in women than in men, and research on women exclusively in these areas is important.
According to data collected during the years 1980 through 1993 (in the survey known as the National Drug and Alcoholism Treatment Unit Survey), women represent approximately 30 percent of the clients presenting for alcohol problems in traditional public treatment facilities.
A recent study has shown that women are more likely than men to use nontraditional health care systems for alcohol-related problems.
No data exists to count women in nontraditional treatment settings; therefore, it is not possible to know whether women are overrepresented or underrepresented in all treatment settings in proportion to their numbers (30 percent).
Alcohol use by pregnant women is the leading known cause of mental retardation in newborns.
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), which is marked by dysfunction of the central nervous system and by prenatal and postnatal growth deficiency and facial malformations, strikes 1 to 3 out of every 1,000 newborns, or 3,600 to 10,000 babies a year, depending upon the national birth-rate.
The incidence of less severe fetal alcohol effects (FAE) is at least 3 times that of fetal alcohol syndrome.
For Black Americans, the risk of FAS remains about sevenfold higher than for whites, even after adjustment for the frequency of maternal alcohol intake, occurrence of chronic alcohol problems, and parity.
Among Native Americans, the incidence of FAS varies among different cultures; some are similar to the overall United States Reports population, while a much higher prevalence is reported for others.
Research is also needed on the male contribution to birth abnormalities related to alcohol.
Most treatment programs do not provide child care or adequate alternatives for women entering treatment.
The death rate of female alcoholics is 50 to 100 percent higher than for male alcoholics.
Proportionately more alcoholic women die of cirrhosis of the liver than do alcoholic men.
Additionally, the combined effects of estrogen and alcohol may impact not only liver damage but osteoporosis as well.
The interval between onset of drinking-related problems and entry into treatment appears to be shorter for women than for men.
Further, studies of women alcoholics in treatment suggest that they often experience greater physiological impairment earlier in their drinking careers, despite having consumed less alcohol than men.
These findings suggest that the development of consequences associated with heavy drinking may be accelerated or ``telescoped'' in women.
Women become intoxicated faster than men.
This may be due to a different enzyme and hormonal activity in women than in women.
Chronic, heavy drinking contributes to menstrual disorders, fertility problems, and premature menopause.
Alcohol use may be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.
Research indicates that the incidence of breast cancer increases when a woman consumes 1 ounce or more of absolute alcohol daily.
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism has identified areas for future research on alcohol abuse and alcoholism among women.
As a result of stimulating research applications during the years 1993 through 1995, such Institute's portfolio on women and children has increased by $17,997,000, or more than 69 percent, over the fiscal year 1992 base of $26,000,000.
PROVISIONS REGARDING INCREASE IN AMOUNT OF FUNDS EXPENDED FOR RESEARCH ON ALCOHOL ABUSE AND ALCOHOLISM AMONG WOMEN.
Section 464H(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285n(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following paragraph: ``(3) Women's health.-- ``(A) For fiscal year 1997, of the first $191,186,000 appropriated under paragraph (1), the Director of the Institute shall obligate not less than $43,997,080 for the purpose of carrying out under this subpart projects of research on alcohol abuse and alcoholism among women.
In addition to the authorization of appropriations established in paragraph (1), there are authorized to be appropriated for carrying out the purpose specified in subparagraph (A) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 and 1999.