This Act may be cited as the ``Pay for Your Stay Act''.
WORK REQUIREMENTS FOR PRISONERS.
In General.--Chapter 301 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Work requirement for prisoners ``(a) The Attorney General shall establish by rule-- ``(1) the requirement that Federal prisoners that are able to do so engage in work and that such prisoners work at least 48 hours each week; ``(2) the requirement that Federal prisoners engage in educational study for at least 12 hours each week; ``(3) that no television viewing will be provided to Federal prisoners, except educational programs; and ``(4) that a 25 percent assessment be levied on all wages earned by Federal prisoners, with 5 percent returned to the prosecuting agency to help reimburse the cost of the prosecution, 10 percent set aside for victim restitution, and 10 percent placed in the Fund created by subsection (b).
There is established in the Treasury the James Wilson, Jr. Fund (referred to in this section as the `Fund').
The Fund shall consist of moneys placed in it under subsection (a).
The Attorney General shall distribute the money in the fund equally between-- ``(1) State and local programs whose primary purpose is to provide training and purchase equipment designed to protect peace officers from personal injury in the line of duty resulting from the criminal acts of third parties; and ``(2) to families of local, State, and Federal peace officers killed in the line of duty; according to such procedures, and in such amounts, as the Attorney General shall by rule establish.
The Attorney General, in consultation with the appropriate authorities of States, the District of Columbia, and other territories and possessions of the United States, shall establish a system whereby inmate labor may be utilized, with or without compensation, to undertake activities to mediate the damage caused by an impending natural disaster or to remediate the damage done by such a disaster.''.
No Adverse Impact on Business Concerns and Their Law-Abiding Employees.--Chapter 301 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Protection from unfair competition by prison labor ``(a) Work Opportunities Within Federal Correctional Institutions.--In implementing the requirements of section 4014(a), the Attorney General shall-- ``(1) maximize the employment of inmates with respect to the operation and maintenance of Federal corrections institutions; and ``(2) maximize the employment of inmates in work-based vocational education and skill training activities designed to prepare participating inmates for gainful employment after release, while avoiding, to the maximum extent practicable, expanding sales of any resulting products or services pursuant to section 4124.
Minimizing Unfair Competition With the Private Sector.--Any expansion in the inmate production of products or services to be offered for sale resulting from the implementation of section 4014(a)-- ``(1) may be sold only through Federal Prison Industries to Federal agencies on a competitive basis pursuant to either section 303 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 253) or section 2304 of title 10, United States Code, and their implementing regulations; and ``(2) shall be approved for sale by the Board of Directors of Federal Prison Industries pursuant to section 4122(b), after determining that the proposed volume of sales is not expected to have an adverse impact on sales to the Government by a private sector contractor offering the same specific product or service.
Disaster Remediation Activities by Inmates.--In implementing section 4014(c), the Attorney General shall-- ``(1) maximize the use of inmate labor to augment governmental personnel and community volunteers in preparing for a natural disaster or in conducting remediation activities during the period immediately after such a disaster; and ``(2) assure that inmate labor does not supplant post- disaster remediation activities that would otherwise be performed under contract by private sector firms employed by an affected individual or governmental entity.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 301 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``4014.
Work requirement for prisoners.
Protection from unfair competition by prison labor.''.
REQUIRED STATEMENT OF ASSETS.
Section 1915(a)(2) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Such prisoner shall also submit a statement of all other assets such prisoner possesses.