CAPABILITIES OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY.
Authorization of Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance to strengthen the conflict resolution capability of the Organization of African Unity, as follows: (1) Funds may be provided to the Organization of African Unity for use in supporting its conflict resolution capability.
Funds may be used for expenses of sending individuals with expertise in conflict resolution to work with the Organization of African Unity.
Funding.--Of the foreign assistance funds that are allocated for sub-Saharan Africa, not less than $1,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998 should be used to carry out subsection (a).
IMPROVING CONFLICT RESOLUTION CAPABILITIES OF MULTILATERAL SUBREGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN AFRICA.
Authorization of Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance to strengthen the conflict resolution capabilities of subregional organizations established by countries in sub-Saharan Africa, as follows: (1) Funds may be provided to such an organization for use in supporting its conflict resolution capability.
Funds may be used for the expenses of sending individuals with expertise in conflict resolution to work with such an organization.
Funding.--Of the foreign assistance funds that are allocated for sub-Saharan Africa, such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998 may be used to carry out subsection (a).
AFRICAN DEMOBILIZATION AND RETRAINING PROGRAM.
Authorization of Assistance.--In order to facilitate reductions in the size of the armed forces of countries of sub-Saharan Africa, the President is authorized to provide assistance for-- (1) the encampment and related activities for the purpose of demobilization of such forces; and (2) the reintegration of demobilized military personnel into civilian society through activities such as retraining for civilian occupations, creation of income-generating opportunities, the reintegration into agricultural activities, and the transportation to the home areas of such personnel.
Funding.--Of the foreign assistance funds that are allocated for sub-Saharan Africa, $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996 should be used for the assistance described in subsection (a), if conditions permit.
TRAINING FOR AFRICANS IN CONFLICT RESOLUTION AND PEACEKEEPING.
Chapter 5 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2347 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CONFLICT RESOLUTION AND PEACEKEEPING PROGRAM FOR SUB- SAHARAN AFRICA.
``In addition to the other education and training activities carried out under this chapter, the President is authorized to establish a program to provide education and training in conflict resolution and peacekeeping for civilian and military personnel of countries in sub-Saharan Africa.''.
BUILDING MEDIATION CAPABILITY IN AFRICA.
Authorization of Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance to nongovernmental organizations that are engaged in mediation and reconciliation efforts in Africa.
Funding.--Of the foreign assistance funds that are allocated for sub-Saharan Africa, such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996 should be used to carry out subsection (a).
PLAN FOR UNITED STATES SUPPORT FOR CONFLICT RESOLUTION AND DEMOBILIZATION IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA.
In General.--In furtherance of and building upon the provisions of sections 3 through 7, the President shall develop an integrated long-term plan to provide support for the enhancement of conflict resolution capabilities and demobilization activities in sub-Saharan Africa.
Contents of Plan.--Such plan shall identify, among other things, the following: (1) The type, purpose, amount, and duration of assistance that is planned to be provided to conflict resolution units in sub-Saharan Africa.
The type and amount of assistance that is planned to be provided for the demobilization of military personnel of countries of sub-Saharan Africa, including-- (A) a list of which countries will receive such assistance and an explanation of why such countries were chosen for such assistance; and (B) a list of other countries and international organizations that are providing assistance for such demobilization.
The type and amount of assistance that is planned to be provided to nongovernmental organizations that are engaged in mediation and reconciliation efforts in sub-Saharan Africa.
A description of proposed training programs for Africans in conflict resolution and peacekeeping, including a list of prospective participants and plans to expand such programs.
The mechanisms to be used to coordinate interagency efforts to administer the plan.
Efforts to seek the participation of other countries and international organizations to achieve the objectives of the plan.
Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report containing a description of the plan developed under this section.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report describing the efforts and progress made in carrying out the provisions of this Act.
The President shall consult with the appropriate congressional committees prior to providing assistance under section 3 or section 5.
APPROPRIATE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES DEFINED.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Appropriations, and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Appropriations, and the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
Passed the House of Representatives September 19, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.