This Act may be cited as the ``Postal Inspection Service and Inspector General Act''.
RESTRICTION ON THE USE OF PAID CONFIDENTIAL INFORMANTS BY THE POSTAL SERVICE.
Confidential Informants.-- (1) Restriction.--Section 404 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c)(1) The Postal Service may not retain the services of a paid confidential informant for purposes of any investigation concerning the possible violation of any law relating to controlled substances, unless the unlawful use of the mails is involved.
The Postal Service shall render a semiannual report to the Congress concerning any investigation-- ``(A) in which the Postal Service retains the services of a paid confidential informant; and ``(B) which results in the arrest of 1 or more individuals for violating any law relating to controlled substances.
For the purpose of this subsection-- ``(A) the term `controlled substance' has the meaning given such term by section 102(6) of the Controlled Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970; and ``(B) a confidential informant shall be considered to be `paid' if such informant receives, or is to receive, a monetary or nonmonetary benefit (including any forbearance from a civil or criminal action) for the services involved.''.
Applicability.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to any investigation commencing on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Officers.-- (1) In general.--Section 204 of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by amending the section heading to read as follows: ``Sec.
Assistant Postmasters General; General Counsel; Judicial Officer; Chief Postal Inspector''; (B) in the first sentence by striking ``and a Judicial Officer.''
and inserting ``a Judicial Officer, and a Chief Postal Inspector.
''; and (C) in the second sentence by striking ``and the Judicial Officer'' and inserting ``the Judicial Officer, and the Chief Postal Inspector''.
Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 204 and inserting the following: ``204.
Assistant Postmasters General; General Counsel; Judicial Officer; Chief Postal Inspector.''.
INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE.
Definitions.--Section 11 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1) by inserting ``the Postmaster General;'' after ``the Attorney General;''; and (2) in paragraph (2) by inserting ``the United States Postal Service,'' after ``Treasury;''.
Transfer of Functions.--Section 9(a) of the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended by section 203(g)(3)(A) of the National and Community Service Trust Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-82; 107 United States Statutes at Large 890), is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) in subparagraph (U) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(W) of the United States Postal Service, that portion of the Postal Inspection Service that is engaged in internal audit and program review activities; and''; and (2) in paragraph (2) by inserting ``(or, in the case of the United States Postal Service, the Postmaster General, in consultation with the Board of Governors)'' after ``head of the establishment involved''.
Special Provisions.--The Inspector General Act of 1978 is amended-- (1) by redesignating the first section designated as section 8G as section 8H; (2) by redesignating the second section designated as section 8G as section 8I; and (3) by inserting after section 8F the following: ``special provisions concerning the united states postal service ``Sec.
In carrying out the duties and responsibilities specified in this Act, the Inspector General of the United States Postal Service shall have oversight responsibility for all activities of the Postal Inspection Service, including any internal investigation performed thereby.
The Chief Postal Inspector shall promptly report the significant activities being carried out by the Postal Inspection Service to such Inspector General.
Nothing in this Act shall restrict, eliminate, or otherwise adversely affect any of the rights, privileges, or benefits of either employees of the United States Postal Service, or labor organizations representing employees of the United States Postal Service, under chapter 12 of title 39, United States Code, the National Labor Relations Act, any handbook or manual affecting employee labor relations with the United States Postal Service, or any collective bargaining agreement.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Relating to the inspector general act of 1978.--Section 8H of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (as so redesignated by subsection (c)(1)) is amended-- (A) in subsection (a)(2) by striking ``Tennessee Valley Authority,'' and all that follows through the semicolon and inserting ``Tennessee Valley Authority, and the United States International Trade Commission;''; and (B)(i) by striking subsection (f), and redesignating subsections (g) and (h) as subsections (f) and (g), respectively; (ii) in paragraphs (3) and (4) of subsection (a) by striking ``(h)(1)'' and inserting ``(g)(1)''; and (iii) in subsection (c) by striking ``Except as provided under subsection (f) of this section, the'' and inserting ``The''.
Relating to title 39, united states code.--Section 410(b) of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9); and (B) by amending paragraph (10) to read as follows: ``(10) the Inspector General Act of 1978; and''.
Effective Date; Interim Service.-- (1) Effective date.--This section and the amendments made by this section shall take effect upon the expiration of the 3- month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Interim service.--The individual serving as Inspector General of the United States Postal Service on the day before this section takes effect may continue to serve in that capacity until-- (A) a successor has taken office, or (B) such individual ceases to be the Chief Postal Inspector of the United States Postal Service.
Passed the House of Representatives June 27, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.