TITLE I--CASA MALPAIS SEC.
CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
Findings.--The Congress finds and declares that-- (1) the Casa Malpais National Historic Landmark was occupied by one of the largest and most sophisticated Mogollon communities in the United States; (2) the landmark includes a 58-room masonry pueblo, including stairways, Great Kiva complex, and fortification walls, a prehistoric trail, and catacomb chambers where the deceased were placed; (3) the Casa Malpais was designated as a national historic landmark by the Secretary of the Interior in 1964; and (4) the State of Arizona and the community of Springerville are undertaking a program of interpretation and preservation of the landmark.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this title to assist in the preservation and interpretation of the Casa Malpais National Historic Landmark for the benefit of the public.
In General.--In furtherance of the purpose of this title, the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with the State of Arizona and the town of Springerville, Arizona, pursuant to which the Secretary may provide technical assistance to interpret, operate, and maintain the Casa Malpais National Historic Landmark and may also provide financial assistance for planning, staff training, and development of the Casa Malpais National Historic Landmark, but not including other routine operations.
Additional Provisions.--Any such agreement may also contain provisions that-- (1) the Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall have right to access at all reasonable times to all public portions of the property covered by such agreement for the purpose of interpreting the landmark; and (2) no changes or alterations shall be made in the landmark except by mutual agreement between the Secretary and the other parties to all such agreements.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to provide financial assistance in accordance with this title.
TITLE II--LOWER EASTSIDE TENEMENT SEC.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) immigration, and the resulting diversity of cultural influences, is a key factor in defining American identity; the majority of United States citizens trace their ancestry to persons born in nations other than the United States; (2) the latter part of the 19th century and the early part of the 20th century marked a period in which the volume of immigrants coming to the United States far exceeded that of any time prior to or since that period; (3) no single identifiable neighborhood in the United States absorbed a comparable number of immigrants than the Lower East Side neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City; (4) the Lower East Side Tenement at 97 Orchard Street in New York City is an outstanding survivor of the vast number of humble buildings that housed immigrants to New York City during the greatest wave of immigration in American history; (5) the Lower East Side Tenement is owned and operated as a museum by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum; (6) the Lower East Side Tenement Museum is dedicated to interpreting immigrant life within a neighborhood long associated with the immigrant experience in the United States, New York's Lower East Side, and its importance to United States history; and (7) the National Park Service found the Lower East Side Tenement at 97 Orchard Street to be nationally significant; the Secretary of the Interior declared it a National Historic Landmark on April 19, 1994, and the National Park Service through a special resource study found the Lower East Side Tenement suitable and feasible for inclusion in the National Park System.
Purposes.--The purposes of this title are-- (1) to ensure the preservation, maintenance, and interpretation of this site and to interpret at the site the themes of immigration, tenement life in the later half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, the housing reform movement, and tenement architecture in the United States; (2) to ensure continued interpretation of the nationally significant immigrant phenomenon associated with New York City's Lower East Side and its role in the history of immigration to the United States; and (3) to enhance the interpretation of the Castle Clinton, Ellis Island, and Statue of Liberty National Monuments.
As used in this title: (1) Historic site.--The term ``historic site'' means the Lower East Side Tenement at 97 Orchard Street on Manhattan Island in New York City, New York, and designated as a national historic site by section 4.
Museum.--The term ``Museum'' means the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, a nonprofit organization established in New York City, which owns and operates the tenement building at 97 Orchard Street and manages other properties in the vicinity of 97 Orchard Street as administrative and program support facilities for 97 Orchard Street.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ESTABLISHMENT OF HISTORIC SITE.
Designation.--To further the purposes of this title and the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the preservation of historic American sites, buildings, objects, and antiquities of national significance, and for other purposes'', approved August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et seq.
), the Lower East Side Tenement at 97 Orchard Street, in the City of New York, State of New York, is designated a national historic site.
Status as Affiliated Site.--The Lower East Side Tenement National Historic Site shall be an affiliated site of the National Park System.
The Secretary shall coordinate the operation and interpretation of the historic site with that of the Lower East Side Tenement Historic Site and the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, and Castle Clinton National Monument, as the historic site's story and interpretation of the immigrant experience in the United States is directly related to the themes and purposes of these national Monuments.
Ownership and Operation.--The Lower East Side Tenement National Historic Site shall continue to be owned, operated, and managed by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, a nonprofit institution.
MANAGEMENT OF THE SITE.
Cooperative Agreement.--The Secretary is authorized to enter into a cooperative agreement with the Lower East Side Tenement Museum to ensure the marking, interpretation, and preservation of the national historic site designated by this title.
Assistance.--The Secretary is authorized to provide technical and financial assistance to the Lower East Side Tenement Museum to mark, interpret, and preserve the national historic site including the making of preservation-related capital improvements and repairs.
Management Plan.--The Secretary shall, working with the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, develop a general management plan for the historic site to define the National Park Service's roles and responsibilities with regard to the interpretation and the preservation of the national historic site.
The plan shall also outline how interpretation and programming for the Lower East Side Tenement National Historic Site and the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, and Castle Clinton national monuments will be integrated and coordinated so as to enhance the stories at each of the 4 sites.
Such plan shall be completed within 2 years after the enactment of this Act.
Savings Clause.--Nothing in this title authorizes the Secretary to acquire the property at 97 Orchard Street or to assume overall financial responsibility for the operation, maintenance, or management of the Lower East Side Tenement National Historic Site.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this title.