This Act may be cited as the ``Roads to Success Act of 2005''.
In this Act: (1) Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001).
Secondary school.--The term ``secondary school'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
State educational agency.--The term ``State educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Program Authorized.--From amounts appropriated under section 5, the Secretary shall award a grant to carry out the activities described in subsection (b) to Roads to Success (referred to in this Act as the ``grantee''), a nonprofit educational organization that has as its primary purposes increasing awareness of the importance of higher education, developing career awareness, building life skills, and providing education planning to secondary school students.
Grant Agreement.--The grantee shall enter into an agreement with the Secretary that requires that the grantee-- (1) develop a curriculum-based higher education preparation program curriculum for students in grades 7 through 12 that-- (A)(i) provides information for the students about the opportunities for and the importance of higher education; (ii) develops the career awareness of the students; (iii) builds the students' life skills; and (iv) provides education planning to the students; and (B) provides 1 class hour of higher education preparation instruction each week for students in grades 7 through 12; and (2) award subgrants to not more than 5 State educational agencies to enable the State educational agencies to provide higher education preparation programs, using the higher education preparation program curriculum designed by the grantee, to students in grades 7 through 12 in middle schools and secondary schools served by the State educational agencies.
Subgrants.-- (1) Award basis.--In awarding a subgrant under subsection (b)(2), the grantee shall take into consideration the number of middle schools and secondary schools served by the State educational agency that have historically low rates of student application and admission to institutions of higher education.
Authorized activities.--A State educational agency receiving a subgrant under subsection (b)(2)-- (A) shall use subgrant funds to implement the higher education preparation program curriculum developed under subsection (b)(1) in middle schools and secondary schools served by the State educational agency; and (B) may use subgrant funds, or any other funds including private funds, to supplement the higher education preparation program described in subparagraph (A) with appropriate enrichments, such as guest speakers, videos, Web-based services, or multimedia tools.
Requirement.--In selecting students in grades 7 through 12 to participate in the higher education preparation program, a State educational agency receiving a subgrant under subsection (b)(2) shall give priority to students in the middle schools and secondary schools served by the State educational agency that have historically low rates of student application and admission to institutions of higher education.
Duration.--The grantee shall award each subgrant under subsection (b)(2) for a period of 5 years.
State Educational Agency Reports.--Beginning in fiscal year 2007, a State educational agency receiving a subgrant under section 3(b)(2) shall-- (1) require that each middle school and secondary school participating in the higher education preparation program submit an annual report on the progress of such program to the State educational agency; and (2) submit an annual report on the progress of the higher education preparation program to the grantee.
Grantee Reports.--The grantee shall submit an annual report on the progress of the higher education preparation program curriculum and the higher education preparation program subgrants to the Secretary.
Reports to Congress.-- (1) Annual reports.--The Secretary shall submit to Congress an annual report on the progress of the activities funded under this Act.
Final report.--Not later than 90 days after the conclusion of the time period for all subgrants under section 3(b)(2), the Secretary shall submit to Congress a final report on the results of the higher education preparation program, together with recommendations for such legislative or administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2006 through 2011.