This Act may be cited as the ``Family Reconciliation Act''.
SET-ASIDE FOR STATES WITH APPROVED FAMILY RECONCILIATION PLANS.
In General.-- (1) Set-aside.--Section 430(d) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 629(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Family reconciliation.--The Secretary shall reserve 10 percent of the amounts described in subsection (b) for each fiscal year, for allotment to States with family reconciliation plans approved under section 432(c)(3) to develop and conduct counseling programs described in section 432(c)(2)(B).''.
Assistance in developing family reconciliation counseling programs.--Section 430(d)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 629(d)(1)) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) in assisting States in developing and operating counseling programs described in section 432(c)(2)(B).''.
Family reconciliation plans.--Section 432 of such Act (42 United States Code 629(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Family Reconciliation Plans.-- ``(1) Plan requirements.--A State family reconciliation plan meets the requirements of this paragraph if the plan demonstrates that the State has in effect the laws referred to in paragraph (2).
Satisfaction of plan requirements.--In order to satisfy paragraph (1), a State must have in effect laws requiring that, prior to a final dissolution of marriage of a couple who have one or more children under 12 years of age, the couple shall be required to-- ``(A) undergo a minimum 60-day waiting period beginning on the date dissolution documents are filed; and ``(B) participate in counseling programs offered by a public or private counseling service that includes discussion of the psychological and economic impact of the divorce on the couple, the children of the couple, and society.''.
Approval of plans.--The Secretary shall approve a plan that meets the requirements of paragraph (1).''.
Allotment.--Section 433 of such Act (42 United States Code 633) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Allotments to States With Approved Family Reconciliation Plans.-- ``(1) In general.--From the amount reserved pursuant to section 430(d)(4) for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall allot to each State (other than an Indian tribe) with a family reconciliation plan approved under section 432(c)(3), an amount that bears the same ratio to the amount reserved under such section as the average annual number of final dissolutions of marriage described in paragraph (2) in the State for the 3 fiscal years referred to in subsection (c)(2)(B) bears to the average annual number of such final dissolutions of marriage in such 3-year period in all States with family reconciliation plans approved under section 432(c)(3).
Final dissolutions of marriage described.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a final dissolution of marriage described in this paragraph is a final dissolution of marriage of a couple who have one or more children under 12 years of age.''.
Entitlement.-- (A) In general.--Section 434(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 629d(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Family Reconciliation Amount.--Each State with a family reconciliation plan approved under section 432(c)(3) shall be entitled to an amount equal to the allotment of the State under section 433(d) for the fiscal year.
Conforming amendment.--Section 434(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 629d(a)) is amended by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (3)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 1995.
USE OF FUNDS UNDER LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION ACT.
Section 1007(b) of the Legal Services Corporation Act (42 United States Code 2996f(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (9), by striking ``; or'' and inserting a semicolon; (2) in paragraph (10), by striking the period and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(11) to provide legal assistance to an eligible client with respect to a proceeding or litigation in which the client seeks to obtain a dissolution of a marriage or a legal separation from a spouse, except that nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit a recipient from providing legal assistance to the client with respect to the proceeding or litigation if a court of appropriate jurisdiction has determined that the spouse has physically or mentally abused the client.