This Act may be cited as the ``Freedom and Human Rights for the Enclaved People of Cyprus Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The respect for fundamental freedom and human rights, especially in those countries that are allies of the United States, is a cornerstone of United States foreign policy.
Among the purposes of United States foreign assistance is to promote human rights.
United States foreign assistance should be utilized to end the imposition of restrictions on the freedoms and human rights of the enclaved people of Cyprus.
Among the restrictions of freedom and human rights to which the enclaved people of Cyprus are subjected are the following: (A) Restrictions on the freedom to worship, including restrictions on times and places for such worship.
Restrictions on communication with individuals living outside the area of the enclaved, including a requirement that an individual from among those in control be present during any such communication.
Prohibition on the possession of telephones in homes.
A requirement that an enclaved individual receive permission from an individual from among those in control before leaving the enclaved area.
Censorship of mail sent to and from the enclaved area.
A requirement that enclaved males aged 18 to 50 report once a week to those in control.
Restrictions on the provision of educational services, including-- (i) lack of replacement elementary school teachers and lack of educational facilities beyond elementary school; (ii) a requirement that an enclaved individual who chooses to leave home for education beyond elementary school may return home not more than three times a year; and (iii) a requirement that enclaved males 16 years of age or older and enclaved females 18 years of age or older who choose to leave home for education beyond elementary school may not return home at all.
Violation of property rights, including confiscation of property without compensation.
Lack of compensation for work performed.
Harassment, beating, rape, and murder without adequate protection or investigation.
UNITED STATES EFFORTS TO ALLEVIATE AND ELIMINATE THE RESTRICTIONS ON THE ENCLAVED PEOPLE IN CYPRUS.
In General.--The President shall take steps-- (1) to inform the United Nations, foreign governments, and the appropriate departments and agencies of the United States Government of the restrictions on the enclaved people of Cyprus, (2) to enlist the United Nations and foreign governments in efforts to end restrictions on the freedom and human rights of the enclaved people of Cyprus, and (3) to establish United States Government programs of assistance to the enclaved people of Cyprus, consistent with subsection (b), and to undertake efforts for the alleviation and elimination of restrictions on the enclaved.
Establishment of Assistance Programs.-- (1) In general.--The President-- (A) shall, to the extent practicable, use funds allocated for a fiscal year to the government or ethnic community participating directly or indirectly in imposition of restrictions on the freedom and human rights of the enclaved people of Cyprus to assist such people, or (B) in the absence of such funds, shall establish a foreign assistance program for the enclaved people of Cyprus.
Use of funds.--Assistance for the enclaved people of Cyprus under paragraph (1) shall include-- (A) programs to eliminate specific aspects of the restrictions of freedom and human rights on the enclaved people of Cyprus; and (B) programs to return ancestral homes and lands to the enclaved people, including United States citizens, who have been forcibly expelled, or those individuals who have fled the enclaved areas or other areas of Cyprus in fear of severe restrictions of freedom, human rights abuses, or violation of property rights.
Notification of Opposition to Restrictions of Freedom and Human Rights Abuses.--The President-- (1) shall notify in writing each fiscal year the head of government of any foreign country that is participating, directly or indirectly, in the restrictions on freedom and human rights of the enclaved people of Cyprus of the opposition by the United States to that government's participation in such restrictions; and (2) shall urge the head of such government to cease participation in such restrictions and to work to eliminate such restrictions.
Monitoring and Reporting Requirements.--The Secretary of State shall include a report on the enclaved people of Cyprus as part of the annual Department of State's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices.
UNITED NATIONS EFFORTS TO RESOLVE THE RESTRICTIONS ON THE ENCLAVED PEOPLE IN CYPRUS.
The President shall direct the United States representative to the United Nations-- (1) to urge the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to address and solve the plight of those enclaved on Cyprus; and (2) to call upon the United Nations Human Rights Commissioner to investigate the plight of the enclaved on Cyprus and to implement appropriate and effective corrective action.