Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Wyandotte Nation has a valid interest in certain lands located in the Fairfax Business District in Wyandotte County, Kansas, that are located within the Nation's reservation established pursuant to an agreement between the Wyandotte Nation and the Delaware Nation dated December 14, 1843, which agreement was ratified by the Senate on July 25, 1848.
The Wyandotte Nation filed a lawsuit, Wyandotte Nation v. Unified Government of Kansas City and Wyandotte County, Kansas, United States Reports D.C. Kan., Case No.
012303-CM, against certain landowners within the Fairfax Business District to ascertain and adjudicate ownership of lands that were once owned and held in trust by the United States for the benefit of the Wyandotte Nation but were not conveyed to the United States by the Wyandotte Nation pursuant to the Treaty of January 31, 1855.
The Lawsuit also contends that certain major roads in Kansas City encroach upon a certain parcel of land, known as the Huron Cemetery, which was reserved for the Wyandotte Nation in the Treaty of January 31, 1855.
The pendency of this Lawsuit has resulted in severe economic hardships for the residents of the Fairfax Business District of Wyandotte County, Kansas, by clouding title to much of the land within that District.
Congress shares with the residents of the Fairfax Business District of Wyandotte County, Kansas, a desire to remove all clouds on title resulting from the Lawsuit without additional cost or expense to either the United States, the State of Kansas, the Unified Government of Kansas City and Wyandotte County, Kansas, and all other landowners within the Fairfax Business District of Wyandotte County, Kansas.
The Wyandotte Nation and the Unified Government of Kansas City and Wyandotte County have reached an agreement settling the Lawsuit which requires implementing legislation by the Congress of the United States.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To settle the Lawsuit.
To direct the Secretary to take into trust for the benefit of the Wyandotte Nation the Settlement Lands in settlement of the Wyandotte Nation's Lawsuit and land claims asserted therein.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Kansas lands.--The term ``Kansas Lands'' means all of the lands described and identified as Gifted Lands and Accreted Lands in the Wyandotte Nation's complaint filed in the Lawsuit, as well as those portions of Seventh Street and Minnesota Avenue located within Kansas City, Kansas, which the Wyandotte Nation claim in the Lawsuit were included within the Huron Cemetery under the Treaty of January 31, 1855.
Lawsuit.--The term ``Lawsuit'' means Wyandotte Nation v. Unified Government of Kansas City and Wyandotte County, Kansas, United States Reports D.C. Kan., Case No.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Settlement lands.--The term ``Settlement Lands'' means the following parcel of real property located in the City of Edwardsville, Wyandotte County, Kansas, which the United States shall hold in trust for the Wyandotte Nation as part of the settlement of the claims of the Wyandotte Nation to the Kansas Lands: Legal description as recited in Quit Claim Deed filed for record as Parcel I.D.
944806, book 3190 at page 198 and book 4408 at page 789 in the Wyandotte County Register of Deeds Office.
Unified government.--The term ``Unified Government'' means the Unified Government of Kansas City and Wyandotte County, Kansas.
Wyandotte nation.--The term ``Wyandotte Nation'' means the Wyandotte Nation, a federally recognized Indian tribe.
ACCEPTANCE OF SETTLEMENT LANDS.
Trust Status.--Concurrently with the relinquishment by the Wyandotte Nation of any and all claims to the Kansas Lands and dismissal with prejudice of the Lawsuit, the Secretary shall take the Settlement Lands into trust for the benefit of the Wyandotte Nation as part of the settlement of the Wyandotte Nation's land claims to the Kansas Lands asserted in the Lawsuit, if there are no adverse legal claims on the Settlement Lands, including outstanding liens, mortgages, or taxes owed.
The Secretary's taking of the Settlement Lands into trust for the benefit of the Wyandotte Nation under this Act is a mandatory trust acquisition, and the terms and provisions of the Act of June 18, 1934 (popularly known as the Indian Reorganization Act; 25 United States Code 461 et sequentes), and the regulations and standards set forth in part 151 of title 25, Code of Federal Regulations, shall not apply to the Secretary's taking of the Settlement Lands into trust for the benefit of the Wyandotte Nation under this Act.
Settlement of Land Claims.--The Settlement Lands are taken into trust as provided in this section as part of the settlement of the Wyandotte Nation's land claims to the Kansas Land asserted in the Lawsuit within the meaning of section 20(b)(1)(B)(i) of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act.
Status of Settlement Land.--Upon the Secretary taking the Settlement Lands into trust for the benefit of the Wyandotte Nation under this Act, the Settlement Lands shall become a reservation of the Wyandotte Nation.
Application of the Kansas Act.--Upon the Secretary taking the Settlement Lands into trust for the benefit of the Wyandotte Nation under this Act, the Act of June 25, 1948 (popularly known as the Kansas Act; 18 United States Code 3243), shall apply to the Settlement Lands.
EXTINGUISHMENT OF TITLE AND CLAIMS.
Approval and Ratification of Prior Transfers.--Any transfer, before the date of enactment of this Act, of land or natural resources located within the boundaries of the Kansas Lands from, by, or on behalf of any Indian, Indian nation, or tribe or band of Indians or any member thereof, shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with the Constitution and all laws of the United States, including, without limitation, the Trade and Intercourse Act of 1790, Act of July 22, 1790 (ch.
4; 1 United States Statutes at Large 137), and Congress hereby does approve and ratify such transfers effective as of the date of such transfers.
Aboriginal Title Extinguished.--Any aboriginal title held by any Indian, Indian nation, or tribe or band of Indians or any member thereof to any land or natural resources located within the boundaries of the Kansas Lands, the transfer of which was approved and ratified by subsection (a), shall be regarded as extinguished as of the date of such transfer.
Extinguishment of Claims.--The transfer of the Settlement Lands to the Secretary in trust for the benefit of the Wyandotte Nation as part of the settlement of the Nation's land claims asserted in the Lawsuit of the Wyandotte Nation under this Act shall be conditioned upon receipt by the Secretary of a duly enacted resolution of the elected tribal council or business committee of the Wyandotte Nation agreeing to the extinguishment of all claims (including any claims based upon aboriginal title) against the United States, the Unified Government, or any person or entity by the Wyandotte Nation in connection with the Kansas Lands (including, without limitation, claims for hunting, trapping, trespass, damages, use, or occupancy) as provided in this Act, and agreeing to the extinguishment of any claims against the United States based upon the enactment of this Act.
The extinguishment of these claims is in consideration for the benefits to the Wyandotte Nation under this Act.
COMPACT WITH THE STATE OF KANSAS.
Compact Procedures.--If the State of Kansas and the Wyandotte Nation have not entered into a tribal-State compact under section 11(d) of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, in consultation with the Wyandotte Nation and the State of Kansas, prescribe procedures for the conduct of gaming activities on the Settlement Lands which are consistent with the provisions of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 United States Code 2701 et sequentes) and the relevant provisions of the laws of the State of Kansas.
Surrender of Certain Other Rights.--The prescription of procedures under subsection (a) shall be conditioned upon the Secretary's receipt of a duly enacted resolution of the elected tribal council or business committee of the Wyandotte Nation agreeing that upon commencement of the Wyandotte Nation's operations on the Settlement Lands as contemplated under section 11(d) of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, the Wyandotte Nation will permanently renounce, surrender, and forgo any and all rights the Wyandotte Nation may have under the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act with respect to any Indian lands of the Wyandotte Nation, within the scope of section 4 of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, located within the external boundaries of Wyandotte County, Kansas, with the exception of the Settlement Lands.
Limitation of Action.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any action to contest the constitutionality or validity under law of this Act shall be barred unless the action is filed on or before the date which is 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Exclusive jurisdiction over any such action is hereby vested in the United States District Court for the District of Kansas.
Actions by the Secretary.--When administering this Act, the Secretary shall be aware and mindful of the trust responsibility of the United States to the Wyandotte Nation and shall take such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out this Act.
Separability of Provisions.--In the event that any provision of this Act is held invalid, it is the intent of Congress that the entire Act be invalidated.