This Act may be cited as the ``Torture Victims Relief Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The American people abhor torture by any government or person.
The existence of torture creates a climate of fear and international insecurity that affects all people.
Torture is the deliberate mental and physical damage caused by governments to individuals to destroy individual personality and terrorize society.
The effects of torture are long term.
Those effects can last a lifetime for the survivors and affect future generations.
By eliminating leadership of their opposition and frightening the general public, repressive governments often use torture as a weapon against democracy.
Torture survivors remain under physical and psychological threats, especially in communities where the perpetrators are not brought to justice.
In many nations, even those who treat torture survivors are threatened with reprisals, including torture, for carrying out their ethical duties to provide care.
Both the survivors of torture and their treatment providers should be accorded protection from further repression.
A significant number of refugees and asylees entering the United States have been victims of torture.
Those claiming asylum deserve prompt consideration of their applications for political asylum to minimize their insecurity and sense of danger.
Many torture survivors now live in the United States.
They should be provided with the rehabilitation services which would enable them to become productive members of our communities.
The development of a treatment movement for torture survivors has created new opportunities for action by the United States and other nations to oppose state-sponsored and other acts of torture.
There is a need for a comprehensive strategy to protect and support torture victims and their treatment providers, together with overall efforts to eliminate torture.
By acting to heal the survivors of torture and protect their families, the United States can help to heal the effects of torture and prevent its use around the world.
The United States became a party to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment on November 20, 1994, but has not implemented Article 3 of the Convention.
As used in this Act: (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided, the terms used in this Act have the meanings given those terms in section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)).
Torture.--The term ``torture'' has the meaning given the term in section 2340(1) of title 18, United States Code, and includes the use of rape and other forms of sexual violence by a person acting under the color of law upon another person under his custody or physical control.
PROHIBITION ON INVOLUNTARY RETURN OF PERSONS FEARING SUBJECTION TO TORTURE.
Prohibition.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the United States shall not expel, remove, extradite, or otherwise return involuntarily an individual to a country if there is substantial evidence that a reasonable person in the circumstances of that individual would fear subjection to torture in that country.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``to return involuntarily'', in the case of an individual, means-- (1) to return the individual without the individual's consent, whether or not the return is induced by physical force and whether or not the person is physically present in the United States; or (2) to take an action by which it is reasonably foreseeable that the individual will be returned, whether or not the return is induced by physical force and whether or not the person is physically present in the United States.
IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES FOR TORTURE VICTIMS.
Covered Aliens.--An alien described in this section is any alien who presents a claim of having been subjected to torture, or whom there is reason to believe has been subjected to torture.
Consideration of the Effects of Torture.--In considering an application by an alien described in subsection (a) for refugee status under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, asylum under section 208 of that Act, or withholding of removal under section 241(b)(3) of that Act, the appropriate officials shall take into account-- (1) the manner in which the effects of torture might affect the applicant's responses in the application and in the interview process or other immigration proceedings, as the case may be; (2) the difficulties torture victims often have in recounting their suffering under torture; and (3) the fear victims have of returning to their country of nationality where, even if torture is no longer practiced or the incidence of torture is reduced, their torturers may have gone unpunished and may remain in positions of authority.
Expedited Processing of Refugee Admissions.--For purposes of section 207(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1157(c)), refugees who have been subjected to torture shall be considered to be refugees of special humanitarian concern to the United States and shall be accorded priority for resettlement at least as high as that accorded any other group of refugees.
Processing for Asylum and Withholding of Removal.--Section 235(b)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1225(b)(1)(A)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iv) Special procedures for aliens who are the victims of torture.-- ``(I) Expedited procedures.--With the consent of the alien, an asylum officer or immigration judge shall expedite the scheduling of an asylum interview or a removal proceeding for any alien who presents a claim of having been subjected to torture, unless the evidence indicates that a delay in making a determination regarding the granting of asylum under section 208 of the Immigration and Nationality Act or the withholding of removal under section 241(b)(3) of that Act with respect to the alien would not aggravate the physical or psychological effects of torture upon the alien.
Delay of proceedings.--With the consent of the alien, an asylum officer or immigration judge shall postpone an asylum interview or a removal proceeding for any alien who presents a claim of having been subjected to torture, if the evidence indicates that, as a result of the alien's mental or physical symptoms resulting from torture, including the alien's inability to recall or relate the events of the torture, the alien will require more time to recover or be treated before being required to testify.
Parole in Lieu of Detention.--The finding that an alien is a person described in subsection (a) shall be a strong presumptive basis for a grant of parole, under section 212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1182(d)(5)), in lieu of detention.
Exemption From Expedited Removal.--Section 235(b)(1)(F) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1225(b)(1)(F)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, or to an alien described in section 5(a) of the Torture Victims Relief Act''.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the Attorney General should allocate resources sufficient to maintain in the Resource Information Center of the Immigration and Naturalization Service current information relating to the use of torture in foreign countries.
SPECIALIZED TRAINING FOR CONSULAR, IMMIGRATION, AND ASYLUM PERSONNEL.
In General.--The Attorney General shall provide training for immigration inspectors and examiners, immigration officers, asylum officers, immigration judges, and all other relevant officials of the Department of Justice, and the Secretary of State shall provide training for consular officers, with respect to-- (1) the identification of torture; (2) the identification of the surrounding circumstances in which torture is most often practiced; (3) the long-term effects of torture upon a victim; (4) the identification of the physical, cognitive, and emotional effects of torture, and the manner in which these effects can affect the interview or hearing process; and (5) the manner of interviewing victims of torture so as not to retraumatize them, eliciting the necessary information to document the torture experience, and understanding the difficulties victims often have in recounting their torture experience.
Gender-Related Considerations.--In conducting training under subsection (a) (4) or (5), gender-specific training shall be provided on the subject of interacting with women and men who are victims of torture by rape or any other form of sexual violence.
Amendment of the Immigration and Nationality Act.--Section 412 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1522) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Assistance for Treatment of Torture Victims.--The Secretary may provide grants to programs in the United States to cover the cost of the following services: ``(1) Services for the rehabilitation of victims of torture, including treatment of the physical and psychological effects of torture.
Social and legal services for victims of torture.
Research and training for health care providers outside of treatment centers, or programs for the purpose of enabling such providers to provide the services described in paragraph (1).''.
Funding.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Health and Human Services for fiscal years 1999, 2000, and 2001, but not from funds made available to the Office of Refugee Resettlement, there are authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 412(g) of that Act (relating to assistance for domestic centers and programs for the treatment of victims of torture), as added by subsection (a), the following amounts for the following fiscal years: (A) For fiscal year 1999, $5,000,000.
For fiscal year 2000, $7,500,000.
For fiscal year 2001, $9,000,000.
Availability of funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall remain available until expended.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 1998.
Amendments of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961.--Part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end of chapter 1 the following new section: ``SEC.
ASSISTANCE FOR VICTIMS OF TORTURE.
In General.--The President is authorized to provide assistance for the rehabilitation of victims of torture.
Eligibility for Grants.--Such assistance shall be provided in the form of grants to treatment centers and programs in foreign countries that are carrying out projects or activities specifically designed to treat victims of torture for the physical and psychological effects of the torture.
Use of Funds.--Such assistance shall be available-- ``(1) for direct services to victims of torture; and ``(2) to provide research and training to health care providers outside of treatment centers or programs described in subsection (b), for the purpose of enabling such providers to provide the services described in paragraph (1).''.
Funding.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 1999, 2000, and 2001 pursuant to chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $7,500,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $9,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 to carry out section 129 of the Foreign Assistance Act, as added by subsection (a).
Availability of funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall remain available until expended.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 1998.
Funding.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 1999, 2000, and 2001 pursuant to chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, there are authorized to be appropriated to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture (in this section referred to as the ``Fund'') the following amounts for the following fiscal years: (1) Fiscal year 1999.--For fiscal year 1999, $3,000,000.
Fiscal year 2000.--For fiscal year 2000, $3,000,000.
Fiscal year 2001.--For fiscal year 2001, $3,000,000.
Availability of Funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the President, acting through the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations, should-- (1) request the Fund-- (A) to find new ways to support and protect treatment centers and programs that are carrying out rehabilitative services for victims of torture; and (B) to encourage the development of new such centers and programs; (2) use the voice and vote of the United States to support the work of the Special Rapporteur on Torture and the Committee Against Torture established under the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; and (3) use the voice and vote of the United States to establish a country rapporteur or similar procedural mechanism to investigate human rights violations in a country if either the Special Rapporteur or the Committee Against Torture indicates that a systematic practice of torture is prevalent in that country.