SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``USDA Year 2000 Compliance Enhancement Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Position of Chief Information Officer, Department of Agriculture.
Responsibilities of Chief Information Officer with regard to information technology architecture.
Availability of agency information system funds.
Authority of Chief Information Officer over information technology personnel.
Annual Comptroller General report on compliance.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Chief information officer.--The term ``Chief Information Officer'' means the individual appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture under section 3506(a)(2)(A) of title 44, United States Code, to serve as Chief Information Officer of the Department of Agriculture.
Information technology.--The term ``information technology'' has the meaning given that term in section 5002(3) of the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 (40 United States Code 1401(3)).
Information resources.--The term ``information resources'' has the meaning given that term in section 3502(6) of title 44, United States Code.
Information resources management.--The term ``information resources management'' has the meaning given that term in section 3502(7) of title 44, United States Code.
Information system.--The term ``information system'' has the meaning given such term in section 3502(8) of title 44, United States Code.
Information technology architecture.--The term ``information technology architecture'' has the meaning given that term in section 5125(d) of the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 (40 United States Code 1425(d)).
Office or agency.--The terms ``office or agency'' and ``offices and agencies'' mean each current or future-- (A) national, regional, county, or local office or agency of the Department; (B) county committee established under section 8(b)(5) of the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act (16 United States Code 590h(b)(5)); and (C) State committee, State office, or field service center of the Farm Service Agency.
Department.--The term ``Department'' means the United States Department of Agriculture.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to facilitate the continued successful administration of Department of Agriculture farm policies and programs through the creation of a centralized office in the Department to oversee the use of information resources within the Department.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) American agriculture relies on the Department for the administration of a number of policies and programs essential to the success and vitality of agricultural producers and rural communities in the United States; (2) the successful administration of these policies and programs depends upon the ability of the Department to use information resources in as efficient and effective manner as is technologically feasible; (3) in order to successfully administer these important farm policies and programs the Department relies on a number of information resources that require comprehensive and Department-wide overview and control in order to avoid needless duplication and misuse of resources; (4) agricultural production, marketing, the distribution of commodities, and the extension of farm credit and security are particularly reliant upon the successful use of information resources within the Department; (5) the failure of the Department to meet the requirement of the Office of Management and Budget that all Department mission critical systems be year 2000 compliant would have an adverse impact on the Department's farm policies and programs and American agricultural producers; and (6) in order to better ensure the continued success and vitality of agricultural producers and rural communities it is necessary that within the Department measures are taken to coordinate and centrally plan the use of the information resources of the Department.
POSITION OF CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.
Position in Department.--In order to ensure that information resources within the Department are directed with the greatest efficiency towards the administration of farm policies and programs as authorized by law, the Chief Information Officer of the Department-- (1) shall report directly to the Secretary of Agriculture; and (2) shall not be under the direction or control of the Deputy Secretary of Agriculture or other official or employee of the Department.
Position on Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board.--The Chief Information Officer shall serve as vice-chairperson of the Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board of the Department or any other entity established by the Secretary of Agriculture to review and approve the acquisition of information technology by offices and agencies of the Department.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER WITH REGARD TO INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ARCHITECTURE.
In General.--The Chief Information Officer shall have the authority and responsibility for ensuring that the information technology architecture of the Department, and any office or agency of the Department, is based on the strategic business plans, information resources, goals of information resources management, and core business process methodology of the Department in order to ensure the successful implementation of farm policies and programs administered by the Department as required by law.
Design and Implementation.--The Chief Information Officer shall be responsible for the design and implementation of an information technology architecture for the Department that ensures that-- (1) the information system of each office or agency of the Department maximizes-- (A) the effectiveness and efficiency of mission delivery and information resources management; (B) quality per dollar expended; and (C) the efficiency and coordination of information technology management among offices and agencies of the Department, including the exchange of information between field service centers and other offices and agencies of the Department; (2) the planning for, and the lease or purchase of, information resources of each office or agency of the Department most efficiently satisfies the needs of the office or agency in terms of the customers served, program characteristics, and employees affected by the system; and (3) the information system of each office or agency of the Department is designed and managed to coordinate or consolidate similar functions of the missions, and offices or agencies of the Department, on a Department-wide basis.
Ensuring Compliance With Resulting Architecture.--The Chief Information Officer shall be responsible for the development, acquisition, procurement, and implementation of information resources by an office or agency of the Department in a manner that-- (1) is consistent with the information technology architecture designed under subsection (b); and (2) results in the best use of resources of the office or agency for information technology.
AVAILABILITY OF AGENCY INFORMATION SYSTEM FUNDS.
Transfer.--Each office and agency of the Department shall transfer to the control of the Chief Information Officer an amount of funds each fiscal year equal to four percent of the estimated expenditures to be made by that office or agency for equipment and software for the information system of that office or agency for a fiscal year (other than expenditures for intra-government payments).
The Secretary of Agriculture shall determine the actual amount to be transferred by an office or agency of the Department.
Availability of Funds.--Funds transferred under subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.
Use of Funds.--Funds transferred under subsection (a) may be used by the Chief Information Officer only-- (1) to carry out the responsibilities of the Chief Information Officer under this Act, section 5125 of the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 (40 United States Code 1425), and section 3506(a)(2) of title 44, United States Code; (2) to assist in the development, acquisition, procurement, or implementation of information resources by more than one office or agency of the Department in order to ensure the creation of a Department-wide single information system; and (3) to meet the requirement of the Office and Management and Budget to make all mission critical systems year 2000 compliant.
AUTHORITY OF CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER OVER INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PERSONNEL.
Deputy Information Officers.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established within the Office of the Chief Information Officer the position of deputy information officer who shall be appointed by the Chief Information Officer and serve as a liaison between the Chief Information Officer and each office or agency of the Department.
The separate position of chief information officer of an office or agency of the Department is hereby abolished.
Succession.--A person who is serving as a chief information officer of an office or agency of the Department on the date of the enactment of this Act shall serve as a deputy information officer in the Office of the Chief Information Officer until such time as a successor (if any) is appointed by the Chief Information Officer.
Managers of Major Information Technology Projects.--The assignment of an employee of the Department to serve as manager of a major information technology program or project (as defined by the Chief Information Officer) of an office or agency of the Department, and continuation of the assignment, shall be subject to the approval of the Chief Information Officer.
The Chief Information Officer shall provide input into the performance review of any person so assigned.
Detail and Assignment of Personnel.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an employee of the Department may be detailed or assigned to the Office of the Chief Information Officer for a period of more than 30 days without reimbursement to the employee's employing agency or office.
Information Technology Procurement Officers.--Procurement officers in the Department who are responsible for the procurement of information technology shall serve under the direction and control of the Chief Information Officer.
ANNUAL COMPTROLLER GENERAL REPORT ON COMPLIANCE.
Report Required.--Not later than January 15 of each year, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate a report evaluating the compliance by the Chief Information Officer and the Department with this Act.
The Comptroller General shall conduct the evaluation in a manner which will permit an assessment of the effect of the Department's compliance or lack thereof on the administration of farm policies and programs carried out by the Department as required by law.
Contents of Report.--Each report under subsection (a) shall include the following: (1) An ongoing review and compilation of spending by the Department on information resources which will permit an assessment of the compliance with section 6(a) by offices and agencies of the Department.
An ongoing review and compilation of spending by the Department on information resources which will permit an assessment of the Chief Information Officer's compliance with section 6(c).
An ongoing assessment and evaluation of the Chief Information Officer's performance of duties under this Act.
An ongoing review and evaluation of the Department's success in creating a Department-wide single information system, as described in section 6(c)(2), and in complying with the requirement of the Office of Management and Budget to make all mission critical systems year 2000 compliant, as required under section 6(c)(3).
Evaluation and Recommendations.--In addition to the requirements of subsection (b), the Comptroller General may include in a report under subsection (a) such other recommendations and evaluations as the Comptroller General considers appropriate.