This Act may be cited as the ``Ballast Water Management Act''.
Subsection 1102(a) of Public Law 101-646 (16 United States Code 4712(a)) is amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end: ``(4) National ballast water management evaluation.-- ``(A) Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Task Force shall contract with the Marine Board of the National Research Council to identify and evaluate ballast water management technologies and practices that prevent the introduction and spread of nonindigenous species through ballast water discharged into United States waters.
In conducting the evaluation, the Marine Board shall consider, at a minimum, ballast water management technologies and practices identified in the study prepared under paragraph (3).
In conducting the evaluation, the Marine Board shall identify, at a minimum, ballast water management technologies and practices that-- ``(i) may be retrofitted on existing vessels or incorporated in new vessel designs; ``(ii) are operationally practical; ``(iii) are safe for vessel and crew; ``(iv) are environmentally sound; ``(v) are cost effective; ``(vi) the vessel operator can monitor; and ``(vii) are effective against a broad range of nuisance organisms.''.
Subsection 1102(c) of Public Law 101-646 (16 United States Code 4712(c)) is amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end: ``(3) National ballast water management evaluation report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Ballast Water Management Act, the Task Force shall submit to the appropriate Committees a report on the results of the evaluation conducted under paragraph (4) of subsection (a).''.
NATIONAL BALLAST WATER MANAGEMENT DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Section 1202 of Public Law 101-646 (16 United States Code 4722) is amended by-- (1) redesignating subsection (k) as subsection (l); and (2) inserting after subsection (j) the following: ``(k) National Ballast Water Management Demonstration Program.-- ``(1) Authorization.--Following the submission of the evaluation authorized under section 1102(a)(4) and subject to the availability of appropriations under section 1301(e), the Administrator of the Maritime Administration, in consultation with the Task Force, shall conduct a national ballast water management demonstration program to test and evaluate ballast water management technologies and practices, including those identified in the evaluation authorized under paragraph 1102(a)(4), to prevent the introduction and spread of nonindigenous species through ballast water discharged into United States waters.
Criteria.--In carrying out the demonstration program authorized under this subsection, the Administrator of the Maritime Administration shall use vessels that are documented under chapter 121 of title 46, United States Code, including vessels operating on the Great Lakes.
Any necessary ballast water management technology installation or construction on a vessel used in the demonstration program shall be performed by a United States shipyard or ship repair facility.
Authorities.--In conducting the demonstration program under this subsection, the Task Force and the Administrator of the Maritime Administration may accept donations of property and services.''.
Subsection 1202(l), as redesignated by this Act, is amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end: ``(3) Not later than 1 year after the submission of the evaluation authorized under section 1102(a)(4) and periodically as necessary to report new findings, the Administrator of the Maritime Administration, in consultation with the Task Force, shall submit to the appropriate Committees a report on the results of the demonstration program conducted under subsection (k).''.
Section 1301 of Public Law 101-646 (16 United States Code 4741) is amended by adding the following new subsection at the end: ``(e) National Ballast Water Management Evaluation and Demonstration Program.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Director and the Under Secretary $150,000 for fiscal year 1995 and to the Administrator of the Maritime Administration $1,850,000 for fiscal year 1996, to remain available until expended, to carry out the evaluation authorized under section 1102(a)(4) and the demonstration program authorized under section 1202(k).''.
Passed the House of Representatives March 21, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.