This Act may be cited as the ``Researchers and Farmers Freedom From Terrorism Act of 2000''.
RESEARCHERS AND FARMERS FREEDOM FROM TERRORISM.
Section 1961(1)(B) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``43 (relating to animal enterprise terrorism), section'' after ``Section''.
ENHANCEMENT OF PENALTIES FOR ANIMAL ENTERPRISE TERRORISM.
Section 43 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``intentionally'' each place it appears; and (B) by striking ``one year'' and inserting ``five years'; (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); (B) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph (2): ``(2) Explosives or arson.--Whoever in the course of a violation of subsection (a) maliciously damages or destroys, or attempts to damage or destroy, by means of fire or an explosive, any building, vehicle, or other real or personal property used by the animal enterprise shall be imprisoned for not less than 5 years and not more than 20 years, fined under this title, or both.
''; and (C) in paragraph (3), as so redesignated, by striking ``under this title and'' and all that follows through the period and inserting ``under this title, imprisoned for life or for any term of years, or sentenced to death.
''; and (3) in subsection (d)(1)-- (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (B); (B) by inserting ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (C); and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(D) the offices or headquarters of any enterprise or event described in subparagraph (A), (B).
NATIONAL ANIMAL TERRORISM AND ECOTERRORISM INCIDENT CLEARINGHOUSE.
In General.--The Director shall establish and maintain a national clearinghouse for information on incidents of crime and terrorism-- (1) committed against or directed at any animal enterprise; (2) committed against or directed at any commercial activity because of the perceived impact or effect of such commercial activity on the environment; or (3) committed against or directed at any person because of such person's perceived connection with or support of any enterprise or activity described in paragraph (1) or (2).
Clearinghouse.--The clearinghouse established under subsection (a) shall-- (1) accept, collect, and maintain information on incidents described in subsection (a) that is submitted to the clearinghouse by Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies, by law enforcement agencies of foreign countries, and by victims of such incidents; (2) collate and index such information for purposes of cross-referencing; and (3) upon request from a Federal, State, or local law enforcement agency, or from a law enforcement agency of a foreign country, provide such information to assist in the investigation of an incident described in subsection (a).
Scope of Information.--The information maintained by the clearinghouse for each incident shall, to the extent practicable, include-- (1) the date, time, and place of the incident; (2) details of the incident; (3) any available information on suspects or perpetrators of the incident; and (4) any other relevant information.
Design of Clearinghouse.--The clearinghouse shall be designed for maximum ease of use by participating law enforcement agencies.
Publicity.--The Director shall publicize the existence of the clearinghouse to law enforcement agencies by appropriate means.
Resources.--In establishing and maintaining the clearinghouse, the Director may-- (1) through the Attorney General, utilize the resources of any other department or agency of the Federal Government; and (2) accept assistance and information from private organizations or individuals.
Coordination.--The Director shall carry out the Director's responsibilities under this section in cooperation with the Director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The term ``animal enterprise'' has the same meaning as in section 43 of title 18, United States Code.
The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005 such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.