This Act may be cited as the ``Landowners Equal Treatment Act of 1999''.
Findings.--The Congress finds and declares the following: (1) The Secretary of the Interior, through the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, recently demanded and received compensation for the loss of use of federally owned property resulting from constructive use of the property for other public purposes, in an amount of approximately $26,000,000.
The Secretary of Transportation has promulgated a regulation allowing for compensation of Federal agencies for the lost use of agency property for public purposes, through a definition of the term ``constructive use'' that includes off- site impacts of Federal agency actions on federally owned property.
The Federal Government enjoys no right under the Constitution to compensation for use of Federal agency property for other public purposes, while the rights of private persons to be compensated for the taking of their property by the Government for a public purpose is a fundamental right protected by the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution.
Private property owners should be compensated in a manner that is at least as equitable as the compensation afforded to Federal agencies when their property is used or constructively used for other public purposes.
Fair and equitable treatment of private property owners will increase the willingness of private property owners to provide habitat for wildlife and plants protected under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to increase the efforts of private property owners to protect and restore habitat for wildlife, by ensuring that their constitutional and legal property rights will be honored, respected, and protected in the implementation of the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
MINIMIZING IMPACTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``minimizing impacts on private property ``Sec.
In General.--In implementing this Act, the head of an agency shall make every possible effort to avoid, minimize, or mitigate impacts on non-Federal property that result in Federal use of the property as a direct result of the action of the agency head under this Act or in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
An agency shall not take action that results in a Federal use of non-Federal property under this Act unless the agency-- ``(1) obtains the written permission of its owner; ``(2) negotiates a voluntary agreement authorizing that use; or ``(3) pays compensation in accordance with this section.
Compensation for Federal Use of Non-Federal Property.--An agency that takes action under this Act or in furtherance of the purposes of this Act that results in a Federal use of non-Federal property or any portion of non-Federal property without the written consent of the owner of the property shall compensate the owner for the fair market value of the Federal use of the property or portion.
Compensation paid shall reflect the duration of the Federal use as necessary to achieve the purposes of this Act.
Request of Owner.--An owner of non-Federal property seeking compensation under this section shall make a written request for compensation to the agency implementing the agency action resulting in the Federal use of property.
The request shall, at a minimum, identify the affected portion of the property, the nature of the Federal use of non-Federal property for which the compensation is sought, and the amount of compensation sought.
Negotiations.--The agency may negotiate with the owner to reach agreement on the amount of the compensation under this section, the terms of any agreement for payment, and the terms of any Federal use of non-Federal property for which compensation is paid.
If such an agreement is reached, the agency shall within 6 months pay the owner the amount agreed upon.
An agreement under this section may include a transfer of title or an agreement to limit the period of time of the Federal use of non-Federal property.
Choice of Remedies.--If, not later than 180 days after the written request is made, the parties have not reached an agreement on compensation, the owner of the property may elect binding arbitration or seek compensation due under this section in a civil action.
Arbitration.--The procedures that govern the arbitration shall, as nearly as practicable, be those established under title 9, United States Code, for arbitration proceedings to which that title applies.
An award made in such arbitration shall include a reasonable attorney's fee and other arbitration costs, including appraisal fees.
The agency shall promptly pay any award made to the owner.
Civil Actions.--A civil action to enforce this section may be filed under section 11(g).
An owner who prevails in a civil action against the agency pursuant to this section shall be entitled to, and the agency shall be liable for, the amount of compensation awarded plus reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs, including appraisal fees.
The court shall award interest on the amount of any compensation from the time of the Federal use of non-Federal property.
Source of Payments.--Any payment made under this section to an owner of property and any judgment obtained by an owner of property in a civil action under this section shall, notwithstanding any other provision of law, be made from the annual appropriation of the agency that took the agency action giving rise to the payment or civil action.
If the agency action resulted from a requirement imposed by another agency, then the agency making the payment or satisfying the judgment may seek partial or complete reimbursement from the appropriated funds of the other agency.
For this purpose, the head of the agency concerned may transfer or reprogram any appropriated funds available to the agency.
If insufficient funds exist for the payment or to satisfy the judgment, it shall be the duty of the head of the agency to seek the appropriation of such funds for the next fiscal year.
Availability of Appropriations.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any obligation of the United States to make any payment under this section shall be subject to the availability of appropriations.
Duty of Notice to Owners.--An agency may not take any action that is a Federal use of non-Federal property unless the agency has given 30 days notice to each owner of the property directly affected explaining their rights under this section and either obtaining their permission for the Federal use or providing the procedures for obtaining any compensation that may be available under this section.
Rules of Construction.--The following rules of construction shall apply to this Act: ``(1) Other rights preserved.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit any right to compensation that exists under the Constitution or under other laws.
Extent of federal authority.--Payment of compensation under this section (other than when property is bought by the Federal Government at the option of the owner) shall not confer any rights on the Federal Government other than the Federal use of non-Federal property agreed to so that the agency action may achieve the species conservation purposes of this Act.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: ``(1) Agency.--The term `agency' has the meaning given that term in section 551 of title 5, United States Code.
Federal use.--(A) The term `Federal use' means-- ``(i) any action under this Act to-- ``(I) permanently incorporate non-Federal property into a Federal facility; ``(II) place non-Federal property under the control of the Secretary; or ``(III) temporarily occupy non-Federal property in a manner that is adverse to the constitutional right of the owner of the property against taking of the property by the Federal Government; and ``(ii) any constructive use of non-Federal property.
In this paragraph the term `constructive use' means any action described in subparagraph (C) taken under this Act that results in-- ``(i) substantial diminution in the normal or reasonably expected uses of non-Federal property; ``(ii) a reduction in the fair market value of non- Federal property of 25 percent or more; or ``(iii) in the case of the right to receive water, any diminution in the quantity of water received or available for use.
The actions referred to in subparagraph (B) are the following: ``(i) The imposition or enforcement of a prohibition of use of non-Federal property the purpose of which is to provide or retain habitat for any species of wildlife or plant determined to be an endangered species or threatened species.
A designation of non-Federal property as critical habitat under this Act.
The denial of a permit under section 10 that results in the loss of the ability to use non- Federal property in order to provide habitat for wildlife or plants.
An agency action pursuant to a reasonable and prudent alternative suggested by the Secretary under section 7, that would cause an agency to restrict the use of non-Federal property.
The imposition by any governmental entity of a limitation or restriction on an otherwise permissible use of non-Federal property by the owner of the property, as a condition of a Federal agency providing any land, money, permit, or other benefit to the governmental entity, if imposition of the limitation or restriction by the agency directly would constitute a Federal use of non-Federal property under the other provisions of this paragraph, unless the governmental entity has some other legal basis for imposing the limitation or restriction.
Fair market value.--The term `fair market value' means the most probable price at which property or a right to use property would change hands, in a competitive and open market under all conditions requisite to fair sale, between a willing buyer and willing seller, neither being under any compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts, and without regard to the presence of any species protected under this Act.
With respect to a right to use property, fair market value shall be determined on or immediately before the exercise of the right.
Law of the state.--The term `law of the State' includes the law of a political subdivision of a State.
Non-federal property.--The term `non-Federal property' means property which is owned by a person other than any Federal entity of government.
Property.--The term `property' means land, an interest in land, the right to use or receive water, and any personal property, as defined under the law of the State.