This Act may be cited as the ``Mathematics, Science, and Special Education Teacher Recruitment Act of 2002''.
REVISION OF TEACHER LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAMS.
Guaranteed Student Loans.--Part B of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1071 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 428K the following: ``SEC.
EXPANDED LOAN FORGIVENESS FOR HIGHLY QUALIFIED TEACHERS OF MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE, AND SPECIAL EDUCATION.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to-- ``(1) expand, subject to the availability of appropriations, the eligibility of certain highly qualified teachers to qualify for loan forgiveness beyond that available under section 428J; and ``(2) provide additional incentives for highly qualified teachers of mathematics, science, and special education in high-need schools to enter and continue in the teaching profession.
Program Authorized.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to carry out a program, through the holder of the loan, of assuming the obligation to repay a qualified loan amount for a loan made under section 428 or 428H, in accordance with subsection (c), for any borrower who-- ``(A) is a highly qualified, full-time teacher of mathematics, science, or special education at a high- need school, and has been so employed for not less than 5 consecutive complete school years; ``(B) had mathematics, life or physical sciences, technology, engineering, or special education as an undergraduate academic major or minor, or has a graduate degree in any such field, as certified by the chief administrative officer of the public or nonprofit private school in which the borrower is employed; and ``(C) is not in default on a loan for which the borrower seeks forgiveness.
Selection of recipients.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to ensure fairness and equality for applicants in the selection of borrowers for loan repayment under this section, based on the amount appropriated to carry out this section.
Qualified Loan Amounts.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to repay not more than $17,500 in the aggregate of the loan obligation on 1 or more loans made under section 428 or 428H that are outstanding after the completion of the fifth complete school year of teaching described in subsection (b)(1)(A).
Treatment of consolidation loans.--A loan amount for a loan made under section 428C may be a qualified loan amount for the purposes of this subsection only to the extent that such loan amount was used to repay a Federal Direct Stafford Loan, a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, or a loan made under section 428 or 428H for a borrower who meets the requirements of subsection (b), as determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Regulations.--The Secretary is authorized to issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize any refunding of any repayment of a loan.
Additional Eligibility Provisions.-- ``(1) Continued eligibility.--A highly qualified teacher shall be eligible for loan forgiveness pursuant to subsection (b), if the teacher performs service in a school that-- ``(A) meets the definition of a high-need school under subsection (g) in any year during such service; and ``(B) in a subsequent year, fails to meet the definition of a high-need school under subsection (g).
Prevention of double benefits.-- ``(A) National service positions.--No borrower may, for the same service, receive a benefit under both this section and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12601 et seq.).
Loan forgiveness and cancellation provisions for teachers.-- ``(i) Forgiveness.--No borrower may receive a reduction of loan obligations under both this section and section 428J.
Cancellation.--No borrower may receive loan forgiveness under this section and loan cancellation under section 460 or section 460A that exceeds, in the aggregate, $17,500.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Highly qualified.--The term `highly qualified' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (Public Law 107-110).
High-need school.--The term `high-need school' has the meaning given the term in section 2304(d) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (Public Law 107-110).
Year.--The term `year', where applied to service as a teacher, means an academic year as defined by the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for the period of fiscal years 2003 through 2008.''.
Direct Student Loans.--Part D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1087a) is amended by inserting after section 460 the following: ``SEC.
EXPANDED LOAN CANCELLATION FOR HIGHLY QUALIFIED TEACHERS OF MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE, AND SPECIAL EDUCATION.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to-- ``(1) expand, subject to the availability of appropriations, the eligibility of certain highly qualified teachers to qualify for loan cancellation beyond that available under section 460; and ``(2) provide additional incentives for highly qualified teachers of mathematics, science, and special education in high-need schools to enter and continue in the teaching profession.
Program Authorized.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to cancel the obligation to repay a qualified loan amount in accordance with subsection (c) for Federal Direct Stafford Loans and Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans made under this part for any borrower who-- ``(A) is a highly qualified, full-time teacher of mathematics, science, or special education at a high- need school, and has been so employed for not less than 5 consecutive complete school years; ``(B) had mathematics, life or physical sciences, technology, engineering, or special education as an undergraduate academic major or minor, or has a graduate degree in any such field, as certified by the chief administrative officer of the public or nonprofit private school in which the borrower is employed; and ``(C) is not in default on a loan for which the borrower seeks forgiveness.
Selection of recipients.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to ensure fairness and equality for applicants in the selection of borrowers for loan cancellation under this section, based on the amount appropriated to carry out this section.
Qualified Loan Amounts.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to cancel not more than $17,500 in the aggregate of the loan obligation on 1 or more Federal Direct Stafford Loans or 1 or more Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans that are outstanding after the completion of the fifth complete school year of teaching described in subsection (b)(1)(A).
Treatment of consolidation loans.--A loan amount for a Federal Direct Consolidation Loan may be a qualified loan amount for the purposes of this subsection only to the extent that such loan amount was used to repay a Federal Direct Stafford Loan, a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, or a loan made under section 428 or 428H for a borrower who meets the requirements of subsection (b), as determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Regulations.--The Secretary is authorized to issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize any refunding of any canceled loan.
Additional Eligibility Provisions.-- ``(1) Continued eligibility.--A highly qualified teacher shall be eligible for loan forgiveness pursuant to subsection (b), if the teacher performs service in a school that-- ``(A) meets the definition of a high-need school under subsection (g) in any year during such service; and ``(B) in a subsequent year, fails to meet the definition of a high-need school under subsection (g).
Prevention of double benefits.-- ``(A) National service positions.--No borrower may, for the same service, receive a benefit under both this section and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12601 et seq.).
Loan forgiveness and cancellation provisions for teachers.-- ``(i) Cancellation.--No borrower may receive a reduction of loan obligations under both this section and section 460.
Forgiveness.--No borrower may receive loan cancellation under this section and loan forgiveness under section 428J or section 428L that exceeds, in the aggregate, $17,500.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Highly qualified.--The term `highly qualified' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (Public Law 107-110).
High-need school.--The term `high-need school' has the meaning given the term in section 2304(d) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (Public Law 107-110).
Year.--The term `year', where applied to service as a teacher, means an academic year as defined by the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for the period of fiscal years 2003 through 2008.