This Act may be cited as the ``Food Biotechnology Information Initiative Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Biotechnology has been used for many years to develop new and useful products used in a variety of industries.
Biotechnology holds the potential for benefits to mankind in a number of areas by allowing individual, well- characterized genes to be transferred from one organism to another organism and thus increasing the genetic diversity available to improve commercial plant species.
Plant varieties created with biotechnology will offer foods with better taste, more nutrition, and longer shelf life.
Farmers will be able to grow these varieties more efficiently, leading to lower costs for consumers and greater environmental protection through effective and targeted pesticide and herbicide use and a reduction in soil erosion through an increase in the use of no-till farming.
On April 5, 2000, the National Research Council released a report entitled ``Genetically Modified Pest- Protected Plants: Science and Regulation''.
The report emphasized that there is no evidence that foods produced though biotechnology are unsafe to eat, but that, given the current level of public concern over these foods, Federal agencies should conduct more research to reduce the concern about potential harm to human health and the environment.
In addition, the report recommends that the quantity, quality, and public accessibility of information on the regulation of transgenic pest-protected plant products should be expanded.
The Food and Drug Administration, the Department of Agriculture, and the Environmental Protection Agency are all involved in the regulatory process for the use of biotechnology in foods.
United States consumers are increasingly concerned that food safety issues regarding the use of biotechnology in foods are not being adequately addressed.
All foods, including those based on biotechnology, should continue to be subject to a rigorous Government regulatory process that evaluates the safety of the products to the consumer and the environment.
This process should continue to be based on scientific methods that meet state-of-the-art scientific standards.
Ensuring that the underlying scientific information and the regulatory framework for managing biotechnology is shared with consumers is imperative and should be an integral part of United States food and agriculture programs.
PROGRAM OF PUBLIC EDUCATION REGARDING USE OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN PRODUCING FOOD FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION.
In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture, in collaboration with the Secretary of Health and Human Services (acting through the Commissioner of Food and Drugs and in consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency), shall develop and implement a program to communicate with the public regarding the use of biotechnology in producing food for human consumption.
The information provided under the program shall include the following: (1) Science-based evidence on the safety of foods produced with biotechnology.
Scientific data on the human outcomes of the use of biotechnology to produce food for human consumption.
An analysis of the risks and benefits to the environment of such use, conducted in accordance with established scientific principles, and including information from the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Administration as Component of President's Food Safety Initiative.--Subsection (a) shall be carried out as a component of the Food Safety Initiative announced by the President on January 25, 1997, and carried out by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Department of Agriculture, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Of the funds available for such Initiative for fiscal years 2001 and 2002, not more than $10,000,000 may be expended each such year for carrying out subsection (a).
GRANTS FOR RESEARCH ON ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS AND BENEFITS OF USING BIOTECHNOLOGY IN FOOD PRODUCTION.
Expansion of Current Research Program.--Subsections (a) and (b) of section 1668 of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (7 United States Code 5921) are amended to read as follows: ``(a) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to-- ``(1) authorize and support research intended to identify and analyze technological developments in the area of biotechnology for the purpose of evaluating the potential positive and adverse effects of such developments on the United States farm economy and the environment and addressing public concerns about potential adverse environmental effects of using biotechnology in food production; and ``(2) authorize research to help regulators develop policies, as soon as practicable, concerning the introduction and use of biotechnology.
Grant Program.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a competitive grant program to provide the necessary funding for research designed to further the purposes specified in subsection (a).
The grant program shall be conducted through the Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service and the Agricultural Research Service''.
Types of Research.--Subsection (c) of such section is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) Research designed to evaluate the potential effect of biotechnology developments on the United States farm economy, the competitive status of United States agricultural commodities and foods in foreign markets, and consumer confidence in the healthfulness and safety of agricultural commodities and foods.''.
Priority.--Subsection (d)(1) of such section is amended by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, but giving priority to projects designed to develop improved methods for identifying potential allergens in pest-protected plants, with particular emphasis on the development of tests with human immune-system endpoints and of more reliable animal models''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Subsection (g)(2) of such section is amended by striking ``for research on biotechnology risk assessment''.
The heading of such section is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
GRANTS FOR RESEARCH ON ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS AND BENEFITS OF USING BIOTECHNOLOGY IN FOOD PRODUCTION.