SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Uniformed Services Medicare Subvention Demonstration Project Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Establishment of demonstration project.
Determination of reimbursement amounts.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiary.--The term ``medicare-eligible covered military beneficiary'' means a beneficiary under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, who-- (A) is entitled to hospital insurance benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395c et sequentes); (B) is enrolled in the supplementary medical insurance program under part B of such title (42 United States Code 1395j et sequentes); and (C) resides within a geographic area designated under section 3(b) as a location for the demonstration project.
TRICARE program.--The term ``TRICARE program'' means the managed health care program that is established by the Secretary of Defense under the authority of chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, principally section 1097 of such title, and includes the competitive selection of contractors to financially underwrite the delivery of health care services under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services.
Demonstration project.--The term ``demonstration project'' means the uniformed services medicare subvention demonstration project established under section 3.
Secretaries.--The term ``Secretaries'' means the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Health and Human Services acting jointly, except that in section 6, the term means the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Health and Human Services acting jointly.
ESTABLISHMENT OF DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
Establishment Required.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall jointly establish a demonstration project to provide the Department of Defense with reimbursement, in accordance with section 4, from the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) for health care services provided to medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries who enroll in the demonstration project and receive the health care services through the managed care option of the TRICARE program.
Location of Project.--The Secretaries shall conduct the demonstration project in not more than five geographic areas of the United States designated by the Secretaries.
Duration.--The Secretaries shall conduct the demonstration project during the three-year period beginning on January 1, 1998.
Voluntary Enrollment; Effect of Enrollment.--Enrollment of medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries in the demonstration project shall be voluntary, subject to the capacity and funding limitations specified in section 4.
In the case of a medicare-eligible covered military beneficiary who enrolls in the demonstration project, payments may not be made under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) other than for health care services provided through the demonstration project, except that the Secretaries may provide exceptions for emergencies or other situations as the Secretaries consider appropriate.
TRICARE Program Enrollment Fee Waiver.--The Secretary of Defense shall waive the enrollment fee applicable to any medicare- eligible covered military beneficiary enrolled in the managed care option of the TRICARE program for whom reimbursement may be made under section 4.
Modification of TRICARE Contracts.--In carrying out the demonstration project, the Secretary of Defense may amend existing TRICARE program contracts to incorporate provisions applicable to medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries enrolled in the demonstration project.
Cost Sharing.--The Secretary of Defense may establish cost sharing requirements for medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries who enroll in the demonstration project.
Expansion of Demonstration Project.--The Secretaries shall include in the demonstration project a provision for expanding the demonstration project to incorporate health care services provided to medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries under the fee-for- service options of the TRICARE program if, in the report submitted under section 713 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997 (Public Law 104-106; 110 United States Statutes at Large 2591), the Secretaries determined that such expansion of the demonstration project is feasible and advisable.
DETERMINATION OF REIMBURSEMENT AMOUNTS.
Reimbursement of Department of Defense.-- (1) Basis of payments.--Monthly payments to the Department of Defense under the demonstration project from the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) shall be made on the basis that payments are made under section 1876(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395mm(a)).
Amount of payments.--Subject to subsection (c), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make payments to the Department of Defense from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund (allocated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services between each trust fund based on the relative weight that each trust fund contributes to the required payment) at a per capita rate equal to 93 percent of the applicable adjusted average per capita cost for each medicare-eligible covered military beneficiary enrolled in the demonstration project in excess of the number of such beneficiaries calculated under subsection (b)(4) for the Department of Defense maintenance of health care effort.
Maintenance of Defense Health Care Effort.-- (1) Maintenance of effort required.--The Secretary of Defense shall maintain the Department of Defense health care efforts for medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries so as to avoid the imposition on the medicare program of the costs of health care that medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries would be expected to receive from the Department of Defense in the absence of the demonstration project.
Estimate of prior effort.--The Secretaries shall estimate the amount expended by the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1997 for providing health care items and services (other than pharmaceuticals provided to outpatients) to medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries.
Such amount shall be adjusted for inflation after the first year of the demonstration project, for differences between estimated and actual amounts expended, and for changes in the Department of Defense health care budget that exceed $100,000,000.
Distribution of effort.--The amount determined and adjusted under paragraph (2) shall be divided into a portion devoted to providing health care services to medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries who do not enroll in the demonstration project (which of the total amount may not exceed 70 percent in the first year, 60 percent in the second year, and 50 percent in the third year) and a portion devoted to medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries who are enrolled in the demonstration project.
Target for defense effort.--The Secretaries shall establish monthly targets for the number of medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries enrolled in the demonstration project necessary to meet the maintenance of effort portion devoted to such beneficiaries under paragraph (3).
Annual Limit on Use of Medicare Funds.--Annual medicare payments to the Department of Defense under subsection (a) for the demonstration project may not exceed $65,000,000.
Protection of Medicare Program Against Increased Costs.-- (1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to protect the medicare program against costs incurred in connection with the provision of health care services to medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries enrolled in the demonstration project that would not have been incurred by the medicare program in the absence of the reimbursement requirement under subsection (a).
Additional protections.--If the Secretaries determine that the trust funds under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) still incur excess costs as a result of the demonstration project, the Secretaries shall take such steps as may be necessary to offset those excess costs (and prevent future excess costs), including suspension or termination of the demonstration project or adjustment of the payment rate under subsection (a)(2).
Review by Comptroller General.--Not later than December 31 of each year in which the demonstration project is conducted, the Comptroller General shall determine and submit to the Secretaries and Congress a report on the extent, if any, to which the costs of the Secretary of Defense under the TRICARE program and the costs of the Secretary of Health and Human Services under the medicare program have increased as a result of the project.
Demonstration Project Adjustments Following Review.--Based on the review prepared under subsection (e), the Secretaries shall modify the demonstration project at the end of each year as provided in subsection (d)(2) to correct for any discrepancy between cost targets and actual spending under the demonstration project.
The Secretaries shall provide for an annual reconciliation of payments to ensure that actual costs incurred by the Secretary of Defense to provide health care services to medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries, exclusive of payments from the Secretary of Health and Human Services under subsection (a), met the maintenance of effort requirements under subsection (b).
Not later than 15 months after the establishment of the demonstration project, and then not later than 90 days after the end of the demonstration project, the Secretaries shall submit to Congress a report containing the following: (1) The number of medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries enrolling in the demonstration project instead of receiving health benefits through another health insurance plan (including through the medicare program).
An analysis of whether, and in what manner, easier access to the military treatment system affects the number of medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries receiving health benefits under the medicare program.
A list of the health insurance plans and programs that were the primary payers for medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries during the year prior to their enrollment in the demonstration project and the distribution of their previous enrollment in such plans and programs.
An identification of cost-shifting (if any) among medical care programs as a result of the demonstration project and a description of the nature of any such cost-shifting.
An analysis of how the demonstration project affects the overall accessibility of the military treatment system and the amount of space available for point-of-service care and a description of the unintended effects (if any) upon the normal treatment priority system.
A description of the difficulties (if any) experienced by the Department of Defense in managing the demonstration project.
A description of the effects of the demonstration project on military treatment facility readiness and training and the probable effects of the project on overall Department of Defense medical readiness and training.
A description of the effects that the demonstration project, if permanent, would be expected to have on the overall budget of the military health care system and the budgets of individual military treatment facilities.
An analysis of whether the demonstration project affects the cost to the Department of Defense of prescription drugs or the accessibility, availability, and cost of such drugs to program beneficiaries.