Waiver of Existing Grazing Permit or Lease.--A permittee or lessee may waive to the Secretary, at any time, a valid existing grazing permit or lease authorizing commercial livestock grazing on Federal lands.
Cancellation of Waived Grazing Permit or Lease.--The Secretary shall cancel grazing permits and leases waived under this section and permanently retire the associated grazing allotments from commercial livestock grazing, notwithstanding any other provision of law.
Waiver Priority.--If funds available to the Secretary to carry out this Act are insufficient to meet all of the offers submitted to the Secretary for the waiver of grazing permits and leases, the Secretary shall give priority to the waiver of grazing permits and leases that authorize commercial livestock grazing on the following Federal lands: (1) A unit of the National Wilderness Preservation System.
A unit of the National Wild and Scenic River System.
A unit of the National Park System.
A unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System.
A grazing allotment that includes a trail in the National Trails System.
A unit of the National Landscape Conservation System.
Any designated critical habitat for a species listed under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et seq.).
A designated wilderness study area.
Roadless and undeveloped areas identified in Forest Service, Roadless Area Conservation EIS, vol.
An area of critical environmental concern designated by the Bureau of Land Management.
A designated Research Natural Area.
A grazing allotment that includes a water-quality- limited stream identified by a State pursuant to section 303(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1313(d)).
A grazing allotment that includes a stream segment identified for study under section 5(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1276(a)).
A grazing allotment that includes a stream segment identified by the Secretary under section 5(d)(1) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1276(d)(1)).
A grazing allotment featuring other scientific, ecological, scenic, watershed, or recreation values, as determined by the Secretary.
Relation to Other Authority.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect the ability of a permittee or lessee to renew or transfer a grazing permit or lease as provided by law.
Relation to Eminent Domain.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize the use of eminent domain for the purpose of acquiring a grazing permit or lease.
COMPENSATION FOR WAIVED GRAZING PERMIT OR LEASE.
Compensation Required.--A permittee or lessee who waives a grazing permit or lease (other than an ephemeral grazing permit or lease) under section 4(a) shall be compensated at a rate of $175 per animal unit month based on the average of the highest three years of authorized animal unit months out of the last 10 years authorized to the permittee or lessee or the predecessors of the permittee or lessee.
In the case of an ephemeral grazing permit or lease, the permittee or lessee shall be compensated for the average over the last 10 years of the actual animal unit months of grazing use.
Grazing Fees in Arrears.--If a permittee or lessee is in arrears of Federal grazing fees, the amount of fees in arrears shall be deducted from the amount of compensation otherwise due the permittee or lessee under this section.
Waiver of Certain Permits or Leases Prohibited.--A permittee or lessee who seeks to waive a grazing permit or lease under section 4(a) for a grazing allotment for which no valid grazing permit or lease exists as of the date of the introduction of this Act shall not be eligible for compensation under this section.
Relation to Other Authority.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect the Secretary's authority to otherwise modify or terminate grazing permits or leases without compensation.
Compensation disbursed pursuant to this section shall not create a property right in grazing permits or leases.
DONATION OF GRAZING PERMIT OR LEASE.
Donation Authorized.--A permittee or lessee may at any time waive a claim to compensation in whole or in part under section 5 and donate to the Secretary a valid existing grazing permit or lease authorizing commercial livestock grazing on Federal lands.
Acceptance of Other Compensation.--A permittee or lessee may accept compensation from private or other sources in lieu of, or in addition to, receiving compensation under section 5.
Cancellation of Donated Permits and Leases.--The Secretary shall cancel grazing permits or leases donated under this section and permanently retire the associated grazing allotments from commercial livestock grazing.
EFFECT OF WAIVER OR DONATION OF GRAZING PERMIT OR LEASE.
Effect on Range Developments.--A permittee or lessee who waives a grazing permit or lease to the Secretary under section 4 and receives compensation under section 5, or donates a grazing permit or lease under section 6, shall be deemed to have waived any claim to all range developments on the associated grazing allotments, notwithstanding any other provision of law.
Securing Retired Allotments Against Unauthorized Use.--The Secretary shall ensure that grazing allotments retired from grazing under this Act are rendered reasonably secure from trespass grazing by domestic livestock.
Relation to Other Valid Existing Rights.--Nothing in this Act affects the allocation, ownership, interest, or control, in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, of any water, water right, or any other valid existing right held by the United States, Indian tribe, State, or private individual, partnership or corporation.
RETIREMENT OF GRAZING ALLOTMENTS FOR WHICH NO VALID GRAZING PERMIT OR LEASE EXISTS.
The Secretary shall not issue grazing permits or leases for grazing allotments for which no valid permit or lease exists as of the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall permanently retire the grazing allotments from commercial livestock grazing, notwithstanding any other provision of law.
EFFECT OF NONUSE OR REDUCED USE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a permittee or lessee may opt not to graze a grazing allotment or to graze the grazing allotment at less than the minimum permitted level and still retain the grazing permit or lease for the remainder of its term.
Such nonuse shall be considered to be in compliance with the terms of the grazing permit or lease when it becomes due for renewal.
Payments Required.--For each grazing permit or lease waived under section 4 (other than an ephemeral grazing permit or lease), the Secretary shall pay to the county in which the associated allotment is located $10 per animal unit month based on the average of the highest three years of authorized animal unit months out of the last 10 years authorized to the permittee or lessee or the predecessors of the permittee or lessee.
In the case of an ephemeral grazing permit or lease, the Secretary shall pay to the county in which the associated allotment is located $10 per animal unit month based on the average over the last 10 years of the actual animal unit months of grazing use.
Proportional Allocation Among Counties.--In cases where an allotment is located in more than one county, the payment under subsection (a) to each county in which the allotment is located shall be proportional to the allotment's land area located in that county.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretaries $100,000,000, to remain available until expended, to provide compensation to permittees and lessees under section 5 and to make transition payments to counties under section 10.
None of the funds appropriated pursuant to this section shall be used by any Federal agency for administrative costs related to the purposes of this Act.