SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Food Act of 1998''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Food safety research, education, and extension priority.
Food Safety Rapid Response Team.
Emphasis on food safety research in Fund for Rural America.
National Food Safety Research, Education, and Extension Program.
Development and commercialization of food safety technology.
Congress finds the following: (1) While the American food supply is among the safest in the world, millions of Americans are stricken by illness every year caused by food they consume.
An effective food safety strategy must be developed that encompasses research, educational, and response efforts along the entire farm-to-table spectrum and considers research efforts on emerging food borne illness and related issues at the Department of Agriculture and other Federal agencies.
FOOD SAFETY RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND EXTENSION PRIORITY.
Food Safety Priority.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish the identification and resolution of food safety issues as a priority for the research, education, and extension activities of the Department of Agriculture.
Multidisciplinary and Integrated Approach.--To the extent practicable, the Secretary of Agriculture shall conduct food safety research, education, and extension activities on a multidisciplinary and integrated basis.
Consumer Education.--The Secretary of Agriculture is encouraged to use the authority under section 3(g) of the Act of May 8, 1914 (commonly known as the Smith-Lever Act) (7 United States Code 343(g)) to enter into cooperative agreements to carry out food safety consumer education programs.
Input.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary of Agriculture shall encourage communication among Federal agencies, educational institutions, and the private sector.
FOOD SAFETY RAPID RESPONSE TEAM.
Designation and Composition.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall designate a Food Safety Rapid Response Team within the Department of Agriculture, to enable the Department to rapidly respond to food safety emergencies.
The Secretary shall select the members of the Food Safety Rapid Response Team from personnel of the Department with relevant subject matter expertise.
The Food Safety Rapid Response Team shall be under the direction of a coordinating officer, who is appointed by the Secretary and reports directly to the Secretary.
Duties.--The Food Safety Rapid Response Team shall review and evaluate the response of the Department of Agriculture to food-borne illness outbreaks and make recommendations to the Secretary of Agriculture regarding-- (1) the more effective involvement of other Federal agencies, State and local agencies, land-grant colleges and universities, and other research institutions in the response to a food safety emergency; (2) the rapid dissemination of accurate information to the public regarding a food safety emergency; and (3) other improvements to the current Federal system for response to food safety emergencies.
Food Safety Action Plan.-- (1) Preparation.--The Food Safety Rapid Response Team shall develop a food safety action plan, which shall delineate, within the Department of Agriculture, the responsibility and mission of each office and agency of the Department during a food safety emergency and facilitate the cooperation of the Department and the coordination of the Department response with other Federal agencies, States, local governments, colleges and universities, industry, and public interest groups.
Submission.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit the food safety action plan required by this section to Congress.
Executive Branch Cooperation and Coordination.--The Secretary of Agriculture is encouraged to enter into memoranda of understanding with the heads of other Federal agencies that conduct similar programs or activities regarding food safety, for the purpose of ensuring consistent, accurate, and coordinated dissemination throughout the executive branch of information and services in the event of a food safety emergency.
EMPHASIS ON FOOD SAFETY RESEARCH IN FUND FOR RURAL AMERICA.
Section 793(c)(2)(A) of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (7 United States Code 2204f) is amended-- (1) in clause (vii), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a semicolon; (2) in clause (viii), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(ix) increase food safety from farm-to- consumer.''
NATIONAL FOOD SAFETY RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND EXTENSION PROGRAM.
Definition of Food and Agricultural Sciences.--Section 1404(8)(B) the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 3103(8)(B)) is amended by inserting ``, including food safety'' after ``agricultural products''.
Food Safety Program.--The National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 is amended by adding after section 1425 (7 United States Code 3175) the following new section: ``SEC.
NATIONAL FOOD SAFETY RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND EXTENSION PROGRAM.
Program Required.--The Secretary shall establish the National Food Safety Research, Education, and Extension Program to reduce the incidence of food borne illness to the greatest extent possible through research, education, and extension activities.
Elements of Program.--The Secretary shall use the National Food Safety Research, Education, and Extension Program-- ``(1) to conduct and coordinate research concerning food borne threats to human health and concerning mechanisms to identify, reduce, eliminate, and prevent food borne threats from entering into, and existing in, the food supply, including research to develop rapid, cost effective tests, for the presence of food pathogens (such as Salmonella, Campylobacter, E. coli O157:H7, Cryptosporidium, Hepatitis A and Norwalk viruses, Pfisteria and other marine toxins, Cyclospora, and Toxoplasma), to enhance understanding of how such pathogens become resistant to preservation technologies, and to develop technologies for prevention and control of such pathogens.
to enhance surveillance by providing data to anticipate and prevent future outbreaks of food borne illness by focusing on production, processing, handling, transportation, and storage practices, proper use of veterinary drugs and feed, and management of animal wastes.
to fill current knowledge gaps in food safety issues, including the development of better data and modeling techniques to improve risk assessments; ``(4) to identify ways to improve the dissemination of information regarding food safety strategies to all participants in the farm-to-table spectrum, including agricultural producers, processors, transporters, handlers, and consumers, so as to reduce the incidence of food borne illness; ``(5) to coordinate the activities of the Federal Government and land-grant colleges and universities regarding research on food safety issues and the dissemination of such information; and ``(6) to cooperate with State governments and the private sector to improve and enhance the safety of food.
Contract, Grants, Cooperative Agreements.-- ``(1) In general.--With funds available to carry out this section, the Secretary may enter into contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements with individuals and organizations in accordance with section 1472.
Competitive basis.--Grants made under this subsection shall be made on a competitive basis.
Administration.-- ``(1) Costs.--The Secretary may retain for administration up to 4 percent of amounts appropriated for the National Food Safety Research, Education, and Extension Program authorized by this section, notwithstanding the availability of any appropriation for administrative expenses of the National Food Safety Research, Education, and Extension Program.
Rules and regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe rules and regulations necessary for the administration of this section.
Consultation with the national academy of sciences.-- The Secretary may use funds made available under this section to consult with the National Academy of Sciences regarding the administration of the National Food Safety Research, Education, and Extension Program without regard to the requirements of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
and title XVIII of the Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2281 et seq.).''.
DEVELOPMENT AND COMMERCIALIZATION OF FOOD SAFETY TECHNOLOGY.
Cooperative Agreements for Food Safety Technology.-- Notwithstanding chapter 63 of title 31, United States Code, the Secretary of Agriculture may enter into cooperative agreements with a person or entity otherwise eligible to enter into such an agreement under section 1472 of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 3318) under which the facilities and technical expertise of the Agriculture Research Service may be made available to the person or entity for the purpose of developing and commercializing new technologies and products for food safety to the point of practical application.
Sale of New Technologies and Products.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall authorize the partners in a cooperative agreement under this section to sell new technologies and products for food safety produced under the agreement for the purpose of determining the market potential for the new technologies or products.
Source of Funds.--To carry out this section, the Secretary of Agriculture may use funds appropriated to carry out this section and funds otherwise available for such cooperative agreements that may be entered into under section 12 of the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1986 (15 United States Code 3710a).