This Act may be cited as the ``Community Protection Act of 1999''.
EXEMPTION OF QUALIFIED LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS FROM STATE LAWS PROHIBITING THE CARRYING OF CONCEALED FIREARMS.
In General.--Chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 926A the following: ``Sec.
Carrying of concealed firearms by qualified law enforcement officers ``(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of the law of any State or any political subdivision thereof, an individual who is a qualified law enforcement officer and who is carrying the identification required by subsection (d) may carry a concealed firearm that has been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce, subject to subsection (b).
This section shall not be construed to supersede or limit the laws of any State that-- ``(1) permit private persons or entities to prohibit or restrict the possession of concealed firearms on their property; or ``(2) prohibit or restrict the possession of firearms on any State or local government property, installation, building, base, or park.
As used in this section, the term `qualified law enforcement officer' means an employee of a governmental agency who-- ``(1) is authorized by law to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person for, any violation of law, and has statutory powers of arrest; ``(2) is authorized by the agency to carry a firearm at all times; ``(3) is not the subject of any disciplinary action by the agency; and ``(4) meets standards, if any, established by the agency which require the employee to regularly qualify in the use of a firearm.
The identification required by this subsection is the official badge and photographic identification issued by the governmental agency for which the individual is employed as a law enforcement officer.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 926A the following: ``926B.
Carrying of concealed firearms by qualified law enforcement officers.''.
EXEMPTION OF QUALIFIED RETIRED LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS FROM STATE LAWS PROHIBITING THE CARRYING OF CONCEALED FIREARMS.
In General.--Chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, is further amended by inserting after section 926B the following: ``Sec.
Carrying of concealed firearms by qualified retired law enforcement officers ``(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of the law of any State or any political subdivision thereof, an individual who is a qualified retired law enforcement officer and who is carrying the identification required by subsection (d) may carry a concealed firearm that has been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce, subject to subsection (b).
This section shall not be construed to supersede or limit the laws of any State that-- ``(1) permit private persons or entities to prohibit or restrict the possession of concealed firearms on their property; or ``(2) prohibit or restrict the possession of firearms on any State or local government property, installation, building, base, or park.
As used in this section, the term `qualified retired law enforcement officer' means an individual who-- ``(1) retired in good standing from service with a public agency as a law enforcement officer, other than for reasons of mental instability; ``(2) before such retirement, was authorized by law to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person for, any violation of law, and had statutory powers of arrest; ``(3)(A) before such retirement, was regularly employed as a law enforcement officer for an aggregate of 5 years or more; or ``(B) retired from service with such agency, after completing any applicable probationary period of such service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by such agency; ``(4) has a nonforfeitable right to benefits under the retirement plan of the agency; ``(5) during the most recent 12-month period or, if the agency requires active duty officers to do so with lesser frequency than every 12 months, during such most recent period as the agency requires with respect to active duty officers, has completed, at the expense of the individual, a program approved by the State for training or qualification in the use of firearms; and ``(6) is not prohibited by Federal law from receiving a firearm.
The identification required by this subsection is photographic identification issued by the State in which the agency for which the individual was employed as a law enforcement officer is located.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such chapter is further amended by inserting after the item relating to section 926B the following: ``926C.
Carrying of concealed firearms by qualified retired law enforcement officers.