DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information and returns) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH FUND ``Sec.
Designation to Biomedical Research Fund.
DESIGNATION TO BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH FUND.
In General.--Every individual (other than a nonresident alien) whose adjusted income tax liability for the taxable year is $5 or more may designate that $5 shall be paid over to the Biomedical Research Fund in accordance with the provisions of section 9512.
In the case of a joint return of husband and wife having an adjusted income tax liability of $10 or more, each spouse may designate that $5 shall be paid to the fund.
Adjusted Income Tax Liability.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `adjusted income tax liability' means, for any individual for any taxable year, the excess (if any) of-- ``(1) the income tax liability (as defined in section 6096(b)) of the individual for the taxable year, over ``(2) any amount designated by the individual (and, in the case of a joint return, any amount designated by the individual's spouse) under section 6096(a) for such taxable year.
Manner and Time of Designation.-- ``(1) In general.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year-- ``(A) at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, or ``(B) at any other time (after the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year) specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that, if such designation is made at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Designation for a particular disease.--The Secretary shall provide a means by which taxpayers may indicate, at the time of a designation under subsection (a), the disease with respect to which the designated amount should be applied to biomedical research.''
Biomedical Research Fund.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code (relating to establishment of trust funds) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Creation of Trust Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Biomedical Research Fund'.
Accounts in trust fund.--The Biomedical Research Fund shall consist of a separate account for each disease with respect to which an amount is designated under section 6098, and one account (to be known as the `Miscellaneous Account') for amounts designated under section 6098 for which no disease is indicated.
Each such account shall consist of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such account as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to each account within the Biomedical Research Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6098 for the disease with respect to which such account is established (or, in the case of the Miscellaneous Account, the amounts designated under section 6098 for which no disease is indicated).
Expenditures.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall distribute, as provided in appropriation Acts, amounts in the accounts of the Biomedical Research Fund for purposes of qualified research, to the extent that such amounts exceed the aggregate of all Federal administrative costs attributable to the implementation of section 6098, subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and (with respect to such fund) section 9602.
Prohibition of Use To Replace Appropriations.--Amounts expended under subsection (c) shall be used, with respect to qualified research regarding any disease, to supplement, not supplant, existing funding for biomedical research with respect to such disease.
No expenditure shall be made under subsection (c) from any account during any fiscal year for which the annual amount appropriated for the National Institutes of Health for biomedical research regarding the disease with respect to which the account is established is less than the amount so appropriated for the prior fiscal year.
Qualified Research.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified research' means, with respect to any account of the Biomedical Research Fund, biomedical research conducted by the National Institutes of Health regarding the disease with respect to which such account is established (or, in the case of the Miscellaneous Account, regarding any disease).''
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of income tax payments to Biomedical Research Fund.''
The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.