This Act may be cited as the ``Hibben Center for Archaeological Research Act of 2002''.
Congress finds that-- (1) when the Chaco Culture National Historical Park was established in 1907 as the Chaco Canyon National Monument, the University of New Mexico owned a significant portion of the land located within the boundaries of the Park; (2) during the period from the 1920's to 1947, the University of New Mexico conducted archaeological research in the Chaco Culture National Historical Park; (3) in 1949, the University of New Mexico-- (A) conveyed to the United States all right, title, and interest of the University in and to the land in the Park; and (B) entered into a memorandum of agreement with the National Park Service establishing a research partnership with the Park; (4) since 1971, the Chaco Culture National Historical Park, through memoranda of understanding and cooperative agreements with the University of New Mexico, has maintained a research museum collection and archive at the University; (5) both the Park and the University have large, significant archaeological research collections stored at the University in multiple, inadequate, inaccessible, and cramped repositories; and (6) insufficient storage at the University makes research on and management, preservation, and conservation of the archaeological research collections difficult.
In this Act: (1) Hibben center.--The term ``Hibben Center'' means the Hibben Center for Archaeological Research to be constructed at the University under section 4(a).
Park.--The term ``Park'' means the Chaco Culture National Historical Park in the State of New Mexico.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Tenant improvement.--The term ``tenant improvement'' includes-- (A) finishing the interior portion of the Hibben Center leased by the National Park Service under section 4(c)(1); and (B) installing in that portion of the Hibben Center-- (i) permanent fixtures; and (ii) portable storage units and other removable objects.
University.--The term ``University'' means the University of New Mexico.
HIBBEN CENTER FOR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH.
Establishment.--The Secretary may, in cooperation with the University, construct and occupy a portion of the Hibben Center for Archaeological Research at the University.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may provide to the University a grant to pay the Federal share of the construction and related costs for the Hibben Center under paragraph (2).
Federal share.--The Federal share of the construction and related costs for the Hibben Center shall be 37 percent.
Limitation.--Amounts provided under paragraph (1) shall not be used to pay any costs to design, construct, and furnish the tenant improvements under subsection (c)(2).
Lease.-- (1) In general.--Before funds made available under section 5 may be expended for construction costs under subsection (b)(1) or for the costs for tenant improvements under paragraph (2), the University shall offer to enter into a long-term lease with the United States that-- (A) provides to the National Park Service space in the Hibben Center for storage, research, and offices; and (B) is acceptable to the Secretary.
Tenant improvements.--The Secretary may design, construct, and furnish tenant improvements for, and pay any moving costs relating to, the portion of the Hibben Center leased to the National Park Service under paragraph (1).
Cooperative Agreements.--To encourage collaborative management of the Chacoan archaeological objects associated with northwestern New Mexico, the Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the University, other units of the National Park System, other Federal agencies, and Indian tribes for-- (1) the curation of and conduct of research on artifacts in the museum collection described in section 2(4); and (2) the development, use, management, and operation of the portion of the Hibben Center leased to the National Park Service under subsection (c)(1).
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated-- (1) to pay the Federal share of the construction costs under section 4(b), $1,574,000; and (2) to pay the costs of carrying out section 4(c)(2), $2,198,000.
Availability.--Amounts made available under subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.
Reversion.--If the lease described in section 4(c)(1) is not executed by the date that is 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, any amounts made available under subsection (a) shall revert to the Treasury of the United States.