This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Reform Assessment Act of 1994''.
IDENTIFYING STRATEGIES FOR ASSESSING IMPACT OF HEALTH CARE REFORM.
In General.--Within 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall seek to enter into an agreement with the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences (or another nonprofit, nongovernmental organization or consortium of institutions) to study and report on the impact of health care reform legislation at the national, regional, and State levels.
Purpose.--The purpose of the study under this section is to develop a detailed framework, using a prospective, longitudinal study design, to assess the impact of health care reforms on national goals, such as the goals of assuring security of coverage, promoting simplicity of administration, achieving health care savings, encouraging individual responsibility, improving quality of care, promoting choice, and improving health status.
Report.--The Secretary shall require the organization conducting the study under this section to submit to the Secretary and the Congress a report within 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The report shall include recommendations regarding each of the following: (1) What are appropriate indicators of national progress towards meeting the national goals referred to in subsection (b).
What are appropriate study designs that would assess the impact of health care reform on these indicators and that could take into account different approaches to health care reform that may be used in different States and regions (or by different Federal agencies), as well as by foreign countries.
What are data elements and public and private sources of information for measuring such indicators.
With respect to such elements: (A) What special requirements or authorities are needed to permit access to confidential data (and to assure continued confidentiality of such data) needed to measure such indicators.
What methods for obtaining these data elements that are not currently in use would be useful.
What are the approaches to establishing a core set of primary data as part of a national health care reform collection effort that could overlap with the evaluation of health care reform.
What should be the relationship between Federal, State, and local agencies to gather, report, and share information on health care reform and its assessment.
What are the nature, scope, and frequency of reports that would best serve the Secretary and the Congress for evaluating health reform efforts.
What are the overall cost estimates associated with obtaining and evaluating this information on the impact of health care reform.
What are the ways that health care reform assessment findings could be used by various groups, such as patients, providers, insurers, employers, taxpayers, and various government agencies.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 to carry out the study under this section.
DEVELOPING BASELINE FOR EVALUATING HEALTH CARE REFORM.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall seek to enter into an agreement with the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences (or another nonprofit, nongovernmental organization or consortium of institutions) to develop and report on baseline information to measure access to, and quality and cost of, health care and the individual and public health status of permanent residents of the United States.
Purpose.--The purpose of the study under this section is to establish a benchmark for assessing the short-term and long-term impact of health care reform efforts at the national, regional, and State level.
Relation to Other Study.-- (1) Design.--The baseline information to be collected under this section shall be based, to the extent reasonable, on the study designs, data sources, and indicators likely to be included in recommendations made under section 2(c).
Coordination.--The Secretary shall seek, to the extent reasonable, to enter into an agreement under this section with the same organization that is conducting the study under section 2, in order to facilitate the maximum cooperation and coordination in the performance of both studies.
Report.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall require the organization conducting the study under this section to submit to the Secretary and the Congress a report within 30 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The report shall include information and assessments regarding the following (as of the date of the enactment of this Act or prior to implementation of health care reform): (A) The levels of access to health care services.
The levels of quality of care of those services.
The cost of the care provided, based on measures such as cost of services, the cost of treating various conditions, and the average and marginal cost of maintaining and improving health.
The health status of the public, as a whole and by population subgroups.
Basis.--The information described in paragraph (1) shall be reported in a manner that permits separate evaluation of-- (A) health care services in the public and private sectors, and (B) different types of services, including institutional services, ambulatory services, acute services, long-term care services, mental health services, and population-based services in the public and private sectors.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 to carry out the study under this section.