This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Enhancement Act of 1995''.
URBAN UNIVERSITY BUSINESS INITIATIVE GRANTS.
Urban University Business Initiative Grants.-- (1) Authorization.--The Administrator of the Small Business Administration (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Administrator'') may make grants to eligible institutions in accordance with this section.
Application.-- (A) In general.--An eligible institution seeking assistance under this section shall submit to the Administrator an application at such time, in such form, and containing or accompanied by such information and assurances as the Administrator may require by regulation.
Contents.--Except as provided in subparagraph (C), each application submitted pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall include-- (i) a description of the activities and services for which assistance is sought; (ii) evidence of coordination with any small business development center in existence in the community; and (iii) documentation of the formation of a consortium that includes, in addition to eligible institutions, one or more of the following entities: (I) A nonprofit organization.
A business or other employer.
Waiver.--The Administrator may waive the requirements of subparagraph (B)(iii) for any applicant who can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the applicant has devised an integrated and coordinated plan that otherwise meets the requirements of this section.
Selection procedures.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall by regulation develop a formal procedure for the submission of applications under this section and shall publish in the Federal Register an announcement of that procedure and the availability of funds under this section.
Authorized Activities.-- (1) In general.--Funds provided under this section shall be used to design and implement programs to assist businesses, especially those in lower income urban communities, to become more productive and able to compete in the global marketplace.
Specific authorized activities.--Activities conducted with funds made available under this section may include research on, or planning and implementation of technology transfer, technical training, the delivery of services, or technical assistance in-- (A) business development; (B) business creation; (C) business expansion; and (D) human resource management.
Peer Review Panel.-- (1) Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the Administrator publishes the announcement in the Federal Register in accordance with subsection (a)(3), the Administrator shall appoint a peer review panel (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``panel'').
Membership.--In appointing the panel under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall consult with officials of other Federal agencies and with non-Federal organizations in order to ensure that-- (A) the panel membership is geographically balanced; and (B) the panel is composed of representatives from public and private institutions of higher education, labor, business, and nonprofit organizations having expertise in business development in lower income urban communities.
Duties.--The panel shall-- (A) review applications submitted under this section; and (B) make recommendations to the Administrator concerning the selection of grant recipients.
Disbursement of Funds.-- (1) Limitation on amount.--The Administrator shall not provide assistance under this section to any recipient in an amount that exceeds $400,000 during any 1-year period.
Equitable geographic distribution.--The Administrator shall award grants under this section in a manner that achieves equitable geographic distribution of such grants.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Lower income urban community.--The term ``lower income urban community'' means an urban area in which the percent of residents living below the Federal poverty level is not less than 115 percent of the statewide average.
Urban area.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term ``urban area'' means a primary metropolitan statistical area of the Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce.
Exception.--With respect to a State that does not contain an urban area, as defined in subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall designate 1 area in the State as an urban area for purposes of this section.
Eligible institution.-- (A) Institution or consortium.--The term ``eligible institution'' means a nonprofit institution of higher education that meets the requirements of subparagraph (b), or a consortium of such institutions, any 1 of which meets the requirements of subparagraph (B).
Requirements.--An institution meets the requirements of this subparagraph if the institution-- (i) is located in an urban area; (ii) draws a substantial portion of its undergraduate students from the urban area in which such institution is located, or from contiguous areas; (iii) carries out programs to make postsecondary educational opportunities more accessible to residents of such urban area, or contiguous areas; (iv) has the present capacity to provide resources responsive to the needs and priorities of such urban area and contiguous areas; (v) offers a range of professional, technical, or graduate programs sufficient to sustain the capacity of such institution to provided such resources; (vi) has demonstrated and sustained a sense of responsibility to such urban area and contiguous areas and the people of such areas; and (vii) has a school of business accredited by the American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business (or similar organization) with faculty experienced in conducting research on issues of immediate concern to small and emerging businesses.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section-- (1) $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1996; and (2) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000.