This Act may be cited as the ``James Guelff Body Armor Act of 1999''.
Congress finds that-- (1) nationally, police officers and ordinary citizens are facing increased danger as criminals use more deadly weaponry, body armor, and other sophisticated assault gear; (2) crime at the local level is exacerbated by the interstate movement of body armor and other assault gear; (3) there is a traffic in body armor moving in or otherwise affecting interstate commerce, and existing Federal controls over such traffic do not adequately enable the States to control this traffic within their own borders through the exercise of their police power; (4) recent incidents, such as the murder of San Francisco Police Officer James Guelff by an assailant wearing 2 layers of body armor and a 1997 bank shoot out in north Hollywood, California, between police and 2 heavily armed suspects outfitted in body armor, demonstrate the serious threat to community safety posed by criminals who wear body armor during the commission of a violent crime; (5) of the approximately 1,200 officers killed in the line of duty since 1980, more than 30 percent could have been saved by body armor, and the risk of dying from gunfire is 14 times higher for an officer without a bulletproof vest; (6) the Department of Justice has estimated that 25 percent of State and local police are not issued body armor; (7) the Federal Government is well-equipped to grant local police departments access to body armor that is no longer needed by Federal agencies; and (8) Congress has the power, under the interstate commerce clause and other provisions of the Constitution of the United States, to enact legislation to regulate interstate commerce that affects the integrity and safety of our communities.
In this Act: (1) Body armor.--The term ``body armor'' means any product sold or offered for sale, in interstate or foreign commerce, as personal protective body covering intended to protect against gunfire, regardless of whether the product is to be worn alone or is sold as a complement to another product or garment.
Law enforcement agency.--The term ``law enforcement agency'' means an agency of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State, authorized by law or by a Government agency to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of any violation of criminal law.
Law enforcement officer.--The term ``law enforcement officer'' means any officer, agent, or employee of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State, authorized by law or by a Government agency to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of any violation of criminal law.
AMENDMENT OF SENTENCING GUIDELINES WITH RESPECT TO BODY ARMOR.
Sentencing Enhancement.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend the Federal sentencing guidelines to provide an appropriate sentencing enhancement, increasing the offense level not less than 2 levels, for any offense in which the defendant used body armor.
Applicability.--No amendment made to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines pursuant to this section shall apply if the Federal offense in which the body armor is used constitutes a violation of, attempted violation of, or conspiracy to violate the civil rights of any person by a law enforcement officer acting under color of the authority of such law enforcement officer.
PROHIBITION OF PURCHASE, USE, OR POSSESSION OF BODY ARMOR BY VIOLENT FELONS.
Definition of Body Armor.--Section 921 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(35) The term `body armor' means any product sold or offered for sale, in interstate or foreign commerce, as personal protective body covering intended to protect against gunfire, regardless of whether the product is to be worn alone or is sold as a complement to another product or garment.''.
Prohibition.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Prohibition on purchase, ownership, or possession of body armor by violent felons ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for a person to purchase, own, or possess body armor, if that person has been convicted of a felony that is-- ``(1) a crime of violence (as defined in section 16); or ``(2) an offense under State law that would constitute a crime of violence if it occurred within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States.
Exception.-- ``(1) Application.--A person who is subject to the prohibition of subsection (a) whose employment, livelihood, or safety is dependent on the ability to possess and use body armor, may file a petition with the Secretary for an exception to the prohibition of subsection (a).
Action by secretary.--Upon receipt of a petition under paragraph (1), the Secretary may reduce or eliminate the prohibition of subsection (a), impose conditions on reduction or elimination of the prohibition, or otherwise grant relief from the prohibition, as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, based on a determination that the petitioner-- ``(A) is likely to use body armor in a safe and lawful manner; and ``(B) has a reasonable need for such protection under the circumstances.
Factors for consideration.--In making a determination under paragraph (2) with respect to a petitioner, the Secretary shall consider-- ``(A) any continued employment of the petitioner; ``(B) the interests of justice; ``(C) any relevant evidence; and ``(D) the totality of the circumstances.
Certified copy of permission.--The Secretary shall require, as a condition of granting any exception to a petitioner under this subsection, that the petitioner agree to maintain on his or her person a certified copy of the Secretary's permission to possess and use body armor, including any conditions or limitations.
Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection may be construed to-- ``(A) require the Secretary to grant relief to any particular petitioner; or ``(B) imply that any relief granted by the Secretary under this subsection relieves any other person from any liability that may otherwise be imposed.
Immunity From Liability.-- ``(1) In general.--An officer or employee of a law enforcement agency who enforces the prohibition specified in subsection (a) against a person who has been granted relief pursuant to subsection (b), shall be immune from any liability for false arrest arising from the enforcement of this section unless the person has in his or her possession a certified copy of the permission granting the person relief from the prohibition, as required by subsection (b)(4).
Rule of construction.--The immunity from liability described in paragraph (1) shall not relieve any person or entity from any other liability that may otherwise be imposed.''.
Clerical amendment.--The analysis for chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``931.
Prohibition on purchase, ownership, or possession of body armor by violent felons.''.
Penalties.--Section 924(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(7) Whoever knowingly violates section 931 shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 3 years, or both.''.
DONATION OF FEDERAL SURPLUS BODY ARMOR TO STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``Federal agency'' and ``surplus property'' have the meanings given such terms under section 3 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 472).
Donation of Body Armor.--Notwithstanding section 203 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 484), the head of a Federal agency may donate body armor directly to any State or local law enforcement agency, if such body armor is-- (1) in serviceable condition; and (2) surplus property.
Notice to Administrator.--The head of a Federal agency who donates body armor under this section shall submit to the Administrator of General Services a written notice identifying the amount of body armor donated and each State or local law enforcement agency that received the body armor.
Donation by Certain Officers.-- (1) Department of justice.--In the administration of this section with respect to the Department of Justice, in addition to any other officer of the Department of Justice designated by the Attorney General, the following officers may act as the head of a Federal agency: (A) The Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration.
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
The Director of the United States Marshals Service.
Department of the treasury.--In the administration of this section with respect to the Department of the Treasury, in addition to any other officer of the Department of the Treasury designated by the Secretary of the Treasury, the following officers may act as the head of a Federal agency: (A) The Director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms.
The Commissioner of Customs.
The Director of the United States Secret Service.