This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on the Advancement of Women in the Science and Engineering Work Forces Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) despite a consistently high presence of women in the professional and total work forces of the United States, women continue to be underrepresented in the science and engineering work forces; (2) women scientists and engineers have higher rates of unemployment and underemployment than their male counterparts, although the number of women receiving degrees in scientific and engineering disciplines has increased since 1981; (3) artificial barriers exist in the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women in the science and engineering work forces; (4) academia, industry, and government are increasingly aware of the necessity of and the advantages derived from diverse science and engineering work forces; (5) initiatives of the White House Task Force on Women, Minorities, and the Handicapped in Science and Technology and of the Federal Coordinating Council on Science, Engineering, and Technology have been instrumental in raising public awareness of-- (A) the underrepresentation of women in the science and engineering work forces; and (B) the desirability of eliminating artificial barriers to the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women in such work forces; and (6) the establishment of a commission to examine issues raised by these initiatives would help to-- (A) focus greater attention on the importance of eliminating artificial barriers to the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women in the science and engineering work forces and in all employment sectors of the United States; (B) promote work force diversity; and (C) encourage the replication of successful recruitment and retention programs by universities, corporations, and Federal agencies having difficulties in employing women scientists and engineers.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on the Advancement of Women in the Science and Engineering Work Forces'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall conduct a study to-- (1) identify the number of women in the United States in the science and engineering work forces, and the specific types of occupations in such workforces in which women scientists and engineers are underrepresented; (2) examine the preparedness of women to-- (A) pursue careers in the science and engineering work forces; and (B) advance to positions of greater responsibility within academia, industry, and government; (3) describe the practices and policies of employers and labor unions relating to the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women scientists and engineers; (4) identify the opportunities for, and artificial barriers to, the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women scientists and engineers in academia, industry, and government; (5) describe the employment situations in which the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women scientists and engineers are comparable to their male counterparts, and identify those situations in which such comparability does not exist; (6) compile a synthesis of available research on practices, policies, and programs that have successfully led to the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women in the science and engineering work forces, including training programs, rotational assignments, developmental programs, reward programs, employee benefit structures, and family leave policies; (7) examine such other issues and information relating to the advancement of women in the science and engineering work forces as determined by the Commission to be appropriate; and (8) issue recommendations that government (including Congress and appropriate Federal agencies), academia, and private industry can follow to assist in the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women in science and engineering.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 18 members as follows: (1) 5 members appointed by the President.
3 members appointed jointly by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate.
1 member appointed by the majority leader of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
1 member appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
2 Members of the House of Representatives, appointed jointly by the majority leader and the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
2 Senators appointed jointly by the majority leader and the minority leader of the Senate.
The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy.
Additional Qualifications.--Initial appointments shall be made under subsection (a) not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
In making each appointment under subsection (a), the appointing authority shall consider (among other factors) whether the individual-- (1) is a member of an organization representing women and minorities; (2) holds executive management or senior decision-making positions in any business entity; and (3) possesses academic expertise or other recognized abilities relating to employment and employment discrimination issues.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than \1/2\ of the members may be of the same political party.
Continuation of Membership.--If a member was appointed to the Commission because the member was an officer or employee of any government and later ceases to be such an officer or employee, that member may continue as a member of the Commission for not longer than the 60-day period beginning on the date the member ceases to be such an officer or employee.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each Member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall receive compensation at the daily equivalent of the maximum rate of pay payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance of duties for the Commission, including attendance at meetings and conferences of the Commission, and travel to conduct the duties of the Commission.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Chairperson.--The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy shall serve as the Chairperson of the Commission.
Meetings.-- (1) Meetings prior to completion of report.--The Commission shall meet not fewer than 5 times in connection with and pending the completion of the reports described in subsections (a) and (b) of section 8.
The Commission shall hold additional meetings for such purpose if the Chairperson or a majority of the members of the Commission requests the additional meetings in writing.
Meetings after completion of report.--The Commission shall meet at least once, but not more than twice after the completion of the report described in section 8(b), in connection with and pending completion of the report required by section 8(c).
Employment Status.--A member of the Commission, who is not otherwise an officer or employee of the Federal Government, shall not be deemed to be an employee of the Federal Government except for the purposes of-- (1) the tort claims provisions of chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code; and (2) subchapter I of chapter 81 of title 5, United States Code, relating to compensation for work injuries.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Chairperson.
The Director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals not to exceed the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Contract Authority.--To the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for the purpose of conducting research or surveys necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Status Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which the initial appointments under section 5(a) are completed, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a written report describing the current activities and findings of the Commission and the direction of the Commission.
Recommendation Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date on which the initial appointments under section 5(a) are completed, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a written report containing-- (1) the findings and conclusions of the Commission resulting from the study conducted under section 4; and (2) recommendations, including specific proposed legislation and administrative action, based on the findings and conclusions referred to in paragraph (1).
Follow-Up Report.--After submission of the report required by subsection (b) and before the termination of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the President and to the Congress a written report-- (1) identifying which of the recommendations included in such report have been implemented; and (2) containing any additional information the Commission considers to be appropriate.
CONSTRUCTION; USE OF INFORMATION OBTAINED.
In General.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require any non-Federal entity (such as a business, college, or university, foundation, or research organization) to provide information to the Commission concerning such entity's personnel policies, including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits, promotion criteria, and affirmative action plans.
Use of Information Obtained.--No information obtained from any entity by the Commission may be used in connection with any employment related litigation.
The Commission shall terminate 1 year after submitting the report required by section 8(b).
There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 1997, 1998, and 1999 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.