This Act may be cited as the ``Post Office Relocation Act of 1997''.
GUIDELINES FOR RENOVATION, RELOCATION, CLOSING, OR CONSOLIDATION OF POST OFFICES.
Section 404(b) of title 39, United States Code, is amended to read as follows-- ``(b)(1) The Postal Service, prior to making a determination under subsection (a)(3) of this section as to the necessity for the renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation of any post office, shall provide adequate notice of its intention to renovate, relocate, close, or consolidate such post office at least 60 days prior to the proposed date of such renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation to persons served by such post office.
Such notification shall be made in writing and shall be hand delivered or delivered by mail to persons served by such post office, and shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation within the zip codes served by such post office.
Such notification shall include-- ``(A) an identification of the renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation; ``(B) a summary of the reasons for the renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation; and ``(C) the proposed date for the renovation, relocation, renovation, closing, or consolidation.
Any person served by the post office may offer an alternative renovation, relocation, consolidation, or closing proposal within the 60 day notice period.
The Postal Service shall deliver a response in writing by hand delivery or certified mail to the person making the proposal.
In a case in which the Postal Service rejects a bona fide proposal, the Postal Service shall state in writing the reasons for the rejection.
At the end of the 60 day notice period, the Postal Service shall make a determination under subsection (a)(3).
Prior to making a final determination, the Postal Service shall conduct a hearing, and persons served by the post office may present oral or written testimony with respect to the renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation of such post office.
The Postal Service, in making a determination as to whether or not to renovate, relocate, close, or consolidate a post office shall consider-- ``(A) the extent to which such post office is part of a core downtown business area; ``(B) the effect of such renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation on the community served by such post office; ``(C) whether the community served by such post office opposes a renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation; ``(D) the effect of such renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation on employees of the Postal Service employed at such office; ``(E) whether such renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation is consistent with the policy of the Government, as stated in section 101(b) of this title, that the Postal Service shall provide a maximum degree of effective and regular postal services to rural areas, communities, and small towns where post offices are not self sustaining; ``(F) the quantified long-term economic saving to the Postal Service resulting from such renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation; ``(G) whether postal officials engaged in negotiations with persons served by the post office concerning the proposed renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation; ``(H) whether management of the post office contributed to a desire to relocate; ``(I) the adequacy of the existing post office, and whether all reasonable alternatives have been explored; and ``(J) such other factors as the Postal Service determines are necessary.
Any determination of the Postal Service to renovate, relocate, close, or consolidate a post office shall be in writing and shall include the findings of the Postal Service with respect to the considerations required to be made under paragraph (4) of this subsection.
Such determination and findings shall be made available to persons served by such post office.
The Postal Service shall take no action to renovate, relocate, close, or consolidate a post office until 60 days after its written determination is made available to persons served by such post office.
A determination of the Postal Service to renovate, relocate, close, or consolidate any post office may be appealed by any person served by such post office to the Postal Rate Commission within 30 days after such determination is made available to such person under paragraph (5).
The Commission shall review such determination on the basis of the record before the Postal Service in the making of such determination.
The Commission shall make a determination based upon such review no later than 120 days after receiving any appeal under this paragraph.
The commission shall set aside any determination, findings, and conclusions found to be-- ``(A) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with the law; ``(B) without observance of procedure required by law; or ``(C) unsupported by substantial evidence on the record.
The Commission may affirm the determination of the Postal Service or order that the entire matter be returned for further consideration, but the Commission may not modify the determination of the Postal Service.
The Commission may suspend the effectiveness of the determination of the Postal Service until the final disposition of the appeal.
The provisions of section 556, section 557, and chapter 7 of title 5 shall not apply to any review carried out by the Commission under this paragraph.
In a case in which a community has procedures to address the renovation, relocation, closing, or consolidation of buildings in the community, and the public participation requirements of such procedures are more stringent than those provided in this subsection, the Postal Service shall follow such procedures and disregard the procedures established in this subsection.
The Postal Service, in making a determination to renovate, relocate, close, or consolidate any post office, shall comply with any zoning, planning, or land use regulations, or building codes applicable to State or local public entities, including the zoning authority, of the local jurisdiction.''.
Section 101(g) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Postal Service shall also consider the effect a new postal facility may have on the community served by the prior facility.