This Act may be cited as the ``Drug-Free Families Act of 1999''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The National Institute on Drug Abuse estimates that in 1962, less than 1 percent of the nation's adolescents had ever tried an illicit drug.
By 1979, drug use among young people had escalated to the highest levels in history: 34 percent of adolescents (ages 12-17), 65 percent of high school seniors (age 18), and 70 percent of young adults (ages 18-25) had used an illicit drug in their lifetime.
Drug use among young people was not confined to initial trials.
By 1979, 16 percent of adolescents, 39 percent of high school seniors, and 38 percent of young adults had used an illicit drug in the past month.
Moreover, 1 in 9 high school seniors used marijuana daily.
In 1979, the year the largest number of seniors used marijuana, their belief that marijuana could hurt them was at its lowest (35 percent) since surveys have tracked these measures.
Three forces appeared to be driving this escalation in drug use among children and young adults.
Between 1972 and 1978, a nationwide political campaign conducted by drug legalization advocates persuaded 11 State legislatures to ``decriminalize'' marijuana.
(Many of those States have subsequently ``recriminalized'' the drug.)
Such legislative action reinforced advocates' assertion that marijuana was ``relatively harmless.''
The decriminalization effort gave rise to the emergence of ``head shops'' (shops for ``heads,'' or drug users--``coke heads,'' ``pot heads,'' ``acid heads,'' etc.)
which sold drug paraphernalia--an array of toys, implements, and instructional pamphlets and booklets to enhance the use of illicit drugs.
Some 30,000 such shops were estimated to be doing business throughout the nation by 1978.
In the absence of Federal funding for drug education then, most of the drug education materials that were available proclaimed that few illicit drugs were addictive and most were ``less harmful'' than alcohol and tobacco and therefore taught young people how to use marijuana, cocaine, and other illicit drugs ``responsibly''.
Between 1977 and 1980, 3 national parent drug- prevention organizations--National Families in Action, PRIDE, and the National Federation of Parents for Drug-Free Youth (now called the National Family Partnership)--emerged to help concerned parents form some 4,000 local parent prevention groups across the nation to reverse all of these trends in order to prevent children from using drugs.
Their work created what has come to be known as the parent drug-prevention movement, or more simply, the parent movement.
This movement set 3 goals: to prevent the use of any illegal drug, to persuade those who had started using drugs to stop, and to obtain treatment for those who had become addicted so that they could return to drug-free lives.
The parent movement pursued a number of objectives to achieve these goals.
First, it helped parents educate themselves about the harmful effects of drugs, teach that information to their children, communicate that they expected their children not to use drugs, and establish consequences if children failed to meet that expectation.
Second, it helped parents form groups with other parents to set common age- appropriate social and behavioral guidelines to protect their children from exposure to drugs.
Third, it encouraged parents to insist that their communities reinforce parents' commitment to protect children from drug use.
The parent movement stopped further efforts to decriminalize marijuana, both in the States and at the Federal level.
The parent movement worked for laws to ban the sale of drug paraphernalia.
If drugs were illegal, it made no sense to condone the sale of toys and implements to enhance the use of illegal drugs, particularly when those products targeted children.
As town, cities, counties, and States passed anti- paraphernalia laws, drug legalization organizations challenged their Constitutionality in Federal courts until the early 1980's, when the United States Supreme Court upheld Nebraska's law and established the right of communities to ban the sale of drug paraphernalia.
The parent movement insisted that drug-education materials convey a strong no-use message in compliance with both the law and with medical and scientific information that demonstrates that drugs are harmful, particularly to young people.
The parent movement encouraged others in society to join the drug prevention effort and many did, from First Lady Nancy Reagan to the entertainment industry, the business community, the media, the medical community, the educational community, the criminal justice community, the faith community, and local, State, and national political leaders.
The parent movement helped to cause drug use among young people to peak in 1979.
As its efforts continued throughout the next decade, and as others joined parents to expand the drug-prevention movement, between 1979 and 1992 these collaborative prevention efforts contributed to reducing monthly illicit drug use by two-thirds among adolescents and young adults and reduced daily marijuana use among high-school seniors from 10.7 percent to 1.9 percent.
Concurrently, both the parent movement and the larger prevention movement that evolved throughout the 1980's, working together, increased high school seniors' belief that marijuana could hurt them, from 35 percent in 1979 to 79 percent in 1991.
Unfortunately, as drug use declined, most of the 4,000 volunteer parents groups that contributed to the reduction in drug use disbanded, having accomplished the job they set out to do.
But the absence of active parent groups left a vacuum that was soon filled by a revitalized drug-legalization movement.
Proponents began advocating for the legalization of marijuana for medicine, the legalization of all Schedule I drugs for medicine, the legalization of hemp for medicinal, industrial and recreational use, and a variety of other proposals, all designed to ultimately attack, weaken, and eventually repeal the nation's drug laws.
Furthermore, legalization proponents are also beginning to advocate for treatment that maintains addicts on the drugs to which they are addicted (heroin maintenance for heroin addicts, controlled drinking for alcoholics, etc.
), for teaching school children to use drugs ``responsibly,'' and for other measures similar to those that produced the drug epidemic among young people in the 1970's.
During the 1990's, the message embodied in all of this activity has once again driven down young people's belief that drugs can hurt them.
As a result, the reductions in drug use that occurred over 13 years reversed in 1992, and adolescent drug use has more than doubled.
Today's parents are almost universally in the workplace and do not have time to volunteer.
Many families are headed by single parents.
In some families no parents are available, and grandparents, aunts, uncles, or foster parents are raising the family's children.
Recognizing that these challenges make it much more difficult to reach parents today, several national parent and family drug-prevention organizations have formed the Parent Collaboration to address these issues in order to build a new parent and family movement to prevent drug use among children.
Motivating parents and parent groups to coordinate with local community anti-drug coalitions is a key goal of the Parent Collaboration, as well as coordinating parent and family drug-prevention efforts with Federal, State, and local governmental and private agencies and political, business, medical and scientific, educational, criminal justice, religious, and media and entertainment industry leaders.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) build a movement to help parents and families prevent drug use among their children and adolescents; (2) help parents and families reduce drug abuse and drug addiction among adolescents who are already using drugs, and return them to drug-free lives; (3) increase young people's perception that drugs are harmful to their health, well-being, and ability to function successfully in life; (4) help parents and families educate society that the best way to protect children from drug use and all of its related problems is to convey a clear, consistent, no-use message; (5) strengthen coordination, cooperation, and collaboration between parents and families and all others who are interested in protecting children from drug use and all of its related problems; (6) help parents strengthen their families, neighborhoods, and school communities to reduce risk factors and increase protective factors to ensure the healthy growth of children; and (7) provide resources in the fiscal year 2000 Federal drug control budget for a grant to the Parent Collaboration to conduct a national campaign to mobilize today's parents and families through the provision of information, training, technical assistance, and other services to help parents and families prevent drug use among their children and to build a new parent and family drug-prevention movement.
In this Act: (1) Administrative costs.--The term ``administrative costs'' means those costs that the assigned Federal agency will incur to administer the grant to the Parent Collaboration.
Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration.
No-use message.--The term ``no-use message'' means no use of any illegal drug and no illegal use of any legal drug or substance that is sometimes used illegally, such as prescription drugs, inhalants, and alcohol and tobacco for children and adolescents under the legal purchase age.
Parent collaboration.--The term ``Parent Collaboration'' means the legal entity, which is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, established by National Families in Action, National Asian Pacific American Families Against Substance Abuse, African American Parents for Drug Prevention, National Association for Native American Children of Alcoholics, and the National Hispano/Latino Community Prevention Network and other groups, that-- (A) have a primary mission of helping parents prevent drug use, drug abuse, and drug addiction among their children, their families, and their communities; (B) have carried out this mission for a minimum of 5 consecutive years; and (C) base their drug-prevention missions on the foundation of a strong, no-use message in compliance with international, Federal, State, and local treaties and laws that prohibit the possession, production, cultivation, distribution, sale, and trafficking in illegal drugs; in order to build a new parent and family movement to prevent drug use among children and adolescents.
ESTABLISHMENT OF DRUG-FREE FAMILIES SUPPORT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Administrator shall make a grant to the Parents Collaboration to conduct a national campaign to build a new parent and family movement to help parents and families prevent drug abuse among their children.
Termination.--The period of the grant under this section shall be 5 years.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004 for a grant to the Parent Collaboration to conduct the national campaign to mobilize parents and families.
Administrative Costs.--Not more than 5 percent of the total amount made available under subsection (a) in each fiscal year may be used to pay administrative costs of the Parent Collaboration.