This Act may be cited as the ``West Virginia Rivers Conservation Act of 1994''.
NEW RIVER GORGE NATIONAL RIVER.
Section 1101 of the National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 460m-15) is amended by striking ``NERI-80,023, dated January 1987'' and inserting ``NERI-80,028, dated January 1993''.
GAULEY RIVER NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.
Section 201(b) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 460ww(b)) is amended by striking ``NRA-GR/20,000A and dated July 1987'' and inserting ``GARI-80,001 and dated January 1993''.
BLUESTONE NATIONAL SCENIC RIVER.
Section 3(a)(65) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)(65)) is amended by striking ``WSR-BLU/20,000, and dated January 1987'' and inserting ``BLUE-80,004, and dated January 1993''.
DESIGNATION OF UPPER NEW RIVER, WEST VIRGINIA.
Section 3(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``( ) Upper New River, West Virginia.--(A) The segment in Summers County, West Virginia, from the West Virginia-Virginia State line downstream for approximately 14.5 miles as depicted on the boundary map entitled `Upper New Wild and Scenic River', numbered UPNE 80,000 and dated July 1993 to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a scenic river.
The acreage limitation set forth in subsection (b) shall not apply to the segment designated under this paragraph.
Nothing in this Act shall preclude the improvement of any existing road or right-of-way within the boundaries of the segment designated under this paragraph.
Jurisdiction over all lands and improvements on such lands owned by the United States within the boundaries of the segment designated under this paragraph is hereby transferred without reimbursement to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior, subject to the lease in effect on the date of enactment of this paragraph (or renewed thereafter) between the United States and the State of West Virginia with respect to the Bluestone Wildlife Management Area.
Nothing in this Act shall affect the management by the State of West Virginia of hunting and fishing within the segment designated under this paragraph.
Nothing in this Act shall affect or impair the management by the State of West Virginia of other wildlife activities in the Bluestone Wildlife Management Area to the extent permitted in the lease agreement in effect on the date of enactment of this paragraph.
Upon request by the State of West Virginia, the Secretary shall renew such lease agreement with the same terms and conditions as contained in such lease agreement on the date of enactment of this paragraph under which State management shall be continued pursuant to such renewal.
If requested to do so by the State of West Virginia, or as provided in the lease agreement, the Secretary may terminate or modify the lease and assume administrative authority over all or part of the areas concerned.
Nothing in the designation of the segment referred to in this paragraph shall affect or impair the management of the Bluestone project or the authority of any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States to carry out the purposes of the project.''.
DESIGNATION OF ELK RIVER AS A STUDY RIVER.
Study.--The Secretary of the Interior shall conduct a study of the segment of the Elk River, West Virginia, that is reflected on the Webster Springs Quadrangle (West Virginia) 7.5 minute series topographic map, United States Geological Survey, to determine its eligibility and suitability as either-- (1) a component of the national wild and scenic rivers system; (2) a unit of the National Park System as a national river; or (3) a unit of the National Park System as a national recreation area.
Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall submit a report containing the results of the study conducted pursuant to subsection (a) to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives.
Effect on Management.--Nothing in this section shall affect or impair the management of the Sutton project or the authority of any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States to carry out the purposes of the project on the date of enactment of this section.
Consultation.--In conducting the study required by this section, the Secretary shall consult with the West Virginia Division of Tourism and Parks and the West Virginia Division of Environmental Protection.
To achieve the maximum economy and efficiency of operations in the administration of the segment of the New River designated by the amendment made by section 5, the Secretary of the Interior shall consolidate offices and personnel administering such segment with offices and personnel administering the New River Gorge National River, the Gauley River National Recreation Area, and the Bluestone National Scenic River to the extent practicable, and shall utilize facilities of the New River Gorge National River to the extent practicable.
New River Conforming Amendments.--Title XI of the National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 460m-15 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
APPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF OTHER LAW.
Cooperative Agreements.--Section 202(e)(1) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 460ww-1(e)(1)) shall apply to the New River Gorge National River in the same manner and to the same extent as such section applies to the Gauley River National Recreation Area.
Remnant Lands.--The second sentence of section 203(a) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 460ww-2(a)) shall apply to tracts of land partially within the boundaries of the New River Gorge National River in the same manner and to the same extent as such sentence applies to tracts of land partially within the Gauley River National Recreation Area.''.
Bluestone River Conforming Amendments.--Section 3(a)(65) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)(65)) is amended-- (1) in the fifth sentence, by striking ``leases'' and inserting ``the lease''; (2) in the seventh sentence, by striking ``such management may be continued pursuant to renewal of such lease agreement''; and (3) by striking the eighth sentence and inserting the following: ``Upon request by the State of West Virginia so requests, the Secretary shall renew such lease agreement with the same terms and conditions as contained in such lease agreement on the date of enactment of the West Virginia Rivers Conservation Act of 1994 under which such State management shall be continued pursuant to such renewal.
Upon request by the State of West Virginia, or as provided in such lease agreement, the Secretary may terminate or modify the lease and assume administrative authority over all or part of the areas concerned.''.
Section 202(e) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 460ww-1(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Access to River.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives setting forth a plan to provide river access for noncommercial recreational users within the Gauley River National Recreation Area.
The plan shall provide that such access shall utilize existing public roads and rights-of-way to the maximum extent feasible and shall be limited to providing access for such noncommercial users.''.
The Secretary of the Interior may construct a visitor center and such other related facilities as may be necessary to facilitate visitor understanding and enjoyment of the New River Gorge National River and the Gauley River National Recreation Area in the vicinity of the confluence of the New River and Gauley River.
Such center and related facilities are authorized to be constructed at a site outside of the boundary of the New River Gorge National River or the Gauley River National Recreation Area unless a suitable site is available within the boundaries of either unit.
For a 5-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the provisions of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act applicable to river segments designated for study for potential addition to the wild and scenic rivers system under section 5(b) of such Act (16 United States Code 1276(b)) shall apply to the segments of the Bluestone and Meadow Rivers that were found eligible in the studies completed by the National Park Service in August 1983 but that were not designated by the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (Public Law 100-534; 102 United States Statutes at Large 2702) as part of the Bluestone National Scenic River or as part of the Gauley River National Recreation Area, as the case may be.
BLUESTONE RIVER PUBLIC ACCESS.
Section 3(a)(65) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C 1274(a)(65)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``In order to provide reasonable public access and vehicle parking for public use and enjoyment of the river designated by this paragraph, consistent with the preservation and enhancement of the natural and scenic values of such river, the Secretary may negotiate a memorandum of understanding or cooperative agreement, or acquire such lands or interests in such lands, or both, with the consent of the owner as may be necessary to allow public access to the Bluestone River and to provide, outside the boundary of the scenic river, parking and related facilities in the vicinity of the area known as Eads Mill.''.
GAULEY RIVER BOUNDARY MODIFICATION.
Section 205(c) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 U.S.C 460ww-4(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``If project construction is not commenced within the time required in such license, or if such license is surrendered at any time, such boundary modification shall cease to have any force and effect.