This Act may be cited as the ``Local Education Empowerment Act''.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To give local communities control over how education funds are spent.
To maintain the primary Federal role in education as helping to provide high-quality education for disadvantaged students.
To support the secondary Federal role in education as supporting innovative practices in our schools.
TITLE I--HELPING DISADVANTAGED CHILDREN MEET HIGH STANDARDS SEC.
Section 1002(a) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301) is amended by striking ``$7,400,000,000 for 1995'' and inserting ``$12,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2001''.
Section 1114(a)(1)(B) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6314(a)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``50 percent'' each place it appears and inserting ``35 percent''.
TITLE II--PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT SEC.
Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6601 et sequentes) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``The purpose of this title is to increase student academic achievement by implementing such strategies as hiring new teachers, improving teacher quality, providing professional development, increasing teacher compensation, and lowering class size.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to eligible local educational agencies to provide services described in section 2104.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this title, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Each such application shall include a 5-year plan to improve student achievement by providing high-quality professional development for teachers, hiring new teachers, and reducing class size.
``From the amount made available to carry out this title-- ``(1) 50 percent shall be allocated among such States on the basis of their relative populations of students in kindergarten through 12th grade, as determined by the Secretary on the basis of the most recent satisfactory data; and ``(2) 50 percent shall be distributed according to each local educational agency's share of allocations under part A of title I.
``A local educational agency that receives funds under this title may use such funds for the following: ``(1) To provide professional development activities in core academic subjects to ensure that teachers have content knowledge in subjects they teach.
To provide professional development to ensure teachers are able to use State content and performance standards and assessments to improve student achievement.
To provide intensive programs designed to prepare teachers to return to their schools to provide such instruction to other teachers within such schools.
To support initial teaching experiences by providing programs such as mentoring programs.
To establish or improve routes to alternative certification for highly qualified individuals with baccalaureate degrees, including mid-career professionals from other occupations, paraprofessionals, former military personnel, recent college graduates with records of academic distinction.
To provide initiatives to assist in the recruitment of fully qualified teachers, including signing bonuses and differential pay.
To develop initiatives that promote the retention of highly qualified teachers and principals, including programs that provide mentoring to newly hired teachers, such as from master teachers, and programs providing incentives, including financial incentives, to retain teachers who have a record of success in helping low-achieving students improve their academic success.
To provide incentives to improve the quality of the teaching force such as innovative professional development programs, which may be established through partnerships with institutions of higher education, including programs to train teachers to use technology to improve teaching and learning.
To improve the quality of the teaching force through tenure reform, merit pay, or testing teachers in the subject areas taught by such teachers.
To provide professional development regarding how to teach children with different learning styles, how best to discipline children, and how to teach character education.
``Each local educational agency that receives a grant under this title shall report annually to the State educational agency and to the public.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $1,600,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.''.
TITLE III--EDUCATION REFORMS SEC.
Title III of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary may provide grants to local educational agencies to provide services described in section 3103.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this title, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Each such application shall include a 5-year plan to improve student achievement through the use of education reforms.
``From the amount made available to carry out this title-- ``(1) 25 percent shall be allocated among such States on the basis of their relative populations of students in kindergarten through 12th grade, as determined by the Secretary on the basis of the most recent satisfactory data; and ``(2) 75 percent shall be distributed according to each local educational agency's share of allocations under part A of title I.
``A local educational agency that receives funds under this title may use such funds for the following: ``(1) To implement State standards and assessments.
To establish efforts to increase student progress toward meeting State standards and assessments.
To develop programs to reduce drugs and violence in schools.
To provide after school programs.
To increase access to and understanding of technology in the classroom for learning.
To support gifted and talented education.
To provide arts education.
To establish efforts to reduce dropout rates.
To provide school-to-work activities and opportunities.
To provide education to homeless students.
To promote greater gender and racial equity in education.
To support class size reduction.
To support school construction and facility improvement.
To provide programs and assistance for neglected and delinquent students.
To support Even Start and preschool programs.
To support reading and literacy programs.
To provide civic education programs.
To support math and science education.
``Each local educational agency that receives a grant under this title shall report annually to the State educational agency and to the public regarding the expenditure and use of funds provided under this title for education reforms.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $2,700,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.''.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES SEC.
Title IV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to State educational agencies to maintain State standards and assessments and to monitor the progress of local education agencies toward meeting State goals.
``The Secretary shall determine the amount each State is eligible to receive based on the number of students ages 5 to 17, in the State.
In General.--A State educational agency shall use funds received under this title-- ``(1) to assist local educational agencies to design a 5- year plan for titles II, III, and VII to monitor local educational agencies use of Federal funds and to determine adequate student achievement levels; ``(2) to maintain State standards and assessments and monitor the progress of local educational agencies toward meeting State goals and meeting the local education agency's objectives set out in the 5-year plans submitted for a grant under titles II, III, and VII; ``(3) for administration, evaluations, research, professional development; and ``(4) to provide technical assistance to local educational agencies and schools, continue development of State curriculum content and student performance standards, and develop and align State assessment systems with these standards.
Corrective Action.--If a State determines that a local educational agency is not meeting the goals established by the State, the State, in consultation with the Secretary shall work with the agency to take correction actions to assure that such goals are met.
If after 3 years the State determines, after consultation with the Secretary, that the local educational agency is not taking proper corrective actions, the State may take over (or `reconstitute') administration of the local educational agency, or certain schools, as the State considers appropriate.
Plan.--Each State shall submit a 5-year plan to the Secretary regarding how the State educational agency plans to use the Federal funds to help local educational agencies formulate plans for the use of Federal grants, monitor State progress toward reaching goals, assure Federal funds are being used to help students reach high levels of achievement.
The plan shall also indicate statewide student achievement goals.
Annual Report.--The State educational agency shall report yearly to the Secretary regarding the use of funds and progress toward reaching student achievement goals.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title, $260,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.''.
TITLE V--INCREASED AUTHORIZATION LEVELS SEC.
Magnet Schools.--Section 5113 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7213) is amended by striking ``$120,000,000 for fiscal year 1995'' and inserting ``$130,000,000 for fiscal year 2001''.
Charter Schools.--Section 10311 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8067) is amended by striking ``$100,000,000 for fiscal year 1999 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the four succeeding fiscal years'' and inserting ``such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2000, $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the four succeeding fiscal years''.
TITLE VI--LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENT STUDENTS SEC.
LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENT STUDENTS.
Title VII of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7401 et sequentes) is amended to read as following: ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to eligible local educational agencies to provide services described in section 7103 to limited English proficient students to enable such students to meet the same rigorous standards for academic performance as other students in the State.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this title, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Each such application shall include a 5-year plan to improve limited English proficiency education and address the needs of immigrant students.
The plan shall also establish numerical performance objectives to determine student progress in learning English.
Determination of Amounts.--To determine the amount each local educational agency may be eligible to receive, the Secretary shall use data published by the Bureau of the Census in compiling the most recent decennial census to identify the number of limited English proficient students served by the local educational agency.
Allocation.--From the amount made available to carry out this title-- ``(1) 50 percent shall be allocated among such States on the basis of their relative populations of students in kindergarten through 12th grade, as determined by the Secretary on the basis of the most recent satisfactory data; and ``(B) 50 percent shall be distributed according to each local educational agency's share of allocations under part A of title I.
Hold Harmless.--Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), a local educational agency shall not receive less than the total amount of funds that it received in fiscal year 2000 under title VII of this Act as such title was in effect on the day preceding the date of the enactment of the Local Education Empowerment Act.
``A local educational agency that receives funds under this title may use such funds for the following: ``(1) To increase the proficiency of students learning English.
To assist students with limited English proficiency to meet the same challenging State content and student performance standards expected of other students in the State.
To develop and implement new English language and academic content instructional programs for children who are limited English proficient, including programs of early childhood education and kindergarten through 12th grade education.
To carry out highly focused, innovative, locally designed projects to expand or enhance existing English language and academic content instruction programs for limited English proficient students.
To implement schoolwide programs for restructuring, reforming, and upgrading all relevant programs and operations relating to English language and academic content standards.
To upgrade program objectives and effective instructional strategies.
To improve instructional programs by identifying, acquiring, and upgrading curricula, instructional materials, educational software, and assessment procedures.
To provide intensified instruction to limited English proficient students.
To implement comprehensive preschool, elementary, or secondary school English programs that are coordinated with other relevant programs and services.
To provide professional development to classroom teachers, administrators, and other school and community-based organizational personnel to improve instruction and assessment.
To improve instruction by providing for the acquisition or development of education technology or instructional materials, access to and participation in electronic networks for materials, training and communications, and incorporation of such resources in curricula and programs.
To develop tutoring programs.
To support the identified needs of migratory children that result from their migratory lifestyle.
To provide family literacy services and parent outreach and training activities to limited English proficient children.
``Each local educational agency that receives a grant under this title shall report annually the results of the numerical performance objectives included in the 5-year plan described in section 7101(b) to the State educational agency and to the public.
``For purposes of this title, the term `limited English proficient student' means a child age 5 through 17 who-- ``(1) is enrolled in a public elementary or secondary school; ``(2)(A) was not born in the United States; ``(B) has a native language other than English; or ``(C) is a Native American or Alaska Native and comes from an home in which a language other than English has a significant impact on such individual's level of English language proficiency; ``(3) comes from an home in which a language other than English is used for most communication; and ``(4) has sufficient difficulty speaking, reading, writing, and understanding the English language and such difficulty may deny such individual an opportunity to learn successfully in classrooms in which the language of instruction is English or to participate fully in our society.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.