TRANSFER OF BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT LANDS.
Required Offer.-- (1) In general.--Subject to valid existing rights and except as otherwise provided in this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall offer to transfer all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to all lands and interests in lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management to the State in which such lands and interests are located.
Lands and interests included.--The lands and interests in lands referred to in paragraph (1) include-- (A) the fee simple interest where the United States owns both the surface and mineral rights; (B) the mineral rights where the surface estate is owned by a non-Federal person, including a State or political subdivision thereof; and (C) water rights related to such lands or interests.
Exclusion of mineral interests underlying indian reservations.--Paragraph (1) does not apply with respect to the mineral interests underlying a surface estate held by the United States in trust for an Indian tribe.
Two-Year Period To Make Offer to Governor.--The offer required by subsection (a) with respect to a State shall be made to the Governor within two years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Acceptance of Offer.--A State may only accept the offer of all such lands or reject such offer.
Acceptance of an offer under subsection (a) may only be made by the Governor, in writing to the Secretary.
Effective Date of Transfer.--Any transfer of lands under this Act shall be effective with respect to a State on the date which is ten years after the date on which the offer to the Governor is accepted.
Surveys.--The Secretary is not required to conduct a survey of any lands prior to transferring such lands under this Act.
LEASES, PERMITS, AND UNPATENTED MINING CLAIMS.
Valid Leases and Permits.--Each State receiving lands under this Act shall honor valid existing leases and permits on such lands for the term of such lease or permit and shall manage such leases and permits in accordance with their other terms and conditions.
Mining Claims.--(1) Except for those mining claims for which the holder is entitled to a patent as provided in paragraph (2), after the date on which lands subject to a mining claim are transferred to a State under this Act, the validity and continued existence of the mining claim shall be determined under the laws of the State to which the lands were transferred and shall be administered in accordance with such laws.
The holder of a mining claim is entitled to the issuance of a patent in the case of a mining claim on lands transferred to a State under this Act in the same manner and degree to which such holder would have been entitled to prior to the date of such transfer if, as of the date of the transfer a patent application was filed with the Secretary and all requirements-- (A) under sections 2325 and 2326 of the Revised Statutes (30 United States Code 29 and 30) for vein or lode claims; (B) under sections 2329, 2330, 2331, and 2333 of the Revised Statues (30 United States Code 35, 36, 37) for placer claims; and (C) applicable to such patent application for mill site claims, were fully complied with.
Rights-of-Way.--Each State receiving lands under this Act shall respect all rights-of-way granted by the United States on such lands in accordance with the terms and conditions of the rights-of-way.
MANAGEMENT OF LANDS TRANSFERRED UNDER THIS ACT.
Wilderness.--Lands transferred under this Act which have been designated by an Act of Congress as wilderness shall be managed by the State as wilderness in accordance with the requirements specified in the Wilderness Act, the Act of Congress which designated the lands as wilderness, and any other Act of Congress which specifically provides for the management of such lands, except that the State shall be substituted for the Secretary of the Interior.
Military Uses.--(1) Lands transferred by this Act which on the date of such transfer are subject to use for military purposes shall continue to be subject to the same military uses.
In the case of lands transferred to a State under this Act which are subject to a withdrawal from public use for military purposes, the State shall respect the withdrawal and military use for the term of the withdrawal and may not impose any fee or other charge on the United States with respect to the military purpose.
At the end of such term, the Secretary of the military department concerned, or the Secretary of Defense, may negotiate with the Governor of the State for the continued use of such lands.
Lands for which there is not a continued military use shall be decontaminated by the appropriate Secretary in accordance with the Act of Congress which withdrew such lands for military purposes or the withdrawal order, if any.
Records.--The Secretary of the Interior shall continue to hold all land records of the Secretary with respect to the lands transferred to a State under this Act.
The Secretary shall provide to the State full copies of all applicable land records relating to lands which are transferred under this Act.
The Secretary shall make such records available for public use as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Indian Lands.--The mineral interests described in section 1(a)(3) shall be transferred from the administrative jurisidiction of the Bureau of Land Management and shall be held in trust for the Indian tribe for which the overlying surface estate is held in trust.
In General.--The Secretary shall transfer to a State receiving lands under this Act all water rights of the United States associated with the lands.
Certain Rights Not Affected.--A transfer of water rights under subsection (a) shall not be construed as-- (1) affecting, impairing, diminishing, subordinating, or enlarging-- (A) the rights of the United States or any State to water under any international treaty, interstate compact, or existing judicial decree; (B) any obligation of the United States to Indians or Indian tribes or any claim or right owned or held by or for Indians or Indian tribes, including with respect to any Indian water compact; (C) any right to any quantity of water reserved or used for governmental purposes or programs of the United States at any time prior to the date of the enactment of this Act; or (D) any license or permit issued before the date of the enactment of this Act; or (2) as a recognition, disclaimer, relinquishment, or reduction of any water right of the United States reserved or appropriated before the date of the enactment of this Act.
REDUCTION IN BUDGET AUTHORITY FOR THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT.
Cap on Obligations and Expenditures.--Beginning with the fiscal year in which this Act is enacted, not more than $800,000,000 may be obligated or expended in any fiscal year by the Bureau of Land Management in carrying out its duties, functions, and responsibilities under any provision of law.
Priority for Use of Fiscal Resources.--The Secretary shall give priority to expending amounts available to the Bureau of Land Management to land management activities and to carrying out this Act.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``Indian tribe'' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, pueblo, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians; and (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.