This Act may be cited as the ``Native American Contracting and Federal Lands Management Demonstration Project Act''.
For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Federal lands.--The term ``Federal lands'' means any land or interests in land owned by the United States, including leasehold interests held by the United States, except Indian trust lands.
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given such term by section 4(e) of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
In General.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to expand the provisions of the Indian Self Determination and Education Assistance Act, as amended (25 United States Code 450 et sequentes), in order to expand Native employment and income through greater contracting opportunities with the Federal Government; (2) to encourage Native contracting on Federal lands for purposes of benefiting from the knowledge and expertise of Native people in order to promote innovative management strategies on Federal lands that will lead to greater sensitivity toward, and respect for, Native American religious beliefs and sacred sites; (3) to better accommodate access to and ceremonial use of Indian sacred lands by Indian religious practitioners; and (4) to prevent significant damage to Indian sacred lands.
NATIVE AMERICAN FEDERAL LANDS MANAGEMENT DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
In General.--The Indian Self Determination and Education Assistance Act is amended by adding a new subsection as follows: ``SEC.
NATIVE AMERICAN FEDERAL LANDS MANAGEMENT DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall establish the `Native American Federal Lands Management Demonstration Project' to enter contracts with Indian tribes or tribal organizations to perform functions including, but not limited to, archeological, anthropological and cultural surveys and analyses, and activities related to the identification, maintenance, or protection of lands considered to have religious, ceremonial or cultural significance to Indian tribes.
Participation.--During each of the 2 fiscal years immediately following the date of the enactment, the Secretary shall select not less than 12 eligible Indian tribes or tribal organizations to participate in the demonstration project.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to participate in the demonstration project, an Indian tribe or tribal organization, shall-- ``(1) request participation by resolution or other official action of the governing body of the Indian tribe or tribal organization; ``(2) demonstrate financial and management stability and capability, as evidenced by the Indian tribe or tribal organization having no unresolved significant and material audit exceptions for the previous 3 fiscal years; and (3) demonstrate significant use of or dependency upon the relevant conservation system unit or other public land unit for which programs, functions, services, and activities are requested to be placed under contract.
Planning Phase.--Each Indian tribe and tribal organization selected by the Secretary to participate in the demonstration project shall complete a planning phase prior to negotiating and entering into a conservation system unit management contract.
The planning phase shall be conducted to the satisfaction of the Indian tribe or tribal organization and shall include-- ``(1) legal and budgetary research; and ``(2) internal tribal planning and organizational preparation.
Contracts.-- ``(1) In general.--Upon request of a participating Indian tribe or tribal organization that has completed the planning phase pursuant to subsection (e), the Secretary shall negotiate and enter into a contract with the Indian tribe or tribal organization for the Indian tribe or tribal organization to plan, conduct, and administer programs, services, functions, and activities, or portions thereof, requested by the Indian tribe or tribal organization and related to archeological, anthropological and cultural surveys and analyses, and activities related to the identification, maintenance or protection of lands considered to have religious, ceremonial or cultural significance to Indian tribes.
Time limitation for negotiation of contracts.--Not later than 90 days after a participating Indian tribe or tribal organization has notified the Secretary that it has completed the planning phase required by subsection (e), the Secretary shall initiate and conclude negotiations, unless an alternative negotiation and implementation schedule is otherwise agreed to by the parties.
The declination and appeals provisions of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, including section 110 of such Act, shall apply to contracts and agreements requested and negotiated under this Act.
Contract Administration.-- ``(1) Inclusion of certain terms.--At the request of the contracting Indian tribe or tribal organization, the benefits, privileges, terms, and conditions of agreements entered into pursuant to titles I and IV of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act may be included in a contract entered into under this Act.
If any provisions of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act are incorporated, they shall have the same force and effect as if set out in full in this Act and shall apply notwithstanding any other provision of law.
The parties may include such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreed to and not otherwise contrary to law.
Audit.--Contracts entered into under this Act shall provide for a single-agency audit report to be filed as required by chapter 75 of title 31, United States Code.
Transfer of employees.--Any career Federal employee employed at the time of the transfer of an operation or program to an Indian tribe or tribal organization shall not be separated from Federal service by reason of such transfer.
Intergovernmental personnel actions may be used to transfer supervision of such employees to the contracting Indian tribe or tribal organization.
Such transferred employees shall be given priority placement for any available position within their respective agency, notwithstanding any priority reemployment lists, directives, rules, regulations, or other orders from the Department of the Interior, the Office of Management and Budget, or other Federal agencies.
Available Funding; Payment.--Under the terms of a contract negotiated pursuant to subsection (f), the Secretary shall provide each Indian tribe or tribal organization funds in an amount not less than the Secretary would have otherwise provided for the operation of the requested programs, services, functions, and activities.
Contracts entered into under this Act shall provide for advance payments to the tribal organizations in the form of annual or semiannual installments.
Timing; Contract Authorization Period.--An Indian tribe or tribal organization selected to participate in the demonstration project shall complete the planning phase required by subsection (c) not later than 1 calendar year after the date that it was selected for participation and may begin implementation of its requested contract no later than the first day of the next fiscal year.
The Indian tribe or tribal organization and the Secretary may agree to an alternate implementation schedule.
Contracts entered into pursuant to this Act are authorized to remain in effect for 5 consecutive fiscal years, starting from the fiscal year the participating Indian tribe or tribal organization first entered into its contract under this Act.
Report.--Not later than 90 days after the close of each of fiscal years 2003 and 2006, the Secretary shall present to the Congress detailed reports, including a narrative, findings, and conclusions on the costs and benefits of this demonstration project.
Planning Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to the availability of appropriated funds, upon application the Secretary shall award a planning grant in the amount of $100,000 to any Indian tribe or tribal organization selected for participation in the demonstration project to enable it to plan for the contracting of programs, functions, services, and activities as authorized under this Act and meet the planning phase requirement of subsection (e).
An Indian tribe or tribal organization may choose to meet the planning phase requirement without applying for a grant under this subsection.
No Indian tribe or tribal organization may receive more than 1 grant under this subsection.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for each of the 2 fiscal years immediately following the date of the enactment of this Act to fund planning grants under this section.''.
TRIBAL PROCUREMENT CONTRACTING AND RESERVATION DEVELOPMENT.
In General.--Section 7 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450e) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection (d): ``(d) Fostering Tribal Procurement Contracting and Reservation Development.-- ``(1) Upon the request and application of an Indian tribe to provide certain services or deliverables which the Secretary of the Interior would otherwise procure from a private sector entity, and absent a request to contract those services or deliverables pursuant to section 102 of this Act (25 United States Code 450f) made by the tribe or tribes to be directly benefited by said services or deliverables, the Secretary of the Interior shall contract for such services or deliverables through the applicant Indian tribe pursuant to section 102 of this Act (25 United States Code 450f).
Subsection (1) shall not apply unless the applicant tribe provides assurances to the Secretary that the principal beneficiary of the contracted services remains the tribe or tribes originally intended to benefit from the services or deliverables.
For purposes of this subsection, the contracting tribe shall enjoy no less than the same rights and privileges under this Act as would the beneficiary tribe if the beneficiary tribe exercised its rights to contract under section 102 of this Act.
If at any time the beneficiary tribe (or tribes) seeks to contract services being provided by the contracting tribe, the beneficiary tribe (or tribes) shall give the contracting tribe and the Secretary of the Interior no less than 180 days' notice.