This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Judicial Review Improvement Act of 2002''.
STANDARD FOR REVERSAL OF ERRONEOUS FINDINGS OF FACT.
Change to ``Clearly Erroneous'' Standard.--Section 7261 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(4)-- (A) by inserting ``adverse to a claimant'' after ``material fact''; and (B) by striking ``is clearly erroneous'' and inserting ``is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence''; and (2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: ``(b) In making the determinations under subsection (a), the Court shall review the record of proceedings before the Secretary and the Board, as provided for in section 5107(b) and section 7252(b) of this title.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to any action brought under chapter 72 of title 38, United States Code, that is not final under section 7291 of such title as of after the date of the enactment of this Act.
JURISDICTION OF COURT OF APPEALS FOR VETERANS CLAIMS.
Section 7252 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), by inserting ``under subsection (a)'' in the second sentence after ``The extent of the review''; (2) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and (3) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection (c): ``(c) If the Court determines that the Secretary has unlawfully withheld or unreasonably delayed action on a claim or has failed to plead or otherwise defend in accordance with the rules of the Court, the Court may enter a default judgment against the Secretary.
A default judgment may not be entered against the Secretary unless the Secretary has been provided notice of such a proposed judgment and the Court finds that the claim or right to relief has been established.''.
JURISDICTION OF COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT TO REVIEW DECISIONS OF THE COURT OF APPEALS FOR VETERANS CLAIMS.
Expansion of Jurisdiction.--Section 7292 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``review of the decision''; and (B) by inserting before the period at the end of the first sentence the following: ``, or (2) with respect to any question of law, or of an application of the law to the facts, that was relied on by the Court in making the decision'' (2) in subsection (d)(2)-- (A) by striking ``(A)''; and (B) by striking ``, or (B)'' and all that follows through ``particular case''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to any case for which an appeal is filed with the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit on or after the date of the enactment of this Act or for which an appeal was filed with that court before such date and which is not final under section 7291 of title 38, United States Code, as of that date.
CODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENT FOR EXPEDITIOUS TREATMENT OF CASES ON REMAND.
Cases Remanded by Board of Veterans' Appeals.--(1) Chapter 51 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end of subchapter I the following new section: ``Sec.
Expedited treatment of remanded claims ``The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to provide for the expeditious treatment by the appropriate regional office of the Veterans Benefits Administration of any claim that is remanded to that office by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5109A the following new item: ``5109B.
Expedited treatment of remanded claims.''.
Cases Remanded by Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.--(1) Chapter 71 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Expedited treatment of remanded claims ``The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to provide for the expeditious treatment by the Board of any claim that is remanded to the Secretary by the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``7112.
Expedited treatment of remanded claims.''.
Repeal of Source Section.--Section 302 of the Veterans' Benefits Improvement Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-446; 108 United States Statutes at Large 4658; 38 United States Code 5101 note) is repealed.
AUTHORITY FOR COURT OF APPEALS FOR VETERANS CLAIMS TO ORDER PAYMENT OF INTERIM BENEFITS ON REMANDED CLAIMS.
Authority To Order Payment.--Section 7267 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) Whenever the Court remands to the Secretary a case involving a claim for compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation, or pension, the Court may include in its order remanding the case an order that if the remanded claim is not decided by the Secretary within 180 days of the date of the remand, the Secretary shall pay interim benefits under that claim in such amount as may be provided in the court order, not in excess of the amount specified in the claim (or the amount for the rating specified in the claim).
Payments pursuant to such an order shall commence effective with the next month beginning after the end of such 180-day period and shall terminate as provided in the Court order, but not later than the last day of the month in which the final decision resolving the claim is made.
An order of the Court under paragraph (1) for the payment of interim benefits is final and is not subject to review by any other court.
In a case for which interim benefits are paid pursuant to an order under paragraph (1)-- ``(A) if benefits are awarded as part of the final decision on the claim, the amount of interim benefits paid for any month shall be deducted from the amount of any retroactive benefit otherwise payable for that month under the final decision on the claim; and ``(B) if benefits are not awarded as part of the final decision on the claim, the amount of interim benefits paid shall not be considered to be an overpayment and shall not otherwise be subject to recovery by the United States.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to any action brought under chapter 72 of title 38, United States Code, that is not final under section 7291 of such title as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
AUTHORITY FOR COURT TO EXTEND TIME TO FILE NOTICE OF APPEAL.
Authority.--Section 7266(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) The Court, upon a showing of excusable neglect or good cause, may extend the time for filing a notice of appeal.
A copy of any motion for such an extension of time for filing shall be provided to the Secretary and to any other party to the case in accordance with the Court's rules of practice and procedure.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall not apply to any case for which the time for filing a notice of appeal under section 7266 of title 38, United States Code, has elapsed before the date of the enactment of this Act.