This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Employees Group Long-Term Care Insurance Act of 1999''.
Subpart G of part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``Chapter 90--Long-Term Care Insurance ``Sec.
Minimum standards for contractors.
Studies, reports, and audits.
Definitions ``For the purpose of this chapter-- ``(1) `annuitant' means an individual referred to in section 8901(3); ``(2) `employee' means an individual referred to in subparagraphs (A)-(D), and (F)-(I) of section 8901(1); but does not include an employee excluded by regulation of the Office under section 9011; ``(3) `other eligible individual' means the spouse, former spouse, parent or parent-in-law of an employee or annuitant, or other individual specified by the Office; ``(4) `Office' means the Office of Personnel Management; ``(5) `qualified carrier' means an insurer licensed to do business in each of the States and meeting the requirements of a qualified insurer in each of the States; ``(6) `qualified contract' means a contract meeting the conditions prescribed in section 9002; and ``(7) `State' means a State or territory or possession of the United States, and includes the District of Columbia.
Contracting authority ``(a) The Office may, without regard to section 5 of title 41 or any other statute requiring competitive bidding, purchase from one or more qualified carriers a policy or policies of group long-term care insurance to provide benefits as specified by this chapter.
The Office, however, shall ensure that each resulting contract is awarded on the basis of contractor qualifications, price, and reasonable competition to the maximum extent practicable.
The Office may design a benefits package or packages and negotiate final offerings with qualified carriers.
Each contract shall be for a uniform term of 5 years, unless terminated earlier by the Office.
Premium rates charged under a contract entered into under this section shall reasonably reflect the cost of the benefits provided under that contract as determined by the Office.
The coverage and benefits made available to individuals under a contract entered into under this section are guaranteed to be renewable and may not be canceled by the carrier except for nonpayment of premium.
The Office may, based on open season participation rates, the composition of the risk pool, or both, withdraw the product.
Minimum standards for contractors ``At the minimum, to be a qualified carrier under this chapter, a company shall-- ``(1) be licensed as an insurance company and approved to issue group long-term care insurance in all States and to do business in each of the States; and ``(2) be in compliance with the requirements imposed on issuers of qualified long-term care contracts by section 4980C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Long-term care benefits ``The benefits provided under this chapter shall be long-term care benefits which, at a minimum, shall be compliant with the most recent standards recommended by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
9005. Financing ``(a) The amount necessary to pay the premium for enrollment of an enrolled employee shall be withheld from the pay of each enrolled employee.
Except as provided by subsection (d), the amount necessary to pay the premium for enrollment of an enrolled annuitant shall be withheld from the annuity of each enrolled annuitant.
The amount necessary to pay the premium for enrollment of a spouse may be withheld from pay or annuity, as appropriate.
An employee, annuitant, or other eligible individual, whose pay or annuity is insufficient to cover the withholding required for enrollment, shall, at the discretion of the Office, pay the premium for enrollment directly to the carrier.
Each carrier participating in the Program established by this chapter shall maintain the funds related to this Program separate and apart from funds related to other contracts and other lines of business.
The costs of the Office in adjudicating a claims dispute under section 9008, including costs related to an inquiry not culminating in a dispute, shall be reimbursed by the carrier involved in the dispute or inquiry.
Such funds shall be available to the Office for the administration of this chapter.
Preemption ``The provisions of this chapter shall supersede and preempt any State or local law which is determined by the Office to be inconsistent with-- ``(1) the provisions of this chapter; or ``(2) after consultation with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, the efficient provision of a nationwide long-term care insurance program for Federal employees.
Studies, reports, and audits ``(a) Each qualified carrier entering into a contract under this chapter shall-- ``(1) furnish such reasonable reports as the Office determines to be necessary to enable it to carry out its functions under this chapter; and ``(2) permit the Office and representatives of the General Accounting Office to examine such records of the carrier as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
Each Federal agency shall keep such records, make such certifications, and furnish the Office, the carrier, or both, with such information and reports as the Office may require.
Claims for benefits ``(a) A claim for benefits under this chapter shall be filed within 4 years of the date on which the reimbursable cost was incurred or the service was provided.
The Office shall adjudicate a claims dispute arising under this chapter and shall require the contractor to pay for any benefit or provide any service the Office determines appropriate under the applicable contract.
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), benefits payable under this chapter for any reimbursable cost incurred or service provided are secondary to any other benefit payable for such cost or service.
no payment may be made where there is no legal obligation for such payment.
Benefits payable under the following programs shall be secondary to benefits payable under this chapter: ``(A) The program of medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act; and ``(B) Any other Federal or State programs that the Office may specify in regulations that provide health benefit coverage designed to be secondary to other insurance coverage.
Jurisdiction of courts ``A claimant under this chapter may file suit against the carrier of the long-term care insurance policy covering such claimant in the district courts of the United States, after exhausting all available administrative remedies.
Regulations ``(a) The Office shall prescribe regulations necessary to carry out this chapter.
The regulations of the Office may prescribe the time at which and the conditions under which an eligible individual may enroll in the Program established under this chapter.
The Office may not exclude-- ``(1) an employee or group of employees solely on the basis of the hazardous nature of employment; or ``(2) an employee who is occupying a position on a part- time career employment basis, as defined in section 3401(2).
The regulations of the Office shall provide for the beginning and ending dates of coverage of employees, annuitants, former spouses, and other eligible individuals under this chapter, and any requirements for continuation or conversion of coverage.
Authorization of appropriations ``There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the purposes of carrying out sections 9002, and 9010.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of enactment of this act, except that no coverage may be effective until the first day of the first pay period in October, which follows by more than 1 year the date of enactment of this Act.