The Congress finds that-- (1) fraudulent activity in the United States has a devastating effect on the elderly; (2) as the fears of the elderly over financial security have increased over the years, so too have the deceptive tactics of unscrupulous groups that prey on those fears; (3) elderly citizens represent 12.5 percent of the population, but they are 30 percent of the victims of fraud; (4) elderly citizens are far more likely to be subjected to questionable and unscrupulous sales practices than any other age group; (5) elderly citizens, because they are home more than younger citizens, are more accessible to fraudulent practices involving the telemarketer's call or the knock of a door-to- door salesperson; (6) schemes to bilk the elderly are becoming increasingly common as dishonest persons manage to sell inferior, worthless, unnecessary, and sometimes nonexistent products to thousands of elderly citizens nationwide; (7) schemes to bilk the elderly involve outrageous tactics and rob the elderly of their savings, independence, and dignity; (8) phony vacations, fraudulent credit repair services, and free prizes are but a few of the practices and activities involving consumer fraud carried out against the elderly; (9) persons engaged in consumer fraud against the elderly are highly mobile and prosecution is difficult; and (10) such practices and activities are a blight on reputable businesses engaged in legitimate marketing practices.
Participation in the Financial Crimes Enforcement Center.--The Federal Trade Commission shall participate in, and be on the receiving list of law enforcement products of, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Center of the Department of the Treasury.
Venue.--Subsections (a) and (b) of section 13 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 53) are each amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Whenever it appears to the court that the interests of justice require that any other person, partnership, or corporation should be a party in such suit, the court may cause such person, partnership, or corporation to be summoned without regard to whether they reside or transact business in the district in which the suit is brought, and to that end process may be served wherever the person, partnership, or corporation may be found.''.
Criminal Contempt Authority.--Section 16(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 56(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``civil'' the first place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``Federal court''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``The Commission may bring a criminal contempt action for violations of orders obtained in cases brought under section 13(b) of this Act in the same manner as civil penalty and other Federal court actions to which this subsection applies.
Such cases may be initiated by the Commission on its own complaint, or pursuant to its acceptance of an appointment by a court to assist it in enforcing such orders pursuant to Rule 42(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.''.
Fraud and Deceit.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend its sentencing guidelines relating to fraud and deceit so as to provide for increases in offense levels based on the number of persons that the offender has victimized.
Vulnerable Victims.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend its sentencing guidelines relating to vulnerable victims so as to provide that if the offender knew or should have known that the victim was unusually vulnerable or that the victim was otherwise particularly susceptible to the offense, the offense level shall be increased by 7 levels.
Order of Restitution.--Section 3663(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``may order'' and inserting ``shall order''.
Procedure.--Section 3664(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``in determining whether to order restitution under section 3663 of this title and the amount of such restitution'' and inserting ``in determining the amount of restitution under section 3663''.
SENSE OF CONGRESS CONCERNING THE NATIONAL TELEMARKETING FRAUD WORKING GROUP.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) all United States Attorneys should regularly enter information on telemarketing fraud into the database of the National Telemarketing Fraud Working Group; and (2) the National Telemarketing Fraud Working Group and the States should continue to cooperate with each other in coordinating the prosecution of offenders in venues that are convenient to the victims of their offenses.
CONSUMER AND ANTI-FRAUD ACTIVITIES.
Additional United States Attorneys.--The Attorney General shall designate 50 existing full-time equivalent positions for attorneys and sufficient support staff to be assigned to the prosecution of consumer fraud and for law enforcement and consumer fraud education programs.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
Civil Forfeiture.--Section 981 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1)-- (A) in subparagraph (D) by inserting ``(i)'' before ``Any'' and redesignating clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), and (vi) as subclauses (I), (II), (III), (IV), (V), and (VI), respectively; (B) by striking ``(E) With respect to an offense listed in subsection (a)(1)(D)'' and inserting ``(ii) With respect to an offense described in clause (i)''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Any property, real or personal, that constitutes, represents, is derived from, or is traceable to the proceeds of a violation of section 1029, 1341, or 1343 of this title if such violation relates to crimes against individuals 55 years of age or older.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 524 of title 28, United States Code, up to 25 percent of the amounts forfeited pursuant to this subparagraph for an offense may be used to provide restitution to any victim of the offense.''.
Criminal Forfeiture.--Section 982(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(5) The court, in imposing sentence on a person convicted of a violation of, or a conspiracy to violate, section 1029, 1341 or 1343 of this title, affecting an individual 55 years of age or older, shall order that the person forfeit to the United States any property constituting, or derived from, proceeds the person obtained directly or indirectly, as the result of such violation.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 524 of title 28, United States Code, up to 25 percent of the amounts forfeited pursuant to this paragraph for an offense may be used to provide restitution to any victim of the offense.''.
Criminal Contempt Authority.--Section 16(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 56(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``civil'' the first place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``Federal court''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``The Commission may bring a criminal contempt action for violations of orders obtained in cases brought under section 13(b) of this Act in the same manner as civil penalty and other Federal court actions to which this subsection applies.
Such cases may be initiated by the Commission on its own complaint, or pursuant to its acceptance of an appointment by a court to assist it in enforcing such orders pursuant to Rule 42(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.''.
Section 1956(c)(7)(D) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after ``1014 (relating to fraudulent loan or credit applications),'' the following: ``1029 (relating to fraud relating to access devices),''.
UNIFORM LAWS GOVERNING LICENSING OF HOME REPAIR CONTRACTORS, MORTGAGE COMPANIES, AND PRIZE GIVEAWAY COMPANIES.
The Attorney General, in consultation with the American Law Institute, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, or other interested persons, shall prepare model State law on each of the following subjects: (1) Licensing of home repair contractors.
Licensing of mortgage companies.
Licensing of prize giveaway companies.
Offense.--Section 1341 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or places in any private courier service office or authorized depository for receipt of matter to be delivered by private courier service,'' after ``mail matter,''; (2) by inserting ``or by a private courier service'' after ``Postal Service''; and (3) by inserting ``or private courier service'' after ``by mail''.
Definition.-- (1) Private courier service.--Section 1346 of title 18, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Definitions ``In this chapter-- ```private courier service' means a private entity providing services provided by the United States Postal Service.
```scheme or artifice to defraud' includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.''.
Technical amendment.--The chapter analysis for chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking the item for section 1346 and inserting the following item: ``1346.