This Act may be cited as the ``Interstate Municipal Solid Waste Control Act''.
INTERSTATE TRANSPORTATION OF NONHAZARDOUS SOLID WASTE.
Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6941 et sequentes) is amended by adding the following new section at the end thereof: ``SEC.
INTERSTATE TRANSPORTATION OF NONHAZARDOUS SOLID WASTE.
Authority To Limit Quantity in Existing Facilities.-- ``(1) Limit based on prior years.--The Governor of a State may limit the quantity of out-of-State municipal solid waste received for disposal at each landfill or incinerator in the State to an annual quantity equal to the quantity of out-of- State municipal solid waste received for disposal at the landfill or incinerator during the calendar year 1990, 1991, or 1992, whichever is less.
30 percent limit.--The Governor of a State may limit the quantity of out-of-State municipal solid waste received for disposal at a landfill or incinerator in the State to an annual quantity not greater than 30 percent of all municipal solid waste received at that landfill or incinerator during calendar year 1990, 1991, or 1992, whichever is less, if, during calendar year 1990, 1991, or 1992, that landfill or incinerator received documented shipments of more than 50,000 tons of out- of-State municipal solid waste representing more than 30 percent of all municipal solid waste received at the landfill or incinerator during the calendar year concerned.
Authority to further limit.--Beginning with calendar year 1995, the Governor of a State may limit the disposal of out-of-State municipal solid waste at landfills or incinerators in the State by reducing the 30 percent annual quantity limitation in paragraph (2) to 20 percent in each of calendar years 1996 and 1997, and to 10 percent in each succeeding calendar year.
Authority To Prohibit Out-of-State Municipal Solid Waste Disposal at Certain Landfills and Incinerators.-- ``(1) New landfills and incinerators.--The Governor of a State may prohibit the disposal of out-of-State municipal solid waste in any new landfill or new incinerator in the State.
Landfills not complying with certain laws.--The Governor of a State may prohibit the disposal of out-of-State municipal solid waste in any landfill that does not meet all applicable Federal and State laws (including any Federal or State rule or regulation) relating to design and location standards, leachate collection, ground water monitoring, and financial assurance for closure and post-closure and corrective action.
Incinerators not complying with certain laws.--The Governor of a State may prohibit the disposal of out-of-State municipal solid waste in any incinerator that does not comply with section 129 of the Clean Air Act (42 United States Code 7429) and meet all applicable Federal and State laws (including any Federal or State rule or regulation) relating to facility design, operations, and emissions.
Industrial Solid Waste Disposed of at Certain Landfills or Incinerators.--A Governor may treat any out-of-State industrial solid waste as out-of-State municipal solid waste for purposes of this section if it is disposed of at a landfill or incinerator that receives municipal solid waste.
Authority of Counties.--The government of any county may exercise within the county the same authority as that provided to the Governor under subsections (a), (b), and (c) with respect to out-of- State municipal or industrial solid waste, except that in applying subsection (a)(2) in the case of a county, the reference to 30 percent shall be treated as a reference to 20 percent.
In any case in which both a county and the State in which such county is located have acted to establish prohibitions or limitations, or both, under subsection (a), (b), or (c), or any combination thereof, the most restrictive of such prohibitions or limitations shall govern in that county.
Applicability and Discrimination Provisions.--Any limitation imposed by a Governor under subsection (a)(1), (b), or (c) shall be applicable throughout the State and shall not discriminate against any shipments of out-of-State solid waste on the basis of State of origin.
Any limitation imposed by a county under subsection (d) shall be applicable throughout the county and shall not discriminate against any shipments of out-of-State solid waste on the basis of State of origin.
Determination of Quantity.--(1) Any Governor who intends to exercise the authority provided in subsection (a) shall, within 150 days after the effective date of this section, submit to the Administrator information documenting the quantity of out-of-State municipal solid waste received for disposal at each landfill and incinerator in the State during calendar years 1990, 1991 and 1992.
Any county which intends to exercise the authority provided in subsection (d) shall, within 120 days after the effective date of this section, submit to the Governor information documenting the quantity of out-of- State municipal solid waste received for disposal at each landfill and incinerator in the county during calendar years 1990, 1991, and 1992, and the Governor shall transmit such information to the Administrator.
On receipt of the information submitted pursuant to paragraph (1), the Administrator shall notify the Governor of each State and the public and shall provide a comment period of not less than 30 days.
Not later than 210 days after the effective date of this section, the Administrator shall publish a list of the quantity of out- of-State municipal solid waste that was received during calendar years 1990, 1991 and 1992, at each landfill and incinerator in each State in which the Governor intends to exercise the authority provided in subsection (a) and at each landfill and incinerator in each county which intends to exercise the authority provided in subsection (d).
Authority To Restrict In-State Municipal Solid Waste Exports.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), a Governor of a State may limit or prohibit the exportation outside the State of municipal solid waste generated in the State, in accordance with the comprehensive waste management plan of the affected local solid waste planning unit, or, if such a plan does not exist, in accordance with State law.
A Governor may not limit or prohibit the exportation of materials consisting solely of materials that have been separated from municipal solid waste for recycling.
Reporting Requirements.--The Governor of each State exercising any authority under subsection (a), (b) or (c) shall submit a report to the Administrator not less frequently than annually documenting the quantities of out-of-State municipal and industrial solid waste disposed of in landfills and incinerators in that State which accept municipal solid waste.
Each county exercising any authority under subsection (d) shall submit a report to the State not less frequently than annually documenting the quantities of out-of- State municipal and industrial solid waste disposed of in landfills and incinerators in that county which accept municipal solid waste, and the State shall submit such report to the Administrator.
Each such report shall specify the percentage of the total amount of solid waste disposed of in each such landfill and incinerator that is comprised of such out-of-State municipal and industrial solid waste.
Exemptions.--The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: ``(1) Material to be recycled, reclaimed, or reused.--Any metal, pipe, glass, plastic, paper, textile, or other material that has been separated or diverted from municipal solid waste and has been transported into the State for the purpose of recycling or reclamation and any material or product returned from a dispenser or distributor to the manufacturer for credit, evaluation, or possible reuse.
This paragraph shall not apply to any material disposed of in a landfill or incinerator.
Internal disposal.--Any solid waste that is generated by an industrial facility and transported for the purpose of treatment, storage, or disposal to a facility that is owned or operated by the generator of the waste, or is located on property owned by the generator or any affiliated person.
Air transportation waste.--Any solid waste generated incident to the provision of service in interstate, intrastate, foreign, or overseas air transportation.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) New landfill.--The term `new landfill' means any landfill or portion thereof other than an existing landfill.
Existing landfill.--The term `existing landfill' means either of the following: ``(A) A landfill or portion thereof authorized to receive waste under a permit under State law was issued before the enactment of this section; and which received shipments of out-of-State municipal solid waste during calendar year 1990, 1991, or 1992.
A proposed landfill or portion thereof that, prior to January 1, 1993, received both of the following: ``(i) An approval from either the affected local government or the local solid waste planning unit to receive municipal solid waste generated outside the jurisdiction of the affected local government, the solid waste planning unit, or the State in which the landfill is located.
A notice of decision from the State to grant a construction permit.
New incinerator.--The term `new incinerator' means any incinerator other than an existing incinerator.
Existing incinerator.--The term `existing incinerator' means an incinerator in operation on the date of enactment of this section that received, during calendar year 1990, 1991, or 1992 documented shipments of out-of-State municipal solid waste.
Out-of-state waste.--The term `out-of-State waste' means, with respect to a State, waste generated outside of the State.
With respect to a county, such term means waste generated outside of the State in which such county is located.
Such term includes waste generated outside of the United States.
Municipal solid waste.--The term `municipal solid waste' means refuse (and refuse-derived fuel) generated by the general public or from a residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial source (or any combination thereof), consisting of paper, wood, yard wastes, plastics, leather, rubber, or other combustible or noncombustible materials such as metal or glass (or any combination thereof).
The term does not include any of the following: ``(A) Any solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste under section 3001.
Any solid waste, including contaminated soil and debris, resulting from a response action taken under section 104 or 106 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (42 United States Code 9604 or 9606) or a corrective action taken under this Act.
Any medical waste that is segregated from or not mixed with municipal solid waste.
Industrial solid waste.--The term `industrial solid waste' means solid waste generated from manufacturing or industrial processing operations that is not identical to municipal solid waste with respect to the physical and chemical state of the waste and the composition of the waste.
The term includes construction and demolition debris.
Affiliated person.--The term `affiliated person' means, with respect to the generator of any solid waste, any person which controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with the generator.''.
TABLE OF CONTENTS AMENDMENT.
The table of contents of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to subtitle D the following new item: ``Sec.
Interstate transportation of nonhazardous solid waste.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date 6 months after enactment.