This Act may be cited as the ``East Saint Louis Jefferson National Expansion Memorial Architectural Design Competition Act''.
Commission.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established a commission to be composed of 7 members appointed by the Secretary of the Interior, of whom-- (A) two shall be selected from among persons who represent the Saint Louis, Missouri, community; (B) two shall be selected from among persons who represent the East Saint Louis, Illinois, community; (C) two shall be selected from among persons who represent the Department of the Interior; and (D) one shall be selected from among disinterested persons who are experts in the area of architectural design, and who shall serve as the professional advisor to the Commission.
Appointment of members.--The Secretary shall appoint the members of the commission not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members of the commission.
Meetings.-- (A) Initial meeting.--The Secretary shall schedule and call the first meeting not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the commission have been appointed.
Subsequent meetings.--The commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Compensation of members.--Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except that members shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the commission.
Staff.-- (A) In general.--The Chairperson of the commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the commission.
Compensation.--The Chairperson may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Powers of the commission.-- (A) Information from federal agencies.--The commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the commission.
Postal services.--The commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Architectural Competition.--The commission shall conduct an architectural competition to solicit design proposals for a museum to be built on the East Saint Louis portion of the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial.
The member of the Commission appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(1)(D) shall organize, manage, and direct the competition, identify potential jurors, and appoint jurors, with the approval of the commission.
Study.--The commission shall conduct a study into possible funding mechanisms for the development, construction, and maintenance of the museum identified in subsection (b).
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the commission shall submit a report, with recommendations, to the President and Congress.
The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the commission with respect to the museum and possible funding mechanisms.
There are authorized to be appropriated $300,000 to carry out this Act.