This Act may be cited as the ``Less Pollution Through Technology Act of 1997.''
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The development of new and innovative environmental technologies, including technologies for monitoring environmental compliance, has been identified as a priority by the Environmental Protection Agency (referred to in this Act as the ``Agency'').
Current Agency environmental monitoring requirements typically specify the use of a particular analytical method that must be precisely followed, including the use of specific procedures and instrumentation.
These requirements inhibit introduction of new environmental monitoring technologies that could prove more accurate, reliable, and cost-effective because of time consuming and labor-intensive procedures for revising regulations.
The Agency is evaluating the barriers to the introduction of new and innovative environmental monitoring technologies and has begun the transition of converting from the current analytical methods approach to a performance-based measurement system.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) facilitate the development, introduction, and use of new and innovative environmental monitoring technologies through the conversion of the Agency's analytical methods to a performance-based measurement system; and (2) establish a deadline for the Agency to implement a performance-based measurement system to cover all media and multimedia environmental monitoring.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Agency'' means the Environmental Protection Agency.
The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The term ``environmental monitoring technologies'' means procedures or techniques associated with the performance, technical capability, or environmental impact of an analytical method.
The term ``performance-based measurement system'' means a system that ensures environmental monitoring data quality assurance objectives are met, without prescribing particular procedures, techniques, or instrumentation for meeting such objectives.
Establishment.--(1) No later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall establish and begin implementing a performance-based measurement system that will facilitate the use of new environmental monitoring technologies, particularly monitoring required to demonstrate compliance with laws and regulations.
Notwithstanding the implementation of a performance-based measurement system, analytical methods existing on the date of enactment of this Act shall be deemed acceptable to the Administrator until such time as the Administrator determines that such methods are no longer acceptable.
Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to permit the Agency to devise or endorse a process that permits or requires the rating or evaluation of one technology or instrument over another.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require the approval of a particular environmental technology or instrument.
Status.--A performance-based measurement system implemented pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be equivalent to Agency analytical methods existing on the date of enactment of this Act for purposes of compliance with all applicable environmental statutes and regulations.
PERFORMANCE-BASED MEASUREMENT SYSTEM ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
Establishment.--The Administrator shall establish a Performance-Based Measurement System Advisory Committee no later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Purposes.--The Performance-Based Measurement System Advisory Committee shall-- (1) assist the Administrator in developing a plan for implementation of a performance-based measurement system; (2) advise the Administrator regarding how Agency policies, regulations, standards, and procedures can be used to implement a performance-based measurement system; and (3) assist the Administrator in developing the report required by section 5 of this Act.
Membership.--The Performance-Based Measurement System Advisory Committee shall be comprised of 12 members selected for appointment to provide a broad and balanced representation of interested parties, including the analytical instruments industry, environmental testing laboratories, representatives from State regulatory agencies, public interest groups, and professional or technical societies.
Duration.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply with respect to the duration of the advisory committee established under this section.
Duties.--The Performance-Based Measurement System Advisory Committee shall convene at least twice a year, and may meet at additional times as required by the Administrator.
The Performance- Based Measurement System Advisory Committee shall submit to the Administrator such recommendations as it believes are consistent with its purposes.
The Administrator shall make available to the Performance-Based Measurement System Advisory Committee such staff as are necessary to carry out its purposes.
No later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to Congress a report containing a plan to establish a performance-based measurement system approval process in accordance with section 4.