This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security Privacy Act of 1994''.
FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The social security account number is a very effective and powerful method of identifying individuals in modern society and its use must therefor be restricted if reasonable levels of privacy are to be maintained.
Numerous citizens concerned for their privacy have petitioned the Congress that use of their social security account numbers at all levels of government be restricted.
Declaration of Policy.--It is therefore the policy of the Congress to restrict the use of the social security account number to purposes most directly related to social security and other social services.
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF SOCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNT NUMBERS.
In General.--So much of section 205(c)(2)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 405(c)(2)(C)) as precedes clause (iii) is amended to read as follows: ``(C)(i) Except to the extent otherwise provided in this subsection or to the extent otherwise provided in any other provision of Federal law specifically referring to this subparagraph, it shall be unlawful for the Federal Government, any State (or political subdivision thereof), or any agency thereof-- ``(I) to deny to any individual any right, benefit, or privilege provided by law because of such individual's refusal to disclose his or her social security account number assigned by the Secretary, or ``(II) to utilize, without the individual's written consent, any number consisting in whole or in part of the individual's social security account number assigned by the Secretary, or any derivitive thereof, for purposes of identifying the individual.
Any Federal, State, or local government agency which requests an individual to disclose his or her social security account number shall inform such individual whether that disclosure is mandatory or voluntary, by what statutory or other authority such number is solicited, and what uses will be made of it.
Any State (or political subdivision thereof) may, in the administration of any general public assistance law within its jurisdiction, utilize the social security account numbers issued by the Secretary for the purpose of establishing the identification of individuals affected by such law, and may require any individual who is or appears to be so affected to furnish to such State (or political subdivision thereof) or any agency thereof having administrative responsibility for such law, the social security account number (or numbers, if he or she has more than one such number) issued to him or her by the Secretary.''.
Additional Amendments.--Section 205(c)(2)(C) of such Act is further amended-- (1) by striking the clause (iii) added by section 2201(b)(3) of Public Law 101-624 (relating to administration of section 506 of the Federal Crop Insurance Act); and (2) in clause (v), by striking ``general public assistance, driver's license, or motor vehicle registration law'' and inserting ``general public assistance law'', and by striking ``the laws referred to in clause (i)'' and inserting ``such law''.
Clerical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 205(c)(2)(C) of such Act is further amended-- (A) in the first sentence of clause (iv), by striking ``subclause (I) of''; (B) by striking the second sentence of clause (iv); and (C) by striking the clause (vii) added by section 1735(b) of Public Law 101-264, and, in subclause (IV) of the remaining clause (vii), by inserting ``, or a request therefor,'' after ``number''.
(A) Section 205(c)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 405(c)(2)(D)) (relating to requirement of blood donors to furnish social security account numbers) is repealed.
Section 1141(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 1320b-11(c)) (relating to Blood Donor Locator Service) is amended by inserting ``(if disclosed by the blood donor to the authorized person making the request)'' after ``social security account number''.
Section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974 (Public Law 93- 579; 88 United States Statutes at Large 1909) is repealed.
Effective Date and Transitional Rules.-- (1) Effective date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect January 1, 1995.
State tax laws.--The amendments made by this section shall not apply with respect to the use, on or after January 1, 1995, by an agency of a State (or a political subdivision thereof) of an individual's social security account number disclosed to such State (or political subdivision) before such date, if-- (A) the disclosure of such number was required under a tax law of such State (or such political subdivision) prior to such date, (B) the disclosure was for the purpose of maintaining a system of records which was in existence and operating before such date, and (C) the use of such number on or after such date is restricted solely to the administration of such tax law.
Driver's license and motor vehicle registration.--The amendments made by this section shall not apply with respect to driver's licenses issued, or motor vehicle registrations executed, before January 1, 1995, until the respective renewal dates thereof on or after such date.