EDUCATION SCHOLARS BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM.
Part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subpart 9--Education Scholars Block Grant Program ``SEC.
SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE; AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
Short Title.--This subpart may be cited as the `Teacher Investment Act'.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this subpart-- ``(1) to attract more of our Nation's most academically gifted students into teaching careers in elementary and secondary education; ``(2) to retain in teaching our Nation's best teachers who have demonstrated promise in, and a commitment to, a teaching career; ``(3) to increase the public status of a teaching career in elementary and secondary education; ``(4) to address the anticipated shortage of teachers in the next several decades; and ``(5) to provide States with the flexibility to integrate State teacher education initiatives with Federal teacher scholarship support.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subpart such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1998 and each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
Program Authority.--The Secretary may award grants to States from allotments under section 420I to enable the States to provide scholarships to individuals who-- ``(1)(A) have completed at least half of the academic credit requirements for graduation from an institution of higher education with a bachelor's degree, or with a graduate degree that prepares the individual for licensure or certification as an elementary school or secondary school teacher; ``(2) are admitted to or enrolled in an institution of higher education; ``(3) have demonstrated outstanding academic achievement while enrolled in an institution of higher education; and ``(4) are committed to becoming or remaining elementary school or secondary school teachers.
Period of Award.--A State shall determine the scholarship period, except that a scholarship recipient shall not receive a scholarship award for more than 2 years of study at any institution of higher education.
Allocation Formula.--From the sums appropriated pursuant to the authority of section 420G(c) for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall allot to each State that has an agreement under section 420J an amount equal to $5,000 multiplied by the number of scholarships determined by the Secretary to be available to such State in accordance with subsection (b).
Number of Scholarships Available.--The number of scholarships to be made available in a State for any fiscal year shall bear the same ratio to the number of scholarships made available to all States as the State's population ages 5 through 17 bears to the population ages 5 through 17 in all the States, except that not less than 10 scholarships shall be made available to any State.
Use of Census Data.--For the purpose of this section, the population ages 5 through 17 in a State and in all the States shall be determined by the most recently available data from the Bureau of the Census that the Secretary determines is satisfactory.
``The Secretary shall enter into an agreement with each State desiring to participate in the scholarship program under this subpart.
Each such agreement shall include provisions to ensure that-- ``(1) the State educational agency will administer the program in the State; ``(2) the State educational agency will comply with the provisions of this subpart; ``(3) the State educational agency will conduct outreach activities to publicize the availability of the scholarships to all eligible postsecondary students in the State, with particular emphasis on activities designed to ensure that students from low-income and moderate-income families have access to the information regarding the opportunity for full participation in the program; and ``(4) the State educational agency will pay to each individual in the State who is awarded a scholarship the cost of tuition and fees at an institution of higher education for a year, except that such payment shall not exceed $5,000.
SELECTION OF EDUCATION SCHOLARS.
Establishment of Criteria.--The State educational agency shall establish the criteria for selection of scholars.
Such criteria shall-- ``(1) fulfill the purpose of the subpart in accordance with a State's projected elementary school and secondary school teaching needs and priorities; and ``(2) require a scholarship recipient to have demonstrated outstanding academic achievement and a commitment to a teaching career, as determined by the State educational agency.
Limitations.--In awarding scholarships under this subpart, the State educational agency shall provide-- ``(1) not less than 75 percent of the scholarships to individuals who do not possess a bachelor's degree; and ``(2) not more than 25 percent of the scholarships to individuals who are pursuing a graduate degree.
Consultation Requirement.--In carrying out this subpart, the State educational agency shall consult with school administrators, school boards, teachers, and counselors.
AWARD AMOUNT; SCHOLARSHIP CONDITIONS.
Award Amount.--Each individual awarded a scholarship under this subpart shall receive an award for the cost of tuition and fees at an institution of higher education of not more than $5,000 for an academic year of study.
Conditions.--Each State educational agency receiving a grant under this subpart shall establish procedures to ensure that each scholarship recipient-- ``(1) pursues a course of study at an institution of higher education; ``(2) maintains a 3.0 grade point average on a 4.0 scale; and ``(3) enters into an agreement to teach in accordance with section 420M(a).
SCHOLARSHIP AGREEMENT; REPAYMENT PROVISIONS.
Scholarship Agreement.--Each recipient of a scholarship under this subpart shall enter into an agreement with the State educational agency under which the recipient shall-- ``(1) within the 2-year period after completing the education for which the scholarship was awarded, teach for a period of 2 years as an elementary school or secondary school teacher in the State served by the State educational agency; ``(2) provide the State educational agency with evidence of compliance, determined pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secretary, with the provisions of paragraph (1); and ``(3) repay all or part of the scholarship award received in accordance with subsection (b) in the event the conditions of paragraph (1) are not complied with, except as provided by section 420N.
Repayment Provisions.--A recipient of a scholarship found by the State educational agency to be in noncompliance with the agreement entered into under subsection (a) shall be required to repay to the State educational agency a pro rata amount of such scholarship assistance received, plus interest, at the rate of 8 percent or the rate applicable to loans in the applicable period under part B of this title, whichever is lower, and where applicable, reasonable collection fees, on a schedule to be prescribed by the Secretary pursuant to regulations promulgated under this subpart.
EXCEPTIONS TO REPAYMENT PROVISIONS.
Deferral During Certain Periods.--A scholarship recipient shall not be considered in violation of the agreement entered into pursuant to section 420M(a) during any period in which the recipient-- ``(1) is pursuing a full-time course of study related to the field of teaching at an institution of higher education; ``(2) is serving, not in excess of 3 years, as a member of the Armed Forces; ``(3) is temporarily totally disabled for a period of time not to exceed 3 years as established by the sworn affidavit of a qualified physician; ``(4) is unable to secure employment for a period not to exceed 12 months by reason of the care required by a spouse who is disabled; ``(5) is seeking and unable to find full-time employment for a single period not to exceed 12 months; or ``(6) satisfies the provisions of additional repayment exceptions that may be prescribed by the Secretary in regulations promulgated under this subpart.
Forgiveness if Permanently Totally Disabled.--A recipient shall be excused from repayment of any scholarship assistance received under this subpart if the recipient becomes permanently and totally disabled as established by the sworn affidavit of a qualified physician.
CONSTRUCTION OF NEEDS PROVISIONS.
``Except as provided in section 471, nothing in this subpart, or any other Act, shall be construed to permit the receipt of a scholarship under this subpart to be counted for any needs analysis in connection with the awarding of any grant or the making of any loan under this Act or any other provision of Federal law relating to education assistance.