This Act may be cited as the ``Youth Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act''.
Title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290aa et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART G--COMPETITIVE GRANT PROGRAMS FOR YOUTH SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary shall award grants on a competitive basis to eligible consortia to enable such consortia to establish the programs described in subsection (c).
Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to applications from eligible consortia that provide services in rural areas or for Native Americans.
Use of Funds.--An eligible consortium receiving amounts under subsection (a) shall use such amounts to establish school-based substance abuse prevention and student assistance programs for youth, including after school programs, to provide services that address youth substance abuse, including services that-- ``(1) identify youth at risk for substance abuse; ``(2) refer any youth at risk for substance abuse for substance abuse treatment; ``(3) provide effective primary prevention programing; ``(4) target underserved areas, such as rural areas; and ``(5) target populations, such as Native Americans, that are underserved.
Application.--An eligible consortium that desires a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section and annually thereafter, an eligible consortium receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary a report describing the programs carried out pursuant to this section.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Eligible consortium.--The term `eligible consortium' means an entity composed of a local educational agency and community-based substance abuse prevention providers and student assistance providers in which the agency and providers maintain equal responsibility in providing the services described in subsection (c).
Local educational agency.--The term `local educational agency' has the meaning given such term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
GRANTS TO TREATMENT FACILITIES.
In General.--The Secretary shall award grants on a competitive basis to inpatient and outpatient treatment facilities that provide the substance abuse treatment services described in subsection (d).
Eligible Applicant.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), a treatment facility must provide or propose to provide alcohol or drug treatment services for individuals under the age of 22 years.
Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to applications from treatment facilities that provide treatment services in rural areas, for Native Americans, or for underserved populations.
Use of Funds.--A treatment facility receiving amounts under subsection (a) shall use such amounts to provide substance abuse treatment services for youth, including community-based aftercare services that provide treatment for the period of time following an individual's discharge from a drug treatment center.
Application.--A treatment facility that desires a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section and annually thereafter, a treatment facility receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary a report describing the services provided pursuant to this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $15,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
GRANTS TO SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT PROVIDERS.
In General.--The Secretary shall award grants on a competitive basis to State and local substance abuse prevention and treatment providers to enable such providers to offer training to provide prevention and treatment services for youth.
Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to applications from areas in which-- ``(1) there is a demonstrated high rate of substance abuse by youth; and ``(2) the population is identified as underserved or the prevention and treatment providers in the area use distance learning.
Application.--A treatment provider that desires a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section and annually thereafter, a treatment provider receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary a report describing the services provided pursuant to this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.