This Act may be cited as the ``Genetic Privacy and Nondiscrimination Act of 1999''.
PROHIBITION OF HEALTH INSURANCE DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF GENETIC INFORMATION.
Group Coverage.-- (1) Amendments to public health service act.-- (A) Inclusion of genetic testing in nondiscrimination requirements.--Section 2702(a)(1)(F) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg- 1(a)(1)(F)), as added by section 102(a) of Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, is amended by inserting ``(or a request for, or receipt of, genetic information or a genetic test)'' after ``genetic information''.
Prohibitions against use and disclosure of genetic information.--Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITIONS AGAINST USE AND DISCLOSURE OF GENETIC INFORMATION.
Prohibition of Use of Genetic Information.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, may not use genetic information to reject, deny, limit, cancel, refuse to renew, establish differential rates or premium payments for, or otherwise affect benefits provided under the plan or health insurance coverage offered in connection with the plan.
Prohibition of Disclosure of Genetic Information.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), regardless of the manner in which genetic information was received, or of the source of such information, including information received from an individual, a health insurance issuer in connection with health insurance coverage offered in connection with a group health plan and a group health plan may not disclose or be compelled (by subpoena or any other means) to disclose genetic information about an individual unless such disclosure is specifically authorized by the individual involved or the legal representative of the individual through a written authorization which includes a description of the information being disclosed, the name of the individual or entity to whom the disclosure is being made, and the purpose of the disclosure.
Exceptions.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), genetic information concerning an individual may be disclosed if such disclosure-- ``(A) is authorized under Federal or State criminal laws relating to the identification of individuals, or as is necessary for the purpose of a criminal or death investigation, a criminal or juvenile proceeding, an inquest, or a child fatality review by a multidisciplinary child abuse team; ``(B) is required under the specific order of a Federal or State court; ``(C) is authorized under Federal or State law for the purpose of establishing paternity; or ``(D) is for the purpose of identifying bodies.
Application of subsection.--The prohibitions of this subsection shall apply to any redisclosure by any entity after another entity has disclosed the genetic information.''.
Definitions.--Section 2791(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-91(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(15) Genetic information; genetic test.-- ``(A) Genetic information.--The term `genetic information' with respect to an individual means information about the genes of the individual or a member of the individual's family or about any gene products or inherited characteristics that may derive from the individual or a member of the individual's family.
Genetic test.--The term `genetic test' means a test for determining the presence or absence of genetic characteristics in an individual, including tests of nucleic acids such as DNA, RNA, and mitochondrial DNA, chromosomes, or proteins in order to diagnose a genetic characteristic.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 2723(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-23(c)) is amended by striking ``section 2704'' and inserting ``sections 2704 and 2707''.
ERISA amendments.-- (A) Inclusion of genetic testing in nondiscrimination requirements.--Section 702(a)(1)(F) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1182(a)(1)(F)) is amended by inserting ``(or a request for, or receipt of, genetic information or a genetic test)'' after ``genetic information''.
Prohibition against use and disclosure of genetic information.--Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITION AGAINST USE AND DISCLOSURE OF GENETIC INFORMATION.
Prohibition of Use of Genetic Information.--A group health plan, and a health insurance insurer offering health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, may not use genetic information to reject, deny, limit, cancel, refuse to renew, increase the rates of, or otherwise affect benefits provided under the plan or health insurance coverage offered in connection with the plan.
Prohibition of Disclosure of Genetic Information.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), regardless of the manner in which genetic information was received, or of the source of such information, including information received from an individual, a health insurance issuer in connection with health insurance coverage offered in connection with a group health plan and a group health plan may not disclose or be compelled (by subpoena or any other means) to disclose genetic information about an individual unless such disclosure is specifically authorized by the individual involved or the legal representative of the individual through a written authorization which includes a description of the information being disclosed, the name of the individual or entity to whom the disclosure is being made, and the purpose of the disclosure.
Exceptions.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), genetic information concerning an individual may be disclosed if such disclosure-- ``(A) is authorized under Federal or State criminal laws relating to the identification of individuals, or as is necessary for the purpose of a criminal or death investigation, a criminal or juvenile proceeding, an inquest, or a child fatality review by a multidisciplinary child abuse team; ``(B) is required under the specific order of a Federal or State court; ``(C) is authorized under Federal or State law for the purpose of establishing paternity; or ``(D) is for the purpose of identifying bodies.
Application of subsection.--The prohibitions of this subsection shall apply to any redisclosure by any entity after another entity has disclosed the genetic information.''.
Definitions.--Section 733(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1186(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Genetic information; genetic test.-- ``(A) The term `genetic information' with respect to an individual means information about the genes of the individual or a member of the individual's family or about any gene products or inherited characteristics that may derive from the individual or a member of the individual's family.
The term `genetic test' means a test for determining the presence or absence of genetic characteristics in an individual, including tests of nucleic acids such as DNA, RNA, and mitochondrial DNA, chromosomes, or proteins in order to diagnose a genetic characteristic.''.
Conforming amendments.--(i) Section 731(c) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191(c)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 714''.
Section 732(a) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191a(a)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 714''.
The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 712 the following new item: ``Sec.
Prohibition against use and disclosure of genetic information.''.
Individual Health Insurance.--Part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after section 2752 the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITION AGAINST USE AND DISCLOSURE OF GENETIC INFORMATION.
``The provisions of section 2707 shall apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in the individual market in the same manner as it applies to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan in the small or large group market.''.
Treatment of Genetic Information under Programs Administered by the Department of Veterans' Affairs.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter III of chapter 73 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 7334 the following new section: ``Sec.
Treatment of genetic information ``The Secretary shall prescribe standards, relating to the use and disclosure of genetic information in connection with hospital care and medical services provided under chapter 17 of this title, which are consistent with the standards applicable under section 2707 of the Public Health Service Act (relating to prohibitions against use and disclosure of genetic information) in connection with benefits provided by group health plans and health insurance coverage offered by health insurance issuers.''.
Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 73 of title 38, United States Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7334 the following new item: ``7335.
Treatment of genetic information.''.
Effective Dates.--(1) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2000.
The amendments made by subsection (b) shall apply with respect to health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the individual market on or after such date.
The amendments made by subsection (c) shall apply with respect to hospital care and medical services provided on or after such date.
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES INVOLVING GENETIC INFORMATION.
Acquisition and Use of Genetic Information and Genetic Testing.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), it shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer-- (A) to attempt to acquire, to acquire, or to use the genetic information of an employee or applicant for employment, or (B) to require a genetic test of an employee or applicant for employment, for the purpose of distinguishing among employees or applicants for employment or for the purpose of discriminating against or restricting any right or benefit otherwise due or available to an employee or applicant for employment, in connection with any matter relating to employment or employment opportunities, including terms and conditions of employment, privileges and benefits for employees, and termination of employment.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to any act described in paragraph (1) with respect to genetic information or any requirement described in paragraph (1) for a genetic test if such act or requirement-- (A) is job-related and consistent with business necessity, or (B) is required under Federal or State law.
Nondisclosure and Confidentiality of Genetic Information.--It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer-- (1) to allow access to genetic information of employees to any person other than persons whose duties or responsibilities in connection with the employer require access to such information for purposes consistent with subsection (a), or (2) to establish or maintain access by the employer to an employee's genetic information which has been acquired-- (A) by any employee welfare benefit plan established or maintained by the employer in which such employee is a participant (or by any other fiduciary of such a plan), or (B) by any health insurance issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan in which such employee is a participant, without the prior, written, and informed consent of the employee, signed by the employee, setting forth the person or persons to whom access to such information is to be allowed.
Enforcement.--The powers, remedies, and procedures set forth in sections 705 through 709 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 shall be the powers, remedies, and procedures this section provides to any person alleging a violation of this section.
Definitions.--As used in this section: (1) Employer; employee.--The terms ``employer'' and ``employee'' have the meanings given such terms, respectively, in section 701 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e).
Employment or employment opportunities.--The term ``employment or employment opportunities'' includes job application procedures, hiring, advancement, discharge, compensation, job training, or any other term, condition, or privilege of employment.
Genetic information.--The term ``genetic information'' with respect to an individual means information about the genes of the individual or a member of the individual's family or about any gene products or inherited characteristics that may derive from the individual or a member of the individual's family.
Genetic test.--The term ``genetic test'' means a test for determining the presence or absence of genetic characteristics in an individual, including tests of nucleic acids such as DNA, RNA, and mitochondrial DNA, chromosomes, or proteins in order to diagnose a genetic characteristic.
Other terms.-- (A) Group health plan; health insurance issuer; health insurance coverage.--The terms ``group health plan'', ``health insurance issuer'', and ``health insurance coverage'' have the meanings given such terms, respectively, in section 733 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1191b(a)).
Employee welfare benefit plan; participant.-- The terms ``employee welfare benefit plan'' and ``participant'' have the meanings given such terms, respectively, in section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002).
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION BY THE NATIONAL BIOETHICS ADVISORY COMMISSION.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the National Bioethics Advisory Commission shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report containing recommendations on-- (1) the development and implementation of standards to provide increased protection for the collection, storage, and use of identifiable DNA samples and genetic information obtained from those samples; and (2) the development and implementation of appropriate standards for the acquisition and retention of genetic information in all settings, including appropriate exceptions.