This Act may be cited as the ``Initiative 911 Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Open communication of information and ideas among peoples of the world contributes to international peace and stability, and that the promotion of such communication is important to the national security of the United States.
The United States needs to improve its communication of information and ideas to people in foreign countries, particularly in countries with significant Muslim populations.
A significant expansion of United States international broadcasting would provide a cost-effective means of improving communication with countries with significant Muslim populations by providing news, information, and analysis, as well as cultural programming, through both radio and television broadcasts.
The report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States stated that, ``Recognizing that Arab and Muslim audiences rely on satellite television and radio, the government has begun some promising initiatives in television and radio broadcasting to the Arab world, Iran, and Afghanistan.
These efforts are beginning to reach large audiences.
The Broadcasting Board of Governors has asked for much larger resources.
It should get them.''.
SPECIAL AUTHORITY FOR SURGE CAPACITY.
The United States International Broadcasting Act of 1994 (22 United States Code 6201 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
SPECIAL AUTHORITY FOR SURGE CAPACITY.
Emergency Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--Whenever the President determines it to be important to the national interests of the United States and so certifies to the appropriate congressional committees, the President, on such terms and conditions as the President may determine, is authorized to direct any department, agency, or other entity of the United States to furnish the Broadcasting Board of Governors with such assistance as may be necessary to provide international broadcasting activities of the United States with a surge capacity to support United States foreign policy objectives during a crisis abroad.
Supersedes existing law.--The authority of paragraph (1) supersedes any other provision of law.
Surge capacity defined.--In this subsection, the term `surge capacity' means the financial and technical resources necessary to carry out broadcasting activities in a geographical area during a crisis.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--Effective October 1, 2004, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President such amounts as may be necessary for the President to carry out this section, except that no such amount may be appropriated which, when added to amounts previously appropriated for such purpose but not yet obligated, would cause such amounts to exceed $25,000,000.
Availability of funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in this subsection are authorized to remain available until expended.
Designation of appropriations.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in this subsection may be referred to as the `United States International Broadcasting Surge Capacity Fund'.''.
In each annual report submitted under section 305(a)(9) of the United States International Broadcasting Act of 1994 (22 United States Code 6204(a)(9)) after the date of enactment of this Act, the Broadcasting Board of Governors shall give special attention to reporting on the activities carried out under this Act.
In General.--In addition to amounts otherwise available for such purposes, the following amounts are authorized to be appropriated to carry out United States Government broadcasting activities under the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948 (22 United States Code 1431 et sequentes), the United States International Broadcasting Act of 1994 (22 United States Code 6201 et sequentes), the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998 (as enacted in division of G of the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999; Public Law 107-277), and this Act, and to carry out other authorities in law consistent with such purposes: (1) International broadcasting operations.--For ``International Broadcasting Operations'', $497,000,000 for the fiscal year 2005.
Broadcasting capital improvements.--For ``Broadcasting Capital Improvements'', $70,000,000 for the fiscal year 2005.
Availability of Funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in this section are authorized to remain available until expended.