This Act may be cited as the ``Water Infrastructure Security and Research Development Act''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; (2) the term ``research organization'' means a public or private institution or entity, including a national laboratory, State or local agency, university, or association of water management professionals, or a consortium of such institutions or entities, that has the expertise to conduct research to improve the security of water supply systems; and (3) the term ``water supply system'' means a public water system, as defined in section 1401(4) of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 United States Code 300f(4)), and a treatment works, as defined in section 212 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1292), that is publicly owned or principally treating municipal waste water or domestic sewage.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM SECURITY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE.
In General.--The Administrator, in consultation and coordination with other relevant Federal agencies, shall establish a program of research and development activities to achieve short-term and long-term improvements to technologies and related processes for the security of water supply systems.
In carrying out the program, the Administrator shall make grants to or enter into cooperative agreements, interagency agreements, or contracts with research organizations.
Projects.--Awards provided under this section shall be used by a research organization to-- (1) conduct research related to or develop vulnerability assessment technologies and related processes for water supply systems to assess physical vulnerabilities (including biological, chemical, and radiological contamination) and information systems vulnerabilities; (2) conduct research related to or develop technologies and related processes for protecting the physical assets and information systems of water supply systems from threats; (3) develop programs for appropriately disseminating the results of research and development to the public to increase awareness of the nature and extent of threats to water supply systems, and to managers of water supply systems to increase the use of technologies and related processes for responding to those threats; (4) develop scientific protocols for physical and information systems security at water supply systems; (5) conduct research related to or develop real-time monitoring systems to protect against chemical, biological, and radiological attacks; (6) conduct research related to or develop technologies and related processes for mitigation of, response to, and recovery from biological, chemical, and radiological contamination of water supply systems; or (7) carry out other research and development activities the Administrator considers appropriate to improve the security of water supply systems.
Guidelines, Procedures, and Criteria.-- (1) Requirement.--The Administrator shall, in consultation with representatives of relevant Federal and State agencies, water supply systems, and other appropriate public and private entities, publish application and selection guidelines, procedures, and criteria for awards under this section.
Report to congress.--Not later than 90 days before publication under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall transmit to Congress the guidelines, procedures, and criteria proposed to be published under paragraph (1).
Diversity of awards.--The Administrator shall ensure that, to the maximum extent practicable, awards under this section are made for a wide variety of projects described in subsection (b) to meet the needs of water supply systems of various sizes and are provided to geographically, socially, and economically diverse recipients.
Security.--The Administrator shall include as a condition for receiving an award under this section requirements to ensure that the recipient has in place appropriate security measures regarding the entities and individuals who carry out research and development activities under the award.
Dissemination.--The Administrator shall include as a condition for receiving an award under this section requirements to ensure the appropriate dissemination of the results of activities carried out under the award.
EFFECT ON OTHER AUTHORITIES.
Nothing in this Act limits or preempts authorities of the Administrator under other provisions of law (including the Safe Drinking Water Act and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act) to award grants or to enter into interagency agreements, cooperative agreements, or contracts for the types of projects and activities described in this Act.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator to carry out this Act $12,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006.
Availability.--Funds appropriated under subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.
Passed the House of Representatives December 18, 2001.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.