This Act may be cited as the ``Cancer Research Fund Act of 1997''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CANCER RESEARCH TRUST FUND.
Part A of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 281 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CANCER RESEARCH TRUST FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund, to be known as the `Cancer Research Trust Fund' (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Fund'), consisting of such amounts as are credited or paid to the Fund as provided for in section 6098 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and any interest earned on investment of amounts in the Fund.
Investment of Trust Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to invest such portion of the Fund as is not, in the Secretary's judgment, required to meet current withdrawals.
Such investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.
For such purpose, such obligations may be acquired-- ``(A) on original issue at the issue price, or ``(B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
The purposes for which obligations of the United States may be issued under chapter 31 of title 31, of the United States Code, are hereby extended to authorize the issuance at par of special obligations exclusively to the Fund.
Such special obligations shall bear interest at a rate equal to the average rate of interest, computed as to the end of the calendar month next preceding the date of such issue, borne by all marketable interest-bearing obligations of the United States then forming a part of the Public Debt; except that where such average rate is not a multiple of one-eighth of 1 percent, the rate of interest of such special obligations shall be the multiple of one-eighth of 1 percent next lower than such average rate.
Such special obligations shall be issued only if the Secretary of the Treasury determines that the purchase of other interest- bearing obligations of the United States, or of obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States on original issue or at the market price, is not in the public interest.
Sale of obligation.--Any obligation acquired by the Fund (except special obligations issued exclusively to the Fund) may be sold by the Secretary of the Treasury at the market price, and such special obligations may be redeemed at par plus accrued interest.
Credits to trust fund.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Fund.
Obligations From Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall annually make available such sums as are available in the Fund (including any amounts not obligated in previous fiscal years) to the National Institutes of Health for the conduct of biomedical, intramural and extramural research.
Director of nih.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health may distribute amounts made available under paragraph (1) among the various research institutes and centers of the National Institutes of Health to enable such institutes and centers to conduct research that the Director determines is appropriate.
The Director shall make awards from amounts available under paragraph (1) for research on cancer.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Amounts provided to an institute or center under subsection (c) shall be used to supplement and not supplant other research conducted with Federal funds.
Limitation.--No expenditure shall be made under subsection (c)(1) during any fiscal year in which the annual amount appropriated for the National Institutes of Health is less than the amount so appropriated for the prior fiscal year.''.
AMENDMENT TO INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information and returns) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANCER RESEARCH TRUST FUND ``Sec.
Designation to Cancer Research Trust Fund.
DESIGNATION TO CANCER RESEARCH TRUST FUND.
In General.--Every individual (other than a nonresident alien) may-- ``(1) designate that a portion (not less than $1) of any overpayment of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for the taxable year, and ``(2) provide that a cash contribution (not less than $1), be paid over to the Cancer Research Trust Fund in accordance with the provisions of section 404F of the Public Health Service Act.
In the case of a joint return of a husband and wife, each spouse may designate one-half of any such overpayment of tax (not less than $2).
Manner and Time of Designation.--Any designation or payment under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year only at the time of filing the original return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year.
Such designation shall be made on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature, and in close proximity to such signature, and shall be labeled `Cancer Research Fund'.
Overpayments Treated as Refunded.--For purposes of this section, any overpayment of tax designated under subsection (a) shall be treated as being refunded to the taxpayer as of the last day prescribed for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 (determined with regard to extensions) or, if later, the date the return is filed.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of overpayments and contributions to Cancer Research Trust Fund.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.