This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Whistleblower Act of 1995''.
The purpose of this Act is to-- (1) reduce and eliminate fraud and abuse under the medicare program; (2) reduce negligent and fraudulent medicare billings by providers; (3) provide medicare beneficiaries with incentives to report inappropriate billing practices; and (4) provide savings to the medicare trust funds by increasing the recovery of medicare overpayments.
REQUEST FOR ITEMIZED BILL FOR MEDICARE ITEMS AND SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1128A of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(m) Written Request for Itemized Bill.-- ``(1) In general.--A beneficiary may submit a written request for an itemized bill for medical or other items or services provided to such beneficiary by any person (including an organization, agency, or other entity) that receives payment under title XVIII for providing such items or services to such beneficiary.
30-day period to receive bill.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which a request under paragraph (1) has been received, a person described in such paragraph shall furnish an itemized bill describing each medical or other item or service provided to the beneficiary requesting the itemized bill.
Penalty.--Whoever knowingly fails to furnish an itemized bill in accordance with subparagraph (A) shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $100 for each such failure.
Review of itemized bill.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the receipt of an itemized bill furnished under paragraph (1), a beneficiary may submit a written request for a review of the itemized bill to the appropriate fiscal intermediary or carrier with a contract under section 1816 or 1842.
Specific allegations.--A request for a review of the itemized bill shall identify-- ``(i) specific medical or other items or services that the beneficiary believes were not provided as claimed, or ``(ii) any other billing irregularity (including duplicate billing).
Findings of fiscal intermediary or carrier.--Each fiscal intermediary or carrier with a contract under section 1816 or 1842 shall, with respect to each claim submitted to the fiscal intermediary or carrier under paragraph (3), make one of the following determinations: ``(A) The itemized bill accurately reflects medical or other items or services provided to the beneficiary.
The itemized bill does not accurately reflect medical or other items or services provided to the beneficiary or contains a billing irregularity but the inaccuracy or irregularity is inadvertent or is the result of a misinterpretation of law.
The itemized bill negligently describes medical or other items or services not provided to the beneficiary or contains a negligent billing irregularity.
The itemized bill fraudulently describes medical or other items or services not provided to the beneficiary or contains a fraudulent billing irregularity.
Review of findings of fiscal intermediary or carrier.-- ``(A) In general.--If a fiscal intermediary or carrier makes a finding described in subparagraph (B), (C), or (D) of paragraph (4), the fiscal intermediary or carrier shall submit to the Secretary a report containing such findings and the basis for such findings.
Determination by secretary.--The Secretary shall determine whether the findings of the fiscal intermediary or carrier submitted under subparagraph (A) are correct.
Recovery of amounts.--The Secretary shall require fiscal intermediaries and carriers to take all appropriate measures to recover amounts inappropriately paid under title XVIII with respect to a bill for which the Secretary makes a determination of correctness under paragraph (5)(B).
Antifraud incentive payments.-- ``(A) In general.--If the Secretary makes a determination of correctness under paragraph (5)(B) with respect to a finding described in subparagraph (C) or (D) of paragraph (4), the Secretary shall make an antifraud incentive payment (in an amount determined under subparagraph (B)) to the beneficiary who submitted the request for the itemized bill under paragraph (1) that resulted in such findings.
Antifraud incentive payment determined.-- ``(i) In general.--The amount of the antifraud incentive payment determined under this subparagraph is equal to the lesser of-- ``(I) 1 percent of the amount that the bill negligently or fraudulently charged for medical or other items or services; or ``(II) $10,000.
Limitation of amount.--The amount determined under this subparagraph may not exceed-- ``(I) in the case of a negligent bill, the total amounts recovered with respect to the bill in accordance with paragraph (6); or ``(II) in the case of a fraudulent bill, the sum of the amounts assessed and collected with respect to the bill under paragraph (8).
Penalty.--If the Secretary makes a determination of correctness with respect to a finding described in paragraph (4)(D) (relating to fraudulent billing), the provider or other person responsible for providing the beneficiary with the itemized bill that is the subject of such findings, shall be subject, in addition to any other penalties that may be prescribed by law, to a civil money penalty equal to the lesser of-- ``(A) 1 percent of the amount that the bill fraudulently charged for medical or other items or services; or ``(B) $10,000.
Prevention of abuse by beneficiaries.--The Secretary shall-- ``(A) address abuses of the incentive system established under this subsection; and ``(B) establish appropriate procedures to prevent such abuses.
Requirement that beneficiary discover negligent or fraudulent bill to receive incentive payment.--No incentive payment shall be made under paragraph (7) to a beneficiary if the Secretary or the appropriate fiscal intermediary or carrier identified the bill that was the subject of the beneficiary's request for review under this subsection as being negligent or fraudulent prior to such request.''.
Payment of Antifraud Incentive to Medicare Beneficiary.-- Section 1128A(f) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7a(f)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (3), by striking ``(3)'' and inserting ``(4)''; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Any penalty recovered under subsection (m)(8) shall be paid as an antifraud incentive payment to the beneficiary who submitted the request for the itemized bill under subsection (m)(1) that resulted in the imposition of the penalty.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Subsections (c) and (d) of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7a) are each amended by striking ``(a) or (b)'' each place it appears and inserting ``(a), (b), or (m)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to medical or other items or services provided on or after January 1, 1996.