This Act may be cited as the ``National Guard and Reserve Soft Landing Reintegration Act''.
RETENTION ON ACTIVE DUTY AFTER DEMOBILIZATION OF RESERVES FOLLOWING EXTENDED DEPLOYMENTS IN CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS OR HOMELAND DEFENSE MISSIONS.
In General.--Chapter 1209 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Reserves: retention on active duty after demobilization following extended deployments in contingency operations or homeland defense missions ``(a) In General.--A member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces described in subsection (b) shall be retained on active duty in the Armed Forces for a period of 90 days following the conclusion of the member's demobilization from a deployment as described in that subsection, and shall be authorized the use of any accrued leave.
Covered Members.--A member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces described in this subsection is any member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces who was deployed for more than 179 days under the following: ``(1) A contingency operation.
A homeland defense mission (as specified by the Secretary of Defense for purposes of this section).
Pay and Allowances.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a member on active duty under subsection (a) shall be paid pay and allowances as follows: ``(1) For the first 30 days during which the member is so retained on active duty-- ``(A) the basic pay payable to a member of the Armed Forces under section 204 of title 37 in the same pay grade as the member; ``(B) the basic allowance for subsistence payable under section 402 of title 37; and ``(C) the basic allowance for housing payable under section 403 of title 37 for a member in the same pay grade, geographic location, and number of dependents as the member.
For the second 30 days during which the member is so retained on active duty, basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and basic allowance for housing as described in paragraph (1) but at rates equal to 75 percent of the rates otherwise payable as described in that paragraph.
For the third 30 days during which the member is so retained on active duty, basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and basic allowance for housing as described in paragraph (1) but at rates equal to 50 percent of the rates otherwise payable as described in that paragraph.
Release From Active Duty.--(1) A member retained on active duty under subsection (a) may be released from active duty at the request of the member at any time following the end of the 15-day period commencing on the date the member is retained on active duty under subsection (a).
The request of a member for release from active duty under this subsection shall be subject to the approval of the officer in the chain of command of the member in grade O-5.
Reintegration Counseling and Services.--(1) The Secretary of the military department concerned shall provide each member retained on active duty under subsection (a), while the member is so retained on active duty, counseling and services to assist the member in reintegrating into civilian life.
The counseling and services provided members under this subsection shall include the following: ``(A) Physical and mental health evaluations.
Employment counseling and assistance.
Marriage and family counseling and assistance.
Counseling and assistance on benefits available to the member through the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The Secretary of the military department concerned shall provide, to the extent practicable, for the participation of appropriate family members of members retained on active duty under subsection (a) in the counseling and services provided such members under this subsection.
The counseling and services provided to members under this subsection shall, to the extent practicable, be provided at National Guard armories and similar facilities close the residences of such members.
Counseling and services provided a member under this subsection shall, to the extent practicable, be provided in coordination with the Yellow Ribbon Reintegration Program of the State concerned under section 582 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (10 United States Code 10101 note).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 1209 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``12323.
Reserves: retention on active duty after demobilization following extended deployments in contingency operations or homeland defense missions.