Committee on Appropriations Resolution.--Section 302(b) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Committee Suballocations.-- ``(1) Committees on appropriations.--(A) As soon as practical after a concurrent resolution on the budget is agreed to, the Committee on Appropriations of each House shall, after consulting with Committee on Appropriations of the other House, report to its House an original joint resolution on appropriations allocations (referred to in the paragraph as the `joint resolution') that contains the following: ``(i) A subdivision among its subcommittees of the allocation of budget outlays and new budget authority allocated to it in the joint explanatory statement accompanying the conference report on such concurrent resolution.
A subdivision of the amount with respect to each such subcommittee between controllable amounts and all other amounts.
The joint resolution shall be placed on the calendar pending disposition of such joint resolution in accordance with this subsection.
(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), the provisions of section 305 for the consideration in the Senate of concurrent resolutions on the budget and conference reports thereon shall also apply to the consideration in the Senate of joint resolutions reported under this paragraph and conference reports thereon.
(I) Debate in the Senate on any joint resolution reported under this paragraph, and all amendments thereto and debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 20 hours.
The Committee on Appropriations shall manage the joint resolution.
The allocations of the Committees on Appropriations shall not take effect until the joint resolution is enacted into law.
Other committees.--As soon as practicable after a concurrent resolution on the budget is agreed to every committee of the House and Senate (other than the Committees on Appropriations) to which an allocation was made in such joint explanatory statement shall, after consulting with the committee or committees of the other House to which all or part of its allocation was made-- ``(A) subdivide such allocation among its subcommittees or among programs over which it has jurisdiction; and ``(B) further subdivide the amount with respect to each subcommittee or program between controllable amounts and all other amounts.
Each such committee shall promptly report to its House the subdivisions made by it pursuant to this paragraph.''.
Point of Order.--Section 302(c) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by striking ``such committee makes the allocation or subdivisions required by'' and inserting ``such committee makes the allocation or subdivisions in accordance with''.
Alteration of Allocations.--Section 302(e) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Alteration of Allocations.-- ``(1) Any alteration of allocations made under paragraph (1) of subsection (b) proposed by the Committee on Appropriations of either House shall be subject to approval as required by such paragraph.
At any time after a committee reports the allocations required to be made under subsection (b)(2), such committee may report to its House an alteration of such allocations.
Any alteration of such allocations must be consistent with any actions already taken by its House on legislation within the committee's jurisdiction.''.
AMENDMENTS TO APPROPRIATIONS BILL.
Section 302 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by-- (1) redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (h); and (2) inserting after subsection (f) the following: ``(g) Amendments to Appropriations Act Reducing Allocations.-- ``(1) Floor amendments.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, an amendment to an appropriations bill shall be in order if-- ``(A) such amendment reduces an amount of budget authority provided in the bill and reduces the relevant subcommittee allocation made pursuant to subsection (b)(1) and the discretionary spending limits under section 601(a)(2) for the fiscal year covered by the bill; or ``(B) such amendment reduces an amount of budget authority provided in the bill and reduces the relevant subcommittee allocation made pursuant to subsection (b)(1) and the discretionary spending limits under section 601(a)(2) for the fiscal year covered by the bill and the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
Conference reports.--(A) It shall not be in order to consider a conference report on an appropriations bill that contains a provision reducing subcommittee allocations and discretionary spending included in both the bill as passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives if such provision provides reductions in such allocations and spending that are less than those provided in the bill as passed by the Senate or the House of Representatives.
It shall not be in order in the Senate or the House of Representatives to consider a conference report on an appropriations bill that does not include a reduction in subcommittee allocations and discretionary spending in compliance with subparagraph (A) contained in the bill as passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives.''.
Section 602(b)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Suballocations by appropriations committees.--The Committee on Appropriations of each House shall make allocations under subsection (a)(1)(A) or (a)(2) in accordance with section 302(b)(1).