QUADRENNIAL QUALITY OF LIFE REVIEW.
Requirement for Review.--Chapter 23 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Quadrennial quality of life review ``(a) Review Required.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall every four years, two years after the submission of the quadrennial defense review to Congress under section 118 of this title, conduct a comprehensive examination of the quality of life of the members of the armed forces (to be known as the `quadrennial quality of life review').
The review shall include examination of the programs, projects, and activities of the Department of Defense, including the morale, welfare, and recreation activities.
The quadrennial review shall be designed to result in determinations, and to foster policies and actions, that reflect the priority given the quality of life of members of the armed forces as a primary concern of the Department of Defense leadership.
Each quadrennial quality of life review shall be conducted in consultation with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Conduct of Review.--Each quadrennial quality of life review shall be conducted so as-- ``(1) to assess quality of life priorities and issues consistent with the most recent National Security Strategy prescribed by the President pursuant to section 108 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 404a); ``(2) to identify actions that are needed in order to provide members of the armed forces with the quality of life reasonably necessary to encourage the successful execution of the full range of missions that the members are called on to perform under the national security strategy; ``(3) to provide a full accounting of the backlog of installations in need of maintenance and repair, to determine how the disrepair affects performance and quality of life of members and their families, and to identify the budget plan that would be required to provide the resources necessary to remedy the backlog of maintenance and repair; and ``(4) to identify other actions that have the potential for improving the quality of life of the members of the armed forces.
Considerations.--Among the matters considered by the Secretary in conducting the quadrennial review, the Secretary shall include the following matters: ``(1) Infrastructure.
Physical conditions at military installations and other Department of Defense facilities.
Adequacy of medical care for members of the armed forces and their dependents.
Adequacy of housing and the basic allowance for housing and basic allowance for subsistence.
Educational opportunities and costs.
Rates of pay, and pay differentials between the pay of members and the pay of civilians.
Retention and recruiting efforts.
Support services for spouses and children.
Other elements of Department of Defense programs and Federal Government policies and programs that affect the quality of life of members.
Submission of QQLR to Congressional Committees.--The Secretary shall submit a report on each quadrennial quality of life review to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
The report shall be submitted not later than September 30 of the year in which the review is conducted.
The report shall include the following: ``(1) The results of the review, including a comprehensive discussion of how the quality of life of members of the armed forces affects the national security strategy of the United States.
The long-term quality of life problems of the armed forces, together with proposed solutions.
The short-term quality of life problems of the armed forces, together with proposed solutions.
The assumptions used in the review.
The effects of quality of life problems on the morale of the members of the armed forces.
The quality of life problems that affect the morale of members of the reserve components in particular, together with solutions.
The effects of quality of life problems on military preparedness and readiness.
The appropriate ratio of-- ``(A) the total amount expended by the Department of Defense in a fiscal year for programs, projects, and activities designed to improve the quality of life of members of the armed forces, to ``(B) the total amount expended by the Department of Defense in the fiscal year.
Independent Review.--Before submitting the report on the quadrennial quality of life review under subsection (d), the Secretary of Defense shall make the report available for review and comment by entities independent of the Department of Defense that are concerned with the quality of life of members of the armed forces.
CJCS Review.--Upon the completion of each quadrennial quality of life review, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall prepare and submit to the Secretary of Defense the Chairman's assessment of the review, including the Chairman's assessment of the quality of life of members of the armed forces.
The Chairman's assessment shall be submitted to the Secretary of Defense in time for the inclusion of the assessment in the report.
The Secretary shall include the Chairman's assessment, together with the Secretary's comments, in the report in its entirety.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``888.
Quadrennial quality of life review.