Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Hunger Fellows Act of 1997''.
Findings.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) There is a critical need for compassionate individuals who are committed to assisting people who suffer from hunger as well as a need for such individuals to initiate and administer solutions to the hunger problem.
Bill Emerson, the distinguished late Representative from the 8th District of Missouri, demonstrated his commitment to solving the problem of hunger in a bipartisan manner, his commitment to public service, and his great affection for the institution and the ideals of the United States Congress.
George T. (Mickey) Leland, the distinguished late Representative from the 18th District of Texas, demonstrated his compassion for those in need, his high regard for public service, and his lively exercise of political talents.
The special concern that Mr. Emerson and Mr. Leland demonstrated during their lives for the hungry and poor was an inspiration for others to work toward the goals of equality and justice for all.
These two outstanding leaders maintained a special bond of friendship regardless of political affiliation and worked together to encourage future leaders to recognize and provide service to others, and therefore it is especially appropriate to honor the memory of Mr. Emerson and Mr. Leland by creating a fellowship program to develop and train the future leaders of the United States to pursue careers in humanitarian service.
ESTABLISHMENT; BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
In General.--There is established as an independent entity of the executive branch of the United States Government, the Congressional Hunger Fellows Program (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Program'').
Board of Trustees.--The Program shall be subject to the supervision and direction of a Board of Trustees.
Appointment.--The Board shall be composed of 7 voting members appointed under subparagraph (A) and 1 nonvoting ex officio member designated in subparagraph (B) as follows: (A) Voting members.--(i) The President in consultation with the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the minority leader, shall appoint 4 members.
The President in consultation with the majority leader and the minority leader of the Senate shall appoint 2 members.
The President in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture shall appoint 1 member.
Nonvoting member.--The Executive Director of the Program shall serve as a nonvoting ex officio member.
Terms.--Members of the Board shall serve a term of 4 years.
Vacancy.-- (A) Authority of board.--A vacancy in the membership of the Board does not affect the power of the remaining members to carry out this Act.
Appointment of successors.--A vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Incomplete term.--If a member of the Board does not serve the full term applicable to the member, the individual appointed to fill the resulting vacancy shall be appointed for the remainder of the term of the predecessor of the individual.
Chairperson.--As the first order of business of the first meeting of the Board, the members shall elect a Chairperson.
Compensation.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), members of the Board may not receive compensation for service on the Board.
Travel.--Members of the Board may be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the duties of the Program.
PURPOSES; AUTHORITY OF PROGRAM.
Purposes.--The purposes of the Program are-- (1) to encourage future leaders of the United States-- (A) to pursue careers in humanitarian service; (B) to recognize the needs of people who are hungry and poor; and (C) to provide assistance and compassion for those in need; (2) to increase awareness of the importance of public service; and (3) to provide training and development opportunities for such leaders.
Authority.--The Program is authorized to develop such fellowships, activities, and services to carry out the purposes of this Act, including the fellowships described in subsection (c).
Fellowships.-- (1) In general.--The Program shall establish and develop the following fellowships: (A) The Bill Emerson Hunger Fellowship shall address domestic hunger and other humanitarian needs.
The Mickey Leland Hunger Fellowship shall address international hunger and other humanitarian needs.
Curriculum.--The fellowships established under paragraph (1) shall provide education and training to develop the skills and understanding of the fellows necessary to improve the humanitarian conditions and the lives of individuals who suffer from hunger, including-- (A) training in direct service to the hungry in conjunction with community based organizations through a program of field placement; and (B) experience in policy development through placement in a governmental entity or nonprofit organization.
Evaluation.--The Program shall from time to time conduct an evaluation of the fellowships under this Act.
Period of Fellowship.--An applicant selected under subsection (b) shall be awarded a fellowship for a period not to exceed 24 months.
Selection of Fellows.-- (1) In general.--A fellowship shall be awarded pursuant to a nationwide competition established by the Executive Director with the approval of a majority of the Board.
The Executive Director shall establish the procedure for the competition process.
Qualification.--A successful applicant shall be an individual who has demonstrated-- (A) a desire to pursue a career in humanitarian service; and (B) outstanding potential for such a career.
Amount of award.--The Board shall determine the amount of an educational award and living allowance that a successful applicant will receive under a fellowship.
Recognition of fellowship receipt.-- (A) A recipient of a fellowship from the Bill Emerson Hunger Fellowship shall be known as an ``Emerson Fellow''.
A recipient of a fellowship from the Mickey Leland Hunger Fellowship shall be known as a ``Leland Fellow''.
Establishment.--There is established the Congressional Hunger Fellows Trust Fund (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Fund'') in the Treasury of the United States, consisting of amounts appropriated to the Fund under section 9, amounts credited to it under subsection (c), and amounts received under section 7(c)(2).
Investment of Funds.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest the full amount of the Fund.
Each investment shall be made in an interest bearing obligation of the United States or an obligation guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States that, as determined by the Secretary in consultation with the Board, has a maturity suitable for the Fund.
Return on Investment.--Except as provided in section 6(a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall credit to the Fund the interest on, and the proceeds from sale or redemption of, obligations held in the Fund.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Program from the amounts described in section 5(c) and section 7(c)(2) such sums as the Board determines are necessary to enable the Program to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Limitation.--The Secretary of the Treasury may not transfer to the Program the amounts appropriated to the Fund under section 9.
Audit by GAO.-- (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an annual audit of the accounts of the Program.
Books.--The Program shall make available to the Comptroller General all books, accounts, financial records, reports, files, and all other papers, things, or property belonging to or in use by the Program and necessary to facilitate such audit.
Report to congress.--The Comptroller General shall submit a copy of the results of each such audit to the Congress.
STAFF; POWERS OF PROGRAM.
Executive Director.-- (1) In general.--The Board shall appoint an Executive Director of the Program who shall be a nonvoting member of the Board and who shall administer the Program.
The Executive Director shall carry out such other functions consistent with the provisions of this Act as the Board shall prescribe.
Restriction.--The Executive Director may not serve as Chairperson of the Board.
Compensation.--The Executive Director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay payable for level GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--With the approval of a majority of the Board, the Executive Director may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel as the Executive Director considers necessary and appropriate to carry out the functions of the provisions of this Act.
Compensation.--An individual appointed under paragraph (1) shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay payable for level GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Powers.--In order to carry out the provisions of this Act, the Program may perform the following functions: (1) Gifts.--The Program may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Program.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Fund and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Board.
Experts and consultants.--The Program may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Contract authority.--The Program may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Other necessary expenditures.--The Program shall make such other expenditures which the Program considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Not later than December 31 of each year, the Board shall submit to Secretary of Agriculture and to Congress a report on the activities of the Program carried out during the previous fiscal year.
For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000.