This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Cities Program Authorization Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) More than two-thirds of all petroleum used in the United States for transportation is imported petroleum.
In 1993, to make the United States economically secure, to lessen petroleum dependence, and to reduce tailpipe and greenhouse gas emissions, the Department of Energy established the Clean Cities program.
The program, a partnership between public and private entities, is now the Department of Energy's flagship transportation deployment and petroleum fuel reduction program.
The program is based on the concept that Federal support can empower local citizens and organizations to become the leaders of a national movement for change.
The program established a national network of nearly 90 coalitions comprised of local partnerships located in communities representing three-quarters of the population of the United States, with nearly 5,700 stakeholders from local businesses, State and local governments, the transportation industry, community organizations, and alternative fuel providers.
In the past 10 years, the program has provided $43,000,000 in competitive grant funds, which were leveraged into $214,000,000 in matching funds from other organizations, and the coalitions stretched these dollars even further by obtaining an additional $845,000,000 in funding since 1993.
Marking more than 15 years of progress, the Clean Cities program coalitions have reduced petroleum use by more than 2,000,000,000 gallons, placed 500,000 alternative fuel vehicles on the road, established alternative fuel infrastructure in thousands of strategic locations, and moved alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicles into the mainstream.
The program is ideally positioned to lead the United States toward a clean, secure, and environmentally friendly transportation future.
Authorization.--The Secretary of Energy shall carry out the Clean Cities program to encourage and accelerate the use of non- petroleum based fuels, alternative fuel vehicles, and other advanced vehicle technologies and practices that achieve significant reduction in the overall use of petroleum in the transportation sector.
Such program shall be a partnership between government and industry.
Program Requirements.--The program under subsection (a) shall-- (1) promote the establishment of vehicle and infrastructure projects that incorporate petroleum reduction technologies, and include educational efforts to inform the public and government officials on the benefits and advantages of using alternative fuels and advanced technology vehicles technologies; (2) provide training, technical assistance, and tools to end-users that adopt petroleum reduction technologies; (3) collaborate with and train fire officials, emergency first responders, and safety code officials; (4) undertake coordinating efforts between Federal, local, and State agencies and the alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicle industry; (5) facilitate the development of necessary refueling and service support infrastructure for petroleum reduction technologies; and (6) develop Internet-based tools and resources for the education and training of consumers and Clean Cities program stakeholders.
Assistance Awards.--Under the program, the Secretary may provide direct financial assistance grants to local and State government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicle stakeholders who are working with Clean Cities coalitions.
These grants shall support the deployment and use of alternative fuels and petroleum reduction technologies in on-road vehicles.
Coalition Formation.--In carrying out the Clean Cities program the Secretary shall encourage and support the voluntary formation of local Clean Cities' organizations around the country.
These local organizations shall be made up of State and local government officials and also include vehicle owners and operators, fuel and service providers, automobile dealers, community service organizations, and other private and public stakeholders interested in pursuing aggressive petroleum reduction goals in the transportation sector.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Alternative fuels.--The term ``alternative fuels'' has the meaning given such term in section 301(2) of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (42 United States Code 13211(2)).
Alterative fueled vehicles.--The term ``alternative fueled vehicles'' has the meaning given such term in section 301(3) of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (42 United States Code 13211(3)).
Program.--The term ``program'' means the Clean Cities program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated $125,000,000 for the 5-fiscal-year period beginning in fiscal year 2010.