This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on Military Justice and Fairness Act''.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on Military Justice and Fairness'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members appointed as follows: (1) Five members appointed by the President, of whom one shall be chosen after consultation with the Attorney General and one shall be chosen after consultation with the Chief Justice of the United States and not more than three of whom may be a member of the Armed Forces on active duty or in a retired status or a member of a reserve component.
Three members appointed by the majority leader of the House of Representatives, not more than one of whom may be a member of the Armed Forces on active duty or in a retired status or a member of a reserve component.
Two members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives, not more than one of whom may be a member of the Armed Forces on active duty or in a retired status or a member of a reserve component.
Three members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate, not more than one of whom may be a member of the Armed Forces on active duty or in a retired status or a member of a reserve component.
Two members appointed by the minority leader of the Senate, not more than one of whom may be a member of the Armed Forces on active duty or in a retired status or a member of a reserve component.
Initial Appointments.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed to the Commission not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Chairman.--There shall be a Chairman of the Commission who shall be designated by the President at the time of the appointment.
Period of Appointment.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment of a member of the Commission.
Security Clearances.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide expedited processing of security clearances requested for members.
The Commission shall investigate and make recommendations on the following: (1) The existence of adequate safeguards for members of the Armed Forces who report incidents of sexual misconduct, sexual harassment, or unlawful gender discrimination, and whether adequate protection from retribution is afforded to members of the Armed Forces who report such incidents.
The existence of adequate mechanisms for investigating sexual misconduct, sexual harassment, and unlawful gender discrimination in the Armed Forces, including the existence of investigative mechanisms outside of the chain of command of a member reporting allegations of such conduct.
Whether investigating officers and trial counsel in the Armed Forces are trained, and possess the resources and independence necessary, to conduct fair and thorough investigations of allegations of sexual misconduct, sexual harassment, and unlawful gender discrimination.
The number of incidents involving allegations of sexual assault by members of the Armed Forces that have been referred by a commanding officer for resolution through an administrative hearing rather than court-martial proceedings, and the reasons for such referrals.
The availability of adequate mechanisms in the Armed Forces for satisfactory resolution of complaints of sexual misconduct, sexual harassment, or unlawful gender discrimination, and whether the award of damages and attorneys fees should be a remedy available to military personnel who are victims of sexual misconduct, sexual harassment, or unlawful gender discrimination.
Whether court-martial jurisdiction should exist over non-service related offenses committed by members of the Armed Forces.
The procedures in the Armed Forces for apprehending and charging an accused and the scope of the discretionary power of commanding officers with respect to such procedures and the court-martial trial process.
The adequacy of the procedures for selection of jurors in the military justice system in protecting such jurors and ensuring impartial court-martial trials.
Whether permanent, uniform mechanisms should be established to insulate judge advocate defense counsel from other elements of the military legal structure and provide such counsel with resources equivalent to those resources available to military trial counsel.
Whether military judges should be afforded increased independence and some form of tenure to protect them from retribution in response to their rulings during the court- martial trial process.
The need for increased uniformity in sentencing in the military justice system and whether sentencing guidelines should be instituted.
The adequacy and effectiveness of judicial review of decisions regarding military personnel, and whether the same right to Supreme Court review should exist for courts-martial as for criminal cases in State and Federal courts.
The necessity for, and effectiveness of, correctional programs designed to rehabilitate offenders to continue service as members of the Armed Forces after serving a court-martial sentence.
The procedural protections for enlisted members of the Armed Forces who are career military personnel and the power of commanding officers to deny reenlistment to such personnel who have not yet qualified for retired pay.
Statistical data collection and analysis with respect to crime and sexual misconduct, sexual harassment, and unlawful gender discrimination in the Armed Forces, and whether such data is regularly reported to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The ability to exchange criminal records of members of the Armed Forces among military courts and other courts in the United States, and whether information with respect to the criminal records of members of the Armed Forces should regularly be reported to the National Crime Information Center.
Whether rulemaking committees that include civilian members and perform functions that are similar to the functions performed by the rulemaking committees of the Judicial Conference of the United States should be established for the military justice system.
Not later than one year after the date that all the original members are appointed, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a report containing a detailed statement of the Commission's findings and conclusions and the Commission's recommendations for administrative and legislative action.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths to witnesses appearing before it.
Obtaining Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission in a full and timely manner.
Subpoena Power.--(1) The Commission may issue a subpoena to require the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relating to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
If a person refuses to obey an order or subpoena of the Commission that is issued in connection with a Commission hearing, the Commission may apply to the United States district court in the judicial district in which the proceeding is held for an order requiring the person to comply with the subpoena or order.
Immunity.--The Commission is an agency of the United States for purposes of part V of title 18, United States Code (relating to immunity of witnesses).
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for goods and services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman or a majority of its members.
Quorum.--Eight members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this Act.
Pay of Members.--Members shall not be paid by reason of their service as members.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--(1) The Commission may, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, appoint a staff director and such additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The Commission may fix the pay of the staff director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay fixed under this paragraph for the staff director may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title and the rate of pay for other personnel may not exceed the maximum rate payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Postal and Printing Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails and obtain printing and binding services in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Miscellaneous Administrative and Support Services.--The Secretary of Defense shall furnish the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, any administrative and support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
PAYMENT OF COMMISSION EXPENSES.
Payment Out of Department of Defense Funds.--The travel expenses and per diem allowances of members and employees of the Commission, and the compensation of employees of the Commission, shall be paid out of funds available to the Department of Defense for the payment of compensation, travel allowances, and per diem allowances, respectively, of civilian employees of the Department of Defense.
The other expenses of the Commission shall be paid out of funds available to the Department of Defense for the payment of similar expenses incurred by that Department.
Prompt Transfer of Funds.--The Secretary of Defense shall promptly transfer funds to the Commission for payment of expenses incurred by the Commission upon submission to the Department of Defense of the amount of funds requested for such payment by the Chairman of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate not later than 90 days after submitting its report to the President and the Congress pursuant to section 4.