This Act may be cited as the ``Great Lakes Federal Effectiveness Act''.
GREAT LAKES RESEARCH COUNCIL.
In General.--Section 118 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1268) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(3)-- (A) by striking subparagraph (E) and inserting the following: ``(E) `Council' means the Great Lakes Research Council established by subsection (d)(1);''; (B) in subparagraph (I), by striking ``and'' at the end; (C) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (D) by adding at the end the following: ``(K) `Great Lakes research' means the application of scientific or engineering expertise to explain, understand, and predict a physical, chemical, biological, or socioeconomic process, or the interaction of 1 or more of the processes, in the Great Lakes ecosystem.
''; (2) by striking subsection (d) and inserting the following: ``(d) Great Lakes Research Council.-- ``(1) Establishment of council.--There is established a Great Lakes Research Council.
Duties of council.--The Council shall-- ``(A) advise and promote the coordination of Federal Great Lakes research activities to avoid unnecessary duplication and ensure greater effectiveness in achieving protection of the Great Lakes ecosystem through the goals of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement; ``(B) not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subparagraph and biennially thereafter, after providing opportunity for public review and comment, prepare and provide to interested parties a document that includes-- ``(i) an assessment of the Great Lakes research activities needed to fulfill the goals of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement; ``(ii) an assessment of Federal expertise and capabilities in the activities needed to fulfill the goals of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, including an inventory of Federal Great Lakes research programs, projects, facilities, and personnel; and ``(iii) recommendations for long-term and short-term priorities for Federal Great Lakes research, based on a comparison of the assessment conducted under clause (i) and the assessment conducted under clause (ii); ``(C) identify topics for and participate in meetings, workshops, symposia, and conferences on Great Lakes research issues; ``(D) make recommendations for the uniform collection of data for enhancing Great Lakes research and management protocols relating to the Great Lakes ecosystem; ``(E) advise and cooperate in-- ``(i) improving the compatible integration of multimedia data concerning the Great Lakes ecosystem; and ``(ii) any effort to establish a comprehensive multimedia data base for the Great Lakes ecosystem; and ``(F) ensure that the results, findings, and information regarding Great Lakes research programs conducted or sponsored by the Federal Government are disseminated in a timely manner, and in useful forms, to interested persons, using to the maximum extent practicable mechanisms in existence on the date of the dissemination, such as the Great Lakes Research Inventory prepared by the International Joint Commission.
Membership.-- ``(A) In general.--The Council shall consist of 1 research manager with extensive knowledge of, and scientific expertise and experience in, the Great Lakes ecosystem from each of the following agencies and instrumentalities: ``(i) The Agency.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The National Biological Service.
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Any other Federal agency or instrumentality that expends $1,000,000 or more for a fiscal year on Great Lakes research.
Any other Federal agency or instrumentality that a majority of the Council membership determines should be represented on the Council.
Nonvoting members.--At the request of a majority of the Council membership, any person who is a representative of a Federal agency or instrumentality not described in subparagraph (A) or any person who is not a Federal employee may serve as a nonvoting member of the Council.
Chairperson.--The chairperson of the Council shall be a member of the Council from an agency specified in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of paragraph (3)(A) who is elected by a majority vote of the members of the Council.
The chairperson shall serve as chairperson for a period of 2 years.
A member of the Council may not serve as chairperson for more than 2 consecutive terms.
Expenses.--While performing official duties as a member of the Council, a member shall be allowed travel or transportation expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Interagency cooperation.--The head of each Federal agency or instrumentality that is represented on the Council-- ``(A) shall cooperate with the Council in implementing the recommendations developed under paragraph (2); ``(B) may, on written request of the chairperson of the Council, make available, on a reimbursable basis or otherwise, such personnel, services, or facilities as may be necessary to assist the Council in carrying out the duties of the Council under this section; and ``(C) shall, on written request from the chairperson, furnish data or information necessary to carry out the duties of the Council under this section.
International cooperation.--The Council shall cooperate, to the maximum extent practicable, with the research coordination efforts of the Council of Great Lakes Research Managers of the International Joint Commission.
Reimbursement for requested activities.--Each Federal agency or instrumentality represented on the Council may reimburse another Federal agency or instrumentality or a non- Federal entity for costs associated with activities authorized under this subsection that are carried out by the other agency, instrumentality, or entity at the request of the Council.
Federal advisory committee act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Council.
Effect on other law.--Nothing in this subsection affects the authority of any Federal agency or instrumentality, under any law, to undertake Great Lakes research activities.
''; (3) in subsection (e)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``the Program Office and the Research Office shall prepare a joint research plan'' and inserting ``the Program Office, in consultation with the Council, shall prepare a research plan''; and (B) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking ``the Research Office, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, and Great Lakes States'' and inserting ``the Council, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, and Great Lakes States,''; and (4) in subsection (h)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by adding ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a period; and (C) by striking paragraph (3).
Conforming Amendment.--The second sentence of section 403(a) of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1447b(a)) is amended by striking ``Great Lakes Research Office authorized under'' and inserting ``Great Lakes Research Council established by''.