This Act may be cited as the ``Drug Court Act of 2000''.
In this Act: (1) Drug courts.--The term ``drug courts'' means a Federal district court of general jurisdiction in a high drug crime district, as defined by the Department of Justice, that will-- (A) expedite the criminal justice process for eligible offenders until such time as they are declared ineligible or selected for inclusion in a drug court program; and (B) maintain jurisdiction over the offenders' cases before, during, and after participation in the program.
Drug court program.--The term ``drug court program'' means a program for substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation for eligible offenders that-- (A) requires a successful plea agreement immediately following conviction or in lieu of incarceration; and (B) is operated by a drug court in a State criminal justice system that has agreed to accept, for a fee per offender, all offenders selected for inclusion in such a program by a Federal drug court.
Eligible offender.--The term ``eligible offender'' means a person who meets the requirements established in section 4 of this Act.
Office.--The term ``Office'' means the Office of Justice Programs of the Department of Justice.
AUTHORIZATION OF DRUG COURTS.
Establishment of Drug Courts.--10 Federal district courts in the United States, as selected by the Office, are authorized to establish drug courts under this Act.
Drug Court Responsibilities.--Each Federal drug court shall enter into an agreement with a State drug court program that will allow all eligible offenders to participate in the drug court program of that State, in exchange for the payment of a fee equal to the amount of the cost of the program for that offender.
Each such agreement shall be subject to the approval of the Office.
Oversight.--Except as specified in this Act, rules governing drug courts will be promulgated separately by each participating Federal district court, with the advice of the Office, and subject to Department of Justice approval.
In General.--An ``eligible offender'' means a person who, by virtue of a Federal crime committed and other factors that the drug court may consider, may be considered for inclusion in the drug court program.
Program Participants.--Drug court program eligibility under this Act shall not be available to any offender who-- (1) is accused of violent criminal offenses; (2) is not accused of drug, drug-related, or drug-motivated offenses; (3) has previously been convicted of a Federal or State violent felony offense; or (4) for any other reason within the discretion of the court, does not meet all requirements of the applicable drug court.
Additional Eligibility Requirements.--In addition to the criteria in subsection (a), no offender will be considered eligible for participation in a drug court program unless, following a reasonable investigation conducted according to standards set by the court, and one or more hearings before the court, consensus agreement is achieved among the prosecutor, the defense counsel, and the presiding judge, that the offender is a person who-- (1) currently suffers from a drug dependency; (2) would benefit from the drug court program; and (3) is appropriate for inclusion in the drug court program.
Ineligible Offender Handling.--If at any point before admission into the drug court program, an offender is found ineligible for participation in a drug court program under this Act, the case of that offender shall be processed by the Federal district court under the applicable rules of procedure and sentencing.
Requirements for Drug Program Participants.--Each eligible offender shall understand, sign, and acknowledge understanding of drug court documents, including-- (1) a waiver of the right of the offender to a speedy trial; (2) a written plea agreement that sets forth the offense charged, the sanction to be imposed in the event of a breach of the agreement, and the penalty to be imposed, if any, in the event of a successful completion of the drug court program, except that incarceration may not be imposed upon successful completion of the program; (3) a written treatment plan that is subject to modification at any time during the drug court program; (4) a written performance contract requiring the offender to enter the drug court program as directed by the court and participate until completion, withdrawal, or removal by the court; and (5) a limited applicability waiver of confidentiality for information relating to the treatment program of the offender, and progress in that program, limited only to agencies and parties participating in the drug court program, and agencies and parties participating in oversight of the case of the offender by the drug court.
Identification of Drug Program Participants.--The Office of the United States Attorney office in a Federal drug court, through the Office, shall establish procedures for the identification of eligible offenders not later than 30 days after the date of arrest of the alleged offender.
Participant Fitness Examination.--A United States Attorney, defense counsel, and a treatment professional affiliated with the drug court program in which the offender would be placed, shall separately conduct investigations regarding the eligibility of an offender for inclusion in the drug court program.
Upon a finding by any of the examining parties that the offender is ineligible to participate in the drug court program, the alleged offender shall be subject to prosecution under the applicable rules of procedure and sentencing.
Hearing.--Upon agreement of the prosecutor, defense counsel, and treatment professional that an offender is eligible for the drug court program, the prosecutor, defense counsel, treatment professional, and offender shall appear for a hearing before a drug court judge, who shall receive testimony from each of the examining parties.
Judicial Discretion.--Upon a finding by the judge that the offender is eligible for inclusion in the drug court program, the judge shall obtain from the offender all appropriate drug court documents, and the offender shall immediately be removed to the custody of the drug treatment program.
Should the offender not agree to any of the conditions of participation in the drug court program, the offender shall be subject to prosecution under the applicable rules of procedure and sentencing.
Drug Court Responsibilities.--The drug court shall-- (1) assign to the drug court program responsibility over all treatment, supervision, education, job skills training, and other ancillary services incidental to the program; (2) hold regular hearings, attended by the judge, prosecutor, defense counsel, and treatment professional to assess the progress of the offender within the drug court program; and (3) assess any and all disciplinary sanctions, penalties, and fines resulting from a violation by the offender of the drug court program plea agreement.
Disciplinary Sanctions.--The drug court shall establish methods for measuring application of disciplinary sanctions, which may include-- (1) short term confinement; (2) reintroducing the offender into the drug court program after a disciplinary action for a minor violation of the treatment plan; and (3) removal from the drug court program and reinstatement of the criminal case.
Drug Court Records.--All drug courts shall maintain records regarding rates of recidivism, relapses, restarts, sanctions imposed, and incentives given.
All such data shall be collected and reported annually by the Office.
Administrative Fees.--For each offender admitted to the drug court program, the drug court shall pay to the drug court program an amount agreed upon at the outset of the relationship between the drug court and drug court program.
This amount shall represent payment for the cost of treatment, supervision, rehabilitation, education, job skills training, and other ancillary services that the program of the offender shall require.
DRUG COURT PROGRAM PARTICIPANT SUPPORT.
In General.--Each drug court program shall provide all participating offenders with a personalized program, including elements of treatment, supervision, rehabilitation, education, and job skills training, and other ancillary services that the program of the offender shall require.
Participant Development.--Each drug court program shall ensure, at a minimum-- (1) strong linkage between all agencies participating in the drug court program, and the drug court judge, prosecutor, and defense counsel responsible for oversight of the case; (2) access for all participating agencies to information on the progress of the offender within the program, notwithstanding normally confidential treatment and counseling information; (3) vigilant supervision and monitoring procedures; (4) random substance abuse testing not less frequently than weekly; (5) provisions for noncompliance, modification of the treatment plan, and revocation proceedings; (6) availability of residential treatment facilities and outpatient services; and (7) methods for measuring performance-based effectiveness of the services of individual treatment providers.
Subject to an appropriations Act, there is authorized to be appropriated for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004, the following amounts: (1) $15,000,000, to the Office, to carry out a pilot program to establish a Federal drug court in each of 10 cities in the United States that are statistically considered high drug crime areas.
$5,000,000 to the Department of Justice, for additional prosecutorial resources, including personnel, dedicated to drug enforcement in each of the 10 cities in which a Federal drug court is established under this Act.