This Act may be cited as the ``Women and Children's HIV Protection Act of 2002''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Perinatal transmission is the leading cause of pediatric HIV infections, including AIDS cases.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (``CDC'') estimates that nearly 7,000 HIV-infected women give birth in the United States each year and as many as 400 babies continue to be born with HIV infection each year.
Medical advances have made it possible to nearly eliminate perinatal HIV transmission.
Research studies have demonstrated that the administration of antiviral medication during pregnancy, during labor, and immediately following birth can significantly reduce the transmission of HIV from an infected mother to her baby.
Caesarean section further reduces the risk of transmission.
Even if treatment begins shortly after birth, antiretroviral therapy can substantially reduce the chance that an HIV-exposed infant will become infected.
Breastfeeding by HIV-infected mothers poses additional significant risk of infection to babies.
The Institute of Medicine (``IOM'') has recommended the adoption of a national policy of universal HIV testing, with patient notification, as a routine component of prenatal care.
However, 15 percent of HIV-infected pregnant women receive no prenatal care according to the IOM.
The CDC has recommended since 1995 that all pregnant women be counseled and offered voluntary HIV testing.
Yet nearly half of pregnant women are still not tested according to the CDC.
The American Medical Association recommends mandatory HIV testing of all newborns with appropriate treatment for affected mothers and children.
Testing newborns whose mothers' status is unknown ensures that every child at risk for HIV is identified.
The provision of testing of pregnant women and newborns with appropriate counseling and treatment can significantly reduce the number of pediatric HIV infections, including AIDS cases, can improve access to and medical care for the woman and children, and can provide opportunities to further reduce transmission among adults.
The provision of such testing, counseling, and treatment can reduce the overall cost of pediatric HIV infections, including AIDS cases.
New York State has required mandatory HIV counseling and voluntary testing for pregnant women and mandatory HIV testing of all newborns since February 1997.
As a result, the perinatal HIV transmission rate in the State has dropped from 25 percent to an all time low of 3.5 percent and over 99 percent of HIV-infected women and their children have been linked to care.
For the reasons specified in paragraphs (1) through (12)-- (A) universal routine HIV testing of pregnant women and newborns should be the standard of care; and (B) the relevant medical organizations, as well as public health officials, should issue guidelines making such testing, counseling, and treatment the standard of care.
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN GRANTS.
Subpart I of part B of title XXVI of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300ff-21 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 2616 the following section: ``SEC.
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN GRANTS.
``For fiscal year 2004 and subsequent fiscal years, the Secretary shall not make a grant to a State under this part unless the State demonstrates that the law or regulations of the State are in accordance with the following: ``(1) That all pregnant women receiving prenatal care in the State be offered counseling and testing regarding HIV disease.
In the case of prenatal testing for such disease that is conducted in the State, that the results of such testing be promptly disclosed to the pregnant woman involved.
In the case of newborn infants who are born in the State and whose biological mothers have not undergone prenatal testing for HIV disease, that each such infant undergo testing for such disease.
That the results of such testing of a newborn infant be promptly disclosed in accordance with the following, as applicable to the infant involved: ``(A) To the biological mother of the infant (without regard to whether she is the legal guardian of the infant).
If the State is the legal guardian of the infant: ``(i) To the appropriate official of the State agency with responsibility for the care of the infant.
To the appropriate official of each authorized agency providing assistance in the placement of the infant.
If the authorized agency is giving significant consideration to approving an individual as a foster parent of the infant, to the prospective foster parent.
If the authorized agency is giving significant consideration to approving an individual as an adoptive parent of the infant, to the prospective adoptive parent.
If neither the biological mother nor the State is the legal guardian of the infant, to another legal guardian of the infant.
To the child's health care provider.
That, in disclosing the test results to an individual under paragraph (2) or (4), appropriate counseling on HIV disease and appropriate referrals for health care be offered to the individual (except in the case of a disclosure to an official of a State or an authorized agency, or to a health care provider).