This Act may be cited as the ``Campus Fire Safety Right-to-Know Act of 2001''.
DISCLOSURE OF FIRE SAFETY OF CAMPUS BUILDINGS.
Section 485 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1092) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (N); (B) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (O) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(P) the fire safety report prepared by the institution pursuant to subsection (h).
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Disclosure of Fire Safety Standards and Measures.-- ``(1) Fire safety reports required.--Each eligible institution participating in any program under this title shall, beginning in academic year 2001-2002, and each year thereafter, prepare, publish, and distribute, through appropriate publications or mailings, to all current students and employees, and to any applicant for enrollment or employment upon request, an annual fire safety report containing at least the following information with respect to the campus fire safety practices and standards of that institution: ``(A) A statement that identifies each student housing facility of the institution, and whether or not that facility is equipped with a fire sprinkler system or other fire safety systems, or both.
Statistics concerning the occurrence on campus, during the 2 preceding calendar years for which data are available, of fires and false fire alarms in student housing facilities.
For each such occurrence, a statement of the human injuries or deaths and the structural damage caused by the occurrence.
Information regarding fire alarms, smoke alarms, the presence of adequate fire escape planning or protocols (as defined in local fire codes), rules on portable electrical appliances, smoking and open flames (such as candles), regular mandatory supervised fire drills, and planned and future improvement in fire safety.
Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the Secretary to require particular policies, procedures, or practices by institutions of higher education with respect to fire safety.
Reports.--Each institution participating in any program under this title shall make periodic reports to the campus community on fires and false fire alarms that are reported to local fire departments in a manner that will aid the prevention of similar occurrences.
Reports to secretary.--On an annual basis, each institution participating in any program under this title shall submit to the Secretary a copy of the statistics required to be made available under paragraph (1)(B).
The Secretary shall-- ``(A) review such statistics; ``(B) make copies of the statistics submitted to the Secretary available to the public; and ``(C) in coordination with representatives of institutions of higher education, identify exemplary fire safety policies, procedures, and practices and disseminate information concerning those policies, procedures, and practices that have proven effective in the reduction of campus fires.
Definitions.--In this subsection, the term `campus' has the meaning provided in subsection (f)(6).''.
REPORT TO CONGRESS BY SECRETARY OF EDUCATION.
Within one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall prepare and submit to the Congress a report containing-- (1) an analysis of the current status of fire safety systems in college and university facilities, including sprinkler systems; (2) an analysis of the appropriate fire safety standards to apply to these facilities, which the Secretary shall prepare after consultation with such fire safety experts, representatives of institutions of higher education, and other Federal agencies as the Secretary, in the Secretary's discretion, considers appropriate; (3) an estimate of the cost of bringing all nonconforming dormitories and other campus buildings up to current new building codes; and (4) recommendations from the Secretary concerning the best means of meeting fire safety standards in all college facilities, including recommendations for methods to fund such cost.