This Act may be cited as the ``Miami Nation of Indiana Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Miami Nation of Indians of the State of Indiana, Inc., an Indian nonprofit 501(c)(3) tax-exempt corporation, is the modern day governing body of the Miami Nation of Indiana, also known as the Miami Indians of Indiana or the Indiana Miamis (collectively referred to herein as the ``Miamis''), which is the descendant of, and the political successor to, the signatory of the Treaty of 1854 (10 United States Statutes at Large 1093).
Historically, the Miamis lived in northern and central Indiana.
Between 1795 and 1840, the Miamis entered into a number of treaties with the United States ceding millions of acres of land to the Federal Government.
In some of those treaties, tracts of land were reserved for individual tribal members or for bands of Miamis.
The 1840 Treaty required all members of the Miamis to remove from Indiana to territory west of the Mississippi River but the Miamis strongly resisted removal to the Kansas Territory.
In early 1846, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs ordered annuity payments withheld until the Miamis were removed, and thereafter about one-half of the Miamis were forcibly removed to the Kansas Territory.
After this emigration, some of the Miamis resided in the Kansas Territory and some of the Miamis resided in Indiana.
In 1854, the Federal Government entered into treaty negotiations with the Miamis who remained in Indiana and thereby recognized them as a separate Indian tribe--the Indiana Miamis.
Congress subsequently enacted legislation specifically concerning treaties with the Indiana Miamis on a government-to- government basis and extended the Federal trust relationship to the Indiana Miamis.
In 1897, the Secretary of the Interior, based on an opinion by then Assistant Attorney General Willis Van Devanter, withdrew the acknowledgement of the Indiana Miamis as a federally recognized Indian tribe.
Congress has never terminated the Indiana Miamis or authorized the Secretary of the Interior to terminate the Indiana Miamis, as a result of which the 1897 administrative termination by the Secretary of the Interior was ultra vires and of no effect.
Tribes elsewhere, including the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, at Miami, Oklahoma, received services from the Federal Government and were extended benefits of the Indian Reorganization Act (25 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
In spite of the denial of recognition and the right to organize under the Indian Reorganization Act (25 United States Code 461 et seq.
), the Indiana Miamis have continued to carry out governmental functions through a tribal council from the treaty times through the present day.
In 1990, the Department of the Interior admitted that the opinion of Attorney General Van Devanter was incorrect and that the trust relationship with the Indiana Miamis was wrongfully terminated, but nothing has been done to remedy the error.
For more than 100 years there has been administrative neglect, violation of treaty and statutory obligations of trusteeship, and misapplication of Federal law and regulations with regard to the Indiana Miamis.
The injustice to the Indiana Miamis described in this section should be corrected and their dignity and self-esteem, individually and collectively, should be returned by restoration of Federal recognition to the Indiana Miamis.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Tribe'' means the Miami Nation of Indiana.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``member'' means an individual who meets the membership criteria of the tribe.
The term ``State'' means the State of Indiana.
The term ``reservation'' means those lands acquired and held in trust by the Secretary for the benefit of the Tribe.
The term ``service area'' means the State of Indiana.
RESTORATION OF FEDERAL RECOGNITION, RIGHTS, AND PRIVILEGES.
Federal Recognition.--Federal recognition is hereby restored to the Tribe.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all laws and regulations of general application to Indians and nations, tribes, or bands of Indians that are not inconsistent with any specific provision of this Act shall be applicable to the Tribe and its members.
Restoration of Rights and Privileges.--Except as provided in subsection (d), all rights and privileges of the Tribe and its members under any Federal treaty, Executive order, agreement, or statute, or under any other authority which were diminished or lost by virtue of the 1897 decision of the Secretary of the Interior which terminated Federal acknowledgement are hereby restored.
Federal Services and Benefits.-- (1) In general.--Without regard to the existence of a reservation, the Tribe and its members shall be eligible, on and after the date of enactment of this Act for all Federal services and benefits furnished to federally recognized Indian tribes or their members.
For the purposes of Federal services and benefits available to members of federally recognized Indian tribes residing on a reservation, members of the Tribe residing in the Tribe's service area shall be deemed to be residing on a reservation.
Relation to other laws.--The eligibility for or receipt of services and benefits under paragraph (1) by the Tribe or individual shall not be considered as income, resources, or otherwise when determining the eligibility for or computation of any payment or other benefit to the Tribe, individual, or household under-- (A) any financial aid program of the United States, including grants and contracts subject to the Indian Self-Determination Act; or (B) any other benefit to which such tribe, household, or individual would otherwise be entitled under any Federal or federally assisted program.
Hunting, Fishing, Trapping, Gathering, and Water Rights.-- Nothing in this Act shall expand, reduce, or affect in any manner any hunting, fishing, trapping, gathering, or water rights of the Tribe and its members.
Certain Rights Not Altered.--Except as specifically provided in this Act, nothing in this Act shall alter any property right or obligation, any contractual right or obligation, or any obligation for taxes levied.
TRANSFER OF LAND TO BE HELD IN TRUST.
Lands To Be Taken in Trust.--Upon application by the Tribe, the Secretary shall accept into trust for the benefit of the Tribe any real property located in the State of Indiana, for the benefit of the Tribe after the property is conveyed or otherwise transferred to the Secretary and if, at the time of such conveyance or transfer, there are no adverse legal claims to such property, including outstanding liens, mortgages, or taxes.
Former Trust Lands of the Tribe.--Subject to the conditions specified in this section, real property eligible for trust status under this section shall include any land within the Tribe's service area.
Lands To Be Part of Reservation.--Any real property taken into trust for the benefit of the Tribe pursuant to this Act shall be part of the Tribe's reservation.
Gaming Rights Suspended.--This Act reserves all rights by the Miami Nation of Indiana to engage in all classes of gaming pursuant to the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act; however, class III gaming shall only be allowed with the express approval of Congress.
Lands To Be Nontaxable.--Any real property taken into trust for the benefit of the Tribe pursuant to this section shall be exempt from all local, State, and Federal taxation as of the date that such land is transferred to the Secretary.
Upon submission by the Tribe, the Secretary shall accept the current membership roll of the Tribe, its present membership criteria, and its existing constitution.