This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Real Property Disposal Enhancement Act of 2009''.
DUTIES OF THE GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION AND EXECUTIVE AGENCIES.
In General.--Section 524 of title 40, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Duties of the General Services Administration and executive agencies ``(a) Duties of the General Services Administration.-- ``(1) Guidance.--The Administrator shall issue guidance for the development and implementation of agency real property plans.
Such guidance shall include recommendations on-- ``(A) how to identify excess properties; ``(B) how to evaluate the costs and benefits involved with disposing of real property; ``(C) how to prioritize disposal decisions based on agency missions and anticipated future need for holdings; and ``(D) how best to dispose of those properties identified as excess to the needs of the agency.
Annual report.--(A) The Administrator shall submit an annual report, for each of the first 5 years after 2009, to the congressional committees listed in subparagraph (C) based on data submitted from all executive agencies, detailing executive agency efforts to reduce their real property assets and the additional information described in subparagraph (B).
The report shall contain the following information for the year covered by the report: ``(i) The aggregated estimated market value and number of real property assets under the custody and control of all executive agencies, set forth government-wide and by agency, and for each at the constructed asset level and at the facility/ installation level.
The aggregated estimated market value and number of surplus real property assets under the custody and control of all executive agencies, set forth government-wide and by agency, and for each at the constructed asset level and at the facility/ installation level.
(I) The aggregated cost for maintaining all surplus real property under the custody and control of all executive agencies, set forth government-wide and by agency, and for each at the constructed asset level and at the facility/installation level.
For purposes of subclause (I), costs for real properties owned by the Federal Government shall include recurring maintenance and repair costs, utilities, cleaning and janitorial costs, and roads and grounds expenses.
For purposes of subclause (I), costs for real properties leased by the Federal Government shall include lease costs, including base and operating rent and any other relevant costs listed in subclause (II) not covered in the lease contract.
The aggregated estimated deferred maintenance costs of all real property under the custody and control of all executive agencies, set forth government-wide and by agency, and for each at the constructed asset level and at the facility/ installation level.
For each surplus real property facility/ installation disposed of, an indication of-- ``(I) its geographic location with address and description; ``(II) its size, including square footage and acreage; ``(III) the date and method of disposal; and ``(IV) its estimated market value.
Such other information as the Administrator considers appropriate.
The congressional committees listed in this subparagraph are as follows: ``(i) The Committee on Oversight and Government Reform and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
The Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
Assistance.--The Administrator shall assist executive agencies in the identification and disposal of excess real property.
Duties of Executive Agencies.-- ``(1) In general.--Each executive agency shall-- ``(A) maintain adequate inventory controls and accountability systems for property under its control; ``(B) continuously survey property under its control to identify excess property; ``(C) promptly report excess property to the Administrator; ``(D) perform the care and handling of excess property; and ``(E) transfer or dispose of excess property as promptly as possible in accordance with authority delegated and regulations prescribed by the Administrator.
Specific requirements with respect to real property.--With respect to real property, each executive agency shall-- ``(A) develop and implement a real property plan in order to identify properties to declare as excess using the guidance issued under subsection (a)(1); ``(B) identify and categorize all real property owned, leased, or otherwise managed by the agency; ``(C) establish adequate goals and incentives that lead the agency to reduce excess real property in its inventory; ``(D) when appropriate, use the authorities in section 572(a)(2)(B) of this title in order to identify and prepare real property to be reported as excess.
Additional requirements.--Each executive agency, as far as practicable, shall-- ``(A) reassign property to another activity within the agency when the property is no longer required for the purposes of the appropriation used to make the purchase; ``(B) transfer excess property under its control to other Federal agencies and to organizations specified in section 321(c)(2) of this title; and ``(C) obtain excess properties from other Federal agencies to meet mission needs before acquiring non- Federal property.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The item relating to section 524 in the table of sections at the beginning of chapter 5 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``524.
Duties of the General Services Administration and executive agencies.''.
ENHANCED AUTHORITIES WITH REGARD TO PREPARING PROPERTIES TO BE REPORTED AS EXCESS.
Section 572(a)(2) of title 40, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) Additional authority.--(i) From the fund described in paragraph (1), subject to clause (iv), the Administrator may obligate an amount to pay the direct and indirect costs related to identifying and preparing properties to be reported excess by another agency.
The General Services Administration shall be reimbursed from the proceeds of the sale of such properties for such costs.
Net proceeds shall be dispersed pursuant to section 571 of this title.
The authority under clause (i) to obligate funds to prepare properties to be reported excess does not include the authority to convey such properties by use, sale, lease, exchange, or otherwise, including through leaseback arrangements or service agreements.
Nothing in this subparagraph is intended to affect subparagraph (D).''.
ENHANCED AUTHORITIES WITH REGARD TO REVERTED REAL PROPERTY.
Authority To Pay Expenses Related to Reverted Real Property.-- Section 572(a)(2)(A) of title 40, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(iv) The direct and indirect costs associated with the reversion, custody, and disposal of reverted real property.''.
Requirements Related to Sales of Reverted Property Under Section 550.--Section 550(b)(1) of title 40, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(1) In general.--''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``If the official, in consultation with the Administrator, recommends reversion of the property, the Administrator shall take control of such property, and, subject to subparagraph (B), sell it at or above appraised fair market value for cash and not by lease, exchange, leaseback arrangements, or service agreements.
Prior to sale, the Administrator shall make such property available to State and local governments and certain non-profit institutions or organizations pursuant to this section and sections 553 and 554 of this title.''.
Requirements Related to Sales of Reverted Property Under Section 553.--Section 553(e) of title 40, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``This Section.--''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``If the Administrator determines that reversion of the property is necessary to enforce compliance with the terms of the conveyance, the Administrator shall take control of such property and, subject to paragraph (2), sell it at or above appraised fair market value for cash and not by lease, exchange, leaseback arrangements, or service agreements.
Prior to sale, the Administrator shall make such property available to State and local governments and certain non-profit institutions or organizations pursuant to this section and sections 550 and 554 of this title.''.
Requirements Related to Sales of Reverted Property Under Section 554.--Section 554(f) of title 40, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``This Section.--''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``If the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, recommends reversion of the property, the Administrator shall take control of such property and, subject to paragraph (2), sell it at or above appraised fair market value for cash and not by lease, exchange, leaseback arrangements, or service agreements.
Prior to sale, the Administrator shall make such property available to State and local governments and certain non-profit institutions or organizations pursuant to this section and sections 550 and 553 of this title.''.
AGENCY RETENTION OF PROCEEDS.
The text of section 571 of title 40, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Proceeds From Transfer or Sale of Real Property.--Net proceeds described in subsection (d) shall be deposited into the appropriate real property account of the agency that had custody and accountability for the real property at the time the real property is determined to be excess.
Such funds shall be expended only as authorized in annual appropriations Acts and only for activities as described in section 524(b) of this title and disposal activities, including paying costs incurred by the General Services Administration for any disposal-related activity authorized by this title.
Proceeds may also be expended by the agency for maintenance and repairs of the agency's real property necessary for its disposal or for the repair or alteration of the agency's other real property, provided that proceeds shall not be authorized for expenditure in an appropriations Act for any repair or alteration project that is subject to the requirements of section 3307 of this title without a prospectus submitted by the General Services Administration and approved by the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
Effect on Other Sections.--Nothing in this section is intended to affect section 572(b), 573, or 574 of this title.
Disposal Agency for Reverted Property.--For the purposes of this section, for any real property that reverts to the United States under sections 550, 553, and 554 of this title, the General Services Administration, as the disposal agency, shall be treated as the agency with custody and accountability for the real property at the time the real property is determined to be excess.
Net Proceeds.--The net proceeds referred to in subsection (a) are proceeds under this chapter, less expenses of the transfer or disposition as provided in section 572(a) of this title, from a-- ``(1) transfer of excess real property to a Federal agency for agency use; or ``(2) sale, lease, or other disposition of surplus real property.
Proceeds From Transfer or Sale of Personal Property.--(1) Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, proceeds described in paragraph (2) shall be deposited in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
The proceeds described in this paragraph are proceeds under this chapter from-- ``(A) a transfer of excess personal property to a Federal agency for agency use; or ``(B) a sale, lease, or other disposition of surplus personal property.
Subject to regulations under this subtitle, the expenses of the sale of personal property may be paid from the proceeds of sale so that only the net proceeds are deposited in the Treasury.
This paragraph applies whether proceeds are deposited as miscellaneous receipts or to the credit of an appropriation as authorized by law.''.
In General.--Subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 40, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Demonstration program of inapplicability of certain requirements of law ``(a) Authority.--Effective for fiscal years 2009 and 2010, the requirements of section 501(a) of the McKinney Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11411(a)) shall not apply to eligible properties.
Eligible Properties.--A property is eligible for purposes of subsection (a) if it meets both of the following requirements: ``(1) The property is selected for demolition by an agency and is a Federal building or other Federal real property located on land not determined to be excess, for which there is an ongoing Federal need, and not to be used in any lease, exchange, leaseback arrangement, or service agreement.
The property is-- ``(A) located in an area to which the general public is denied access in the interest of national security and where alternative access cannot be provided for the public without compromising national security; or ``(B) the property is-- ``(i) uninhabitable; ``(ii) not a housing unit; and ``(iii) selected for demolition by an agency because either-- ``(I) the demolition is necessary to further an identified Federal need for which funds have been authorized and appropriated; or ``(II) the property poses risk to human health and safety or has become an attractive nuisance.
Limitations.-- ``(1) No property of the Department of Veterans Affairs may be considered an eligible property for purposes of subsection (a).
With respect to an eligible property described in subsection (b), the land underlying the property remains subject to all public benefit requirements and notifications for disposal.
Notification to Congress.--(1) A list of each eligible property described in subsection (b) that is demolished or scheduled for demolition, by date of demolition or projected demolition date, shall be sent to the congressional committees listed in paragraph (2) and published on the Web site of the General Services Administration biannually beginning 6 months after the date of the enactment of this section.
The congressional committees listed in this paragraph are as follows: ``(A) The Committee on Oversight and Government Reform and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
The Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
Relationship to Other Provisions of Law.--Nothing in this section may be construed as interfering with the requirement for the submission of a prospectus to Congress as established by section 3307 of this title or for all demolitions to be carried out pursuant to section 527 of this title.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 5 of title 40, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 529 the following new item: ``530.
Demonstration program of inapplicability of certain requirements of law.