This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Education Development Initiative for the 21st Century Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to provide rural school students in the United States with increased learning opportunities.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) While there are rural education initiatives identified at the State and local level, no Federal education policy focuses on the specific needs of rural school districts and schools, especially those that serve poor students.
Under Federal law, there is no consistent definition for rural schools, rural school districts, or rural local educational agencies.
The National Center for Educational Statistics (NCES) reports that 46 percent of our Nation's public schools serve rural areas.
A critical problem for rural school districts involves the hiring and retention of qualified administrators and certified teachers (especially in science and mathematics).
Consequently, teachers in rural schools are almost twice as likely to provide instruction in 3 or more subjects than teachers in urban schools.
Rural schools also face other tough challenges, such as shrinking local tax bases, high transportation costs, aging buildings, limited course offerings, and limited resources.
Data from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) consistently show large gaps between the achievement of students in high-poverty schools and those in other schools.
High-poverty schools will face special challenges in preparing their students to reach high standards of performance on State and national assessments.
In this Act: (1) Elementary school; local educational agency; secondary school; state educational agency.--The terms ``elementary school'', ``local educational agency'', ``secondary school'', and ``State educational agency'' have the meanings given the terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Eligible local educational agency.--The term ``eligible local educational agency'' means a local educational agency that serves-- (A) a school-age population, 20 percent or more of whom are from families with incomes below the poverty line; and (B)(i) a school district that is located in a rural locality; or (ii) a school-age population of 800 or fewer.
Metropolitan statistical area.--The term ``metropolitan statistical area'' includes the area defined as such by the Secretary of Commerce.
Poverty line.--The term ``poverty line'' means the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2))) applicable to a family of the size involved.
Rural locality.--The term ``rural locality'' means a locality that is not within a metropolitan statistical area.
School-age population.--The term ``school-age population'' means the number of students aged 5 through 17.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Specially qualified agency.--The term ``specially qualified agency'' means an eligible local educational agency, located in a State that does not participate in a program under this Act in a fiscal year, that may apply directly to the Secretary for a grant in such year in accordance with section 5(b)(3).
Reservations.--From amounts appropriated under section 9 for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve 0.5 percent to make awards to elementary or secondary schools operated or supported by the Bureau of Indian Affairs to carry out the purpose of this Act.
Grants to States.-- (1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under section 9 that are not reserved under subsection (a), the Secretary shall award grants to State educational agencies that have applications approved under section 7 to enable the State educational agencies to award grants to eligible local educational agencies or schools described in section 6(b)(2) for local authorized activities described in subsection (c).
Formula.--The Secretary shall allot to each State educational agency an amount that bears the same relation to the amount of funds appropriated under section 9 that are not reserved under subsection (a) as the number of students served by eligible local educational agencies in the State bears to the number of all students served by eligible local educational agencies in all States.
Direct awards to specially qualified agencies.-- (A) Nonparticipating state.--If a State educational agency elects not to participate in the program under this Act or does not have an application approved under section 7, a specially qualified agency in such State desiring a grant under this Act shall apply directly to the Secretary to receive an award under this Act.
Direct awards to specially qualified agencies.--The Secretary may award, on a competitive basis, the amount the State educational agency is eligible to receive under paragraph (2) directly to specially qualified agencies in the State.
Local Activities.--Grant funds awarded to local educational agencies or made available to schools under this Act shall be used for-- (1) educational technology, including software and hardware; (2) professional development; (3) technical assistance; (4) teacher recruitment and retention; (5) parental involvement activities; or (6) academic enrichment programs.
STATE DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
Award Basis.--A State educational agency shall award grants to eligible local educational agencies or provide assistance to schools described in subsection (b)(2)-- (1) on a competitive basis; or (2) according to a formula based on the number of students served by the eligible local educational agencies or schools (as appropriate) in the State, as determined by the State.
First Year.--For the first year that a State educational agency receives a grant under this Act, the State educational agency-- (1) shall use not less than 90 percent of the grant funds to award grants to eligible local educational agencies in the State; (2) shall use not more than 9 percent of the grant funds to provide assistance to schools located in a noneligible local educational agency if the school-- (A) is located in a rural community that has a population of 2,500 or less, or a rural community with a population density of less than 1,000 people per square mile; and (B) serves a school-age population, 20 percent or more of whom are from families with incomes below the poverty line; and (3) may use not more than 1 percent for State activities and administrative costs related to the program.
Succeeding Years.--For the second and each succeeding year that a State educational agency receives a grant under this Act, the State educational agency-- (1) shall use not less than 90 percent of the grant funds to award grants to eligible local educational agencies in the State; (2) shall use not more than 9.5 percent of the grant funds to provide assistance to a school described in subsection (b)(2); and (3) may use not more than 0.5 percent of the grant funds for State activities and administrative costs related to the program.
Each State educational agency and specially qualified agency desiring a grant under this Act shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Such application shall include specific measurable goals and objectives to be achieved which may include specific educational goals and objectives relating to increased student academic achievement, decreased student drop-out rates, or such other factors that the State educational agency or specially qualified agency may choose to measure.
State Reports.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant under this Act shall provide an annual report to the Secretary.
The report shall describe-- (1) the method the State educational agency used to award grants to eligible local educational agencies and to provide assistance to schools under this Act; (2) how local educational agencies and schools used funds provided under this Act; and (3) the degree to which progress has been made toward meeting the goals and objectives described in the application submitted under section 7.
Specially Qualified Agency Report.--Each specially qualified agency that receives a grant under this Act shall provide an annual report to the Secretary.
Such report shall describe-- (1) how such agency uses funds provided under this Act; and (2) the degree to which progress has been made toward meeting the goals and objectives described in the application submitted under section 5(b)(3)(A).
Report to Congress.--The Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress an annual report.
The report shall describe-- (1) the methods the State educational agency used to award grants to eligible local educational agencies and to provide assistance to schools under this Act; (2) how eligible local educational agencies and schools used funds provided under this Act; and (3) progress made in meeting specific measurable educational goals and objectives.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $300,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.