SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``American Jobs Act''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
TAXATION OF INCOME OF CONTROLLED FOREIGN CORPORATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO IMPORTED PROPERTY.
General Rule.--Subsection (a) of section 954 (defining foreign base company income) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) imported property income for the taxable year (determined under subsection (h) and reduced as provided in subsection (b)(5)).''
Definition of Imported Property Income.--Section 954 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Imported Property Income.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(6), the term `imported property income' means income (whether in the form of profits, commissions, fees, or otherwise) derived in connection with-- ``(A) manufacturing, producing, growing, or extracting imported property, ``(B) the sale, exchange, or other disposition of imported property, or ``(C) the lease, rental, or licensing of imported property.
Such term shall not include any foreign oil and gas extraction income (within the meaning of section 907(c)) or any foreign oil related income (within the meaning of section 907(c)).
Imported property.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term `imported property' means property which is imported into the United States by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person.
Imported property includes certain property imported by unrelated persons.--The term `imported property' includes any property imported into the United States by an unrelated person if, when such property was sold to the unrelated person by the controlled foreign corporation (or a related person), it was reasonable to expect that-- ``(i) such property would be imported into the United States, or ``(ii) such property would be used as a component in other property which would be imported into the United States.
Exception for property subsequently exported.--The term `imported property' does not include any property which is imported into the United States and which-- ``(i) before substantial use in the United States, is sold, leased, or rented by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person for direct use, consumption, or disposition outside the United States, or ``(ii) is used by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person as a component in other property which is so sold, leased, or rented.
Definitions and special rules.-- ``(A) Import.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `import' means entering, or withdrawal from warehouse, for consumption or use.
Such term includes any grant of the right to use an intangible (as defined in section 936(b)(3)(B)) in the United States.
Unrelated person.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `unrelated person' means any person who is not a related person with respect to the controlled foreign corporation.
Coordination with foreign base company sales income.--For purposes of this section, the term `foreign base company sales income' shall not include any imported property income.''
Separate Application of Limitations on Foreign Tax Credit for Imported Property Income.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 904(d) (relating to separate application of section with respect to certain categories of income) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (H), by redesignating subparagraph (I) as subparagraph (J), and by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following new subparagraph: ``(I) imported property income, and''.
Imported property income defined.--Paragraph (2) of section 904(d) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (H) and (I) as subparagraphs (I) and (J), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (G) the following new subparagraph: ``(H) Imported property income.--The term `imported property income' means any income received or accrued by any person which is of a kind which would be imported property income (as defined in section 954(h)).''
Look-thru rules to apply.--Subparagraph (F) of section 904(d)(3) is amended by striking ``or (E)'' and inserting ``(E), or (H)''.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Clause (iii) of section 952(c)(1)(B) (relating to certain prior year deficits may be taken into account) is amended by inserting the following subclause after subclause (II) (and by redesignating the following subclauses accordingly): ``(III) imported property income,''.
Paragraph (5) of section 954(b) (relating to deductions to be taken into account) is amended by striking ``and the foreign base company oil related income'' and inserting ``the foreign base company oil related income, and the imported property income''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 1995, and to taxable years of United States shareholders within which or with which such taxable years of such foreign corporations end.
Subsection (c).--The amendments made by subsection (c) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR NEW EMPLOYEES.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
35. CREDIT FOR NEW EMPLOYEES.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for any taxable year an amount equal to 20 percent of the qualified social security taxes paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Qualified Social Security Taxes.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified social security taxes' means the amount of taxes imposed by section 3111(a) with respect to wages of an employee for employment during the 2-year period beginning with the day the employee begins work for the employer.
Application to railroad retirement.--Such term shall also include taxes imposed by section 3221(a) with respect to compensation during such 2-year period but only to the extent attributable to the rate of tax in effect under section 3111(a).
Exception for employment outside the united states.-- Such term shall not include taxes paid with respect to employment described in section 3121(b)(B) (relating to employment outside the United States by citizens and residents).
Certain Employees Ineligible.-- ``(1) Overall employment must increase.-- ``(A) In general.--An employer may take into account for purposes of this section only that number of employees hired by the employer during a taxable year which does not exceed the number of employees determined under subparagraph (B).
The employer shall designate which employees shall be taken into account.
Such designation shall apply for such taxable year and any succeeding taxable year.
Maximum number of employees.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the number of employees determined under this subparagraph for a taxable year is an amount equal to the excess (if any) of-- ``(i) the average daily number of full-time equivalent employees of the taxpayer for such taxable year, over ``(ii) the average daily number of full- time equivalent employees of the taxpayer (or any predecessor) for the 3-taxable-year period immediately preceding such taxable year.
Other ineligible employees.--Qualified social security taxes paid with respect to any employee shall not be taken into account under subsection (a) if such employee-- ``(A) is a member of a targeted group with respect to whom the employer has taken into account wages in determining the amount of the targeted jobs credit under section 51, ``(B) is described in paragraph (1) of section 51(i) (relating to related individuals), or ``(C) is employed by the employer for less than 120 days or has not completed at least 120 hours of service.
Other Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Controlled groups.--All employers treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 shall be treated as a single employer.
Other rules.--Rules similar to the rules of section 51(k) and subsections (c), (d), and (e) of section 52 shall apply.''
Conforming Amendments.--The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to section 35 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
35. Credit for new employees.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
REPORT ON ELIMINATION OF BUSINESS TAX PREFERENCES.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall, as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, report to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate recommendations as to the elimination of, or changes in, business tax preferences.
Such recommendations shall provide an increase in Federal revenues sufficient to offset any overall decrease in Federal revenues under the other provisions of this Act.