This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission to Eliminate Waste in Government Act''.
There is established a commission known as the National Commission to Eliminate Waste in Government (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--It shall be the duty of the Commission-- (1) to conduct a private sector survey on management and cost control in the Federal Government; (2) to conduct in-depth reviews of the operations of the executive agencies; (3) to review existing Government Accounting Office (GAO), Congressional Budget Office (CBO), Inspector General reports, and other existing governmental and nongovernmental recommendations for reducing waste including recommendations from the President's Private Sector Survey on Cost Control, and, based on this review, to periodically submit a report to the President and Congress a list of such recommendations with estimated savings the Commission determines are most significant and to include in the report a determination of whether the recommendation can be implemented by Executive order or whether it requires legislative action; and (4) to submit to the President and the Congress recommendations for improving the budget process and management and for reducing waste and costs in the Federal Government.
Particular Areas To Be Examined.--In fulfilling the duties described in subsection (a), the Commission shall identify and address-- (1) opportunities for increased efficiency and reduced costs in the Federal Government that can be realized by Executive action or legislation; (2) areas in the Federal Government where managerial accountability can be enhanced and administrative control can be improved; (3) specific Federal programs that have accomplished their objectives and ought to be terminated; (4) specific Federal program services that could be provided at a lower cost by the private sector; (5) specific reforms of the budget process that would yield savings, increase accountability and efficiency, and enhance public confidence in the budget process; and (6) specific areas in the Federal Government where further study can be justified by potential savings.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members who are not officers or employees of any government and who are especially qualified to serve on the Commission by virtue of their education, training, or experience.
Not more than 6 members of the Commission shall be of the same political party.
The members shall be appointed as follows: (1) Four individuals appointed by the President, not more than two from the same political party.
Three individuals appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, not more than two from the same political party.
One individual appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Three individuals appointed by the majority leader of the Senate, not more than two from the same political party.
One individual appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Continuation of Membership.--If an individual is appointed to the Commission, and later becomes an officer or employee of a government, such individual may continue as a member of the Commission for not longer than the 30-day period beginning on the date such individual becomes such an officer or employee.
Appointment of Members.--Appointments shall be made within 30 days of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled within 30 days in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation; Rates of Pay.--Members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Quorum.--Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members from among the members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the Chairperson of the Commission.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director appointed by the Chairperson of the Commission and paid a rate determined by the Commission.
Staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the Director of the Commission may appoint personnel as the Director considers appropriate.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Delegation of Authority.--Any Member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of the Federal agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies or services without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Periodic Reports.--Pursuant to section 3(a)(3) the Commission shall issue periodic reports to the President and the Congress.
Final Report.--Not later than the expiration of the 24-month period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a final report setting forth the finding and conclusions of the Commission and specific recommendations for legislative and administrative actions that the Commission determines to be appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate not later than the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date on which the Commission submits its final report under section 7(b).
9 FUNDING AND SUPPORT.
The Commission is to be funded, staffed and equipped, by the private sector without cost to the Federal Government.
To accomplish this objective, it is expected that the Secretary of Commerce will engage in a joint project with a nonprofit organization pursuant to the first section of Public Law 91-412 (15 United States Code 1525) for the purpose of providing support for the Commission.