Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Medical Nutrition Therapy Act of 1999''.
Findings.--Congress finds as follows: (1) Medical nutrition therapy is a medically necessary and cost-effective way of treating and controlling many diseases and medical conditions affecting the elderly, including HIV, AIDS, cancer, kidney disease, diabetes, heart disease, pressure ulcers, severe burns, and surgical wounds.
Medical nutrition therapy saves health care costs by speeding recovery and reducing the incidence of complications, resulting in fewer hospitalizations, shorter hospital stays, and reduced drug, surgery, and treatment needs.
A study conducted by The Lewin Group shows that, after the third year of coverage, savings would be greater than costs for coverage of medical nutrition therapy for all medicare beneficiaries, with savings projected to grow steadily in following years.
The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research has indicated in its practice guidelines that nutrition is key to both the prevention and the treatment of pressure ulcers (also called bed sores) which annually cost the health care system an estimated $1,300,000,000 for treatment.
Almost 17,000,000 patients each year are treated for illnesses or injuries that stem from or place them at risk of malnutrition.
Because medical nutrition therapy is not covered under part B of the medicare program and because more and more health care is delivered on an outpatient basis, many patients are denied access to the effective, low-tech treatment they need, resulting in an increased incidence of complications and a need for higher cost treatments.
MEDICARE COVERAGE OF MEDICAL NUTRITION THERAPY SERVICES.
Coverage.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (S); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (T) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(U) medical nutrition therapy services (as defined in subsection (uu)(1));''.
Services Described.--Section 1861 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Medical Nutrition Therapy Services; Registered Dietitian or Nutrition Professional ``(uu)(1) The term `medical nutrition therapy services' means nutritional diagnostic, therapy, and counseling services for the purpose of disease management which are furnished by a registered dietitian or nutrition professional (as defined in paragraph (2)) pursuant to a referral by a physician (as defined in subsection (r)(1)).
Subject to paragraph (3), the term `registered dietitian or nutrition professional' means an individual who-- ``(A) holds a baccalaureate or higher degree granted by a regionally accredited college or university in the United States (or an equivalent foreign degree) with completion of the academic requirements of a program in nutrition or dietetics, as accredited by an appropriate national accreditation organization recognized by the Secretary for this purpose; ``(B) has completed at least 900 hours of supervised dietetics practice under the supervision of a registered dietitian or nutrition professional; and ``(C)(i) is licensed or certified as a dietitian or nutrition professional by the State in which the services are performed, or ``(ii) in the case of an individual in a State that does not provide for such licensure or certification, meets such other criteria as the Secretary establishes.
Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2) shall not apply in the case of an individual who, as of the date of enactment of this subsection, is licensed or certified as a dietitian or nutrition professional by the State in which medical nutrition therapy services are performed.''.
Payment.--Section 1833(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395l(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' before ``(S)'', and (2) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, and (T) with respect to medical nutrition therapy services (as defined in section 1861(uu)), the amount paid shall be 80 percent of the lesser of the actual charge for the services or the amount determined under the fee schedule established under section 1848(b) for the same services if furnished by a physician''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2000.