SHORT TITLE AND REFERENCES.
Short Title.--That this Act may be cited as the ``Community Services Block Grant Amendments of 1994''.
References.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9901 et sequentes).
ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMUNITY INITIATIVE PROGRAM.
Community Initiative Program.--Section 681 (42 United States Code 9910) is amended to read as follows: ``community initiative program ``Sec.
Grants.-- ``(1) Authority.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to local, private, nonprofit community development corporations, or to enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with such community development corporations, to plan for and carry out economic development activities in economically distressed communities.
Economic development activities.--Economic development activities under this section shall be designed to address the economic needs of low-income individuals and families by creating employment and business development opportunities and by providing support services that are designed to enhance the ability of low-income individuals and families to successfully avail themselves of such opportunities.
In addition to any other activities consistent with the purposes of this section, such activities may include the development of facilities through means such as the establishment of partnerships with Head Start agencies, agencies or organizations providing child care or otherwise engaged in the field of child care or child development, and agencies or organizations serving children, youth and families.
Consultation.--The Secretary shall exercise the authority provided under paragraph (1) in consultation with other relevant Federal officials.
Governing Boards.--Each community development corporation receiving funds under this section shall be governed by a board that shall consist of residents of the community and business and civic leaders.
Annual Statement.--The Secretary shall annually publish a statement of the types of projects or activities for which funding under this section will be a priority, such as projects or activities designed to strengthen or enhance activities funded by other Federal programs.
Geographic Distribution.--In providing assistance or entering into other arrangements under this section, the Secretary shall take into consideration the geographic distribution of funds among States and the relative proportion of funding among rural and urban areas.
Reservation.--Of the amounts made available to carry out this section, the Secretary may reserve not to exceed 1 percent for each fiscal year to make grants to private nonprofit organizations or to enter into contracts with private nonprofit or for profit organizations to provide technical assistance to aid community development corporations in developing or implementing projects funded under this section and to evaluate projects funded under this section.''.
Repeal.--Section 505 of the Family Support Act of 1988 (42 United States Code 1315 note) is repealed.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) State allocations.--Section 674(a) (42 United States Code 9903(a)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``which remains after'' and all that follows through ``allot to each State;'' and inserting ``which remains after the Secretary makes the apportionment required in subsection (b)(1), allot to each State''; and (B) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``which remains after'' and all that follows through ``exceeds'' and inserting ``which remains after the Secretary makes the apportionment required in subsection (b)(1), exceeds''.
Annual report.--Section 682(c) (42 United States Code 9911(c)) is amended by striking ``section 681(d)'' and inserting ``section 672(b)''.
Limitation.--Section 680(a) (42 United States Code 9909(a)) is amended by striking ``section 681(c)'' and inserting ``section 681''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Subsection (b) of section 672 (42 United States Code 9901(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) There are authorized to be appropriated $434,622,000 for fiscal year 1995, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1996 through 1998, to carry out the provisions of this subtitle.''.
Repeals.-- (1) Community food and nutrition.--Section 681A (42 United States Code 9910a) is repealed.
Demonstration partnership agreements.--Section 408 of the Human Services Reauthorization Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 9910b) is repealed.
Section Heading.--Section 674 (42 United States Code 9903) is amended in the section heading to read as follows: ``allotments''.
Set-Asides.--Section 674 (42 United States Code 9903) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (a), (b), and (c) as subsections (e), (f), and (g), respectively; and (2) by inserting before subsection (e) (as so redesignated), the following new subsections: ``(a) With respect to amounts appropriated under section 672(b), the Secretary shall make allotments in accordance with subsections (b) through (g).
Of the amounts appropriated pursuant to section 672(b) for fiscal year 1995 and each of the following 4 fiscal years, the Secretary shall reserve $35,000,000 for each such fiscal year for carrying out section 681.
Of the amounts appropriated pursuant to section 672(b), the Secretary may reserve not to exceed one-half of 1 percent of the amount remaining after the application of subsection (b) for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996, and up to 1 percent of such amount for fiscal year 1997 and each fiscal year thereafter, for training, technical assistance, planning, and evaluation activities related to programs or projects carried out under this Act.
Such activities may be carried out by the Secretary directly or through grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements.
Of the amounts appropriated pursuant to section 672(b), the Secretary may reserve not to exceed 2\1/2\ percent of the amount remaining after the application of subsection (b) for fiscal year 1995, up to 4 percent of such amount for fiscal year 1996, up to 5 percent of such amount for fiscal year 1997, and up to 6 percent of such amount for fiscal year 1998, for grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to address needs or problems of the poor which are identified by the Secretary as priorities in the effort to alleviate the causes of poverty.''.
Assured Activities.--Section 675(c)(1)(B) (42 United States Code 9904(c)(1)(B)) is amended by inserting ``the homeless, migrants, and'' before ``the elderly poor''.
State Responsibilities.--Section 675(c)(2)(B) (42 United States Code 9904(c)(2)(B)) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) if less than 100 percent of the allotment is expended under subparagraph (A), provide assurances that with respect to the remainder of the allotment a reasonable amount shall be used for-- ``(i) monitoring the activities of eligible entities and providing training and technical assistance to those entities in need of such assistance; ``(ii) coordinating State-operated programs and services targeted to low-income children and families with services provided by eligible entities funded under this Act; and ``(iii) considering the distribution of funds under this Act within the State to determine if such funds have been targeted to the areas of highest need and, thereafter, not more than the greater of $55,000 or 5 percent of its allotment under section 674 for administrative expenses at the State level;''.
Tripartite Board.--Section 675(c)(3) (42 United States Code 9904(c)(3)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) as clauses (i), (ii), and (iii), respectively; (2) by striking the comma after ``provide assurances that'' and inserting ``(A)''; and (3) by inserting before the semicolon at the end thereof ``, and (B) in the case of a public organization receiving funds under this subtitle, such organization either establish-- ``(i) a board of which at least one-third of the members are persons chosen in accordance with democratic selection procedures adequate to assure that they are representative of the poor in the area served; or ``(ii) another mechanism specified by the State to assure citizen participation in the planning, administration, and evaluation of projects for which such organization has been funded;''.
Community Action Agency Plan.--Section 675(c) (42 United States Code 9904(c)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (11)(B) by striking ``and'' at the end thereof; (2) in paragraph (12) by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (12) the following new paragraph: ``(13) secure from each eligible entity as a condition to its receipt of funding under this Act a community action plan (which shall be available to the Secretary for inspection) that includes-- ``(A) a community needs assessment (including food needs); ``(B) a description of the service delivery system targeted to low-income individuals and families in the service area; ``(C) a description of how linkages will be developed to fill identified gaps in services through information, referral, case management, and followup consultations; ``(D) a description of how funding under this Act will be coordinated with other public and private resources; and ``(E) a description of outcome measures to be used to monitor success in promoting self-sufficiency, family stability, and community revitalization.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall become effective with respect to fiscal years beginning on or after October 1, 1994.