Such regulations shall also grant the option to deduct as expenses intangible drilling and development costs in the case of wells drilled for any geothermal deposit (as defined in section 613(e)(2)) to the same extent and in the same manner as such expenses are deductible in the case of oil and gas wells.
This subsection shall not apply with respect to any costs to which any deduction is allowed under section 59(e) or 291.
Exclusion.-- ``(A) In general.--This subsection shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer in any taxable year in which such taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)).
Amortization of amounts not allowable as deductions under subparagraph (a).--The amount not allowable as a deduction for any taxable year by reason of subparagraph (A) shall be allowable as a deduction ratably over the 60-month period beginning with the month in which the costs are paid or incurred.
For purposes of section 1254, any deduction under this subparagraph shall be treated as a deduction under this subsection.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2013.
LIMITATION ON PERCENTAGE DEPLETION ALLOWANCE FOR OIL AND GAS WELLS.
In General.--Section 613A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Application With Respect to Major Integrated Oil Companies.-- In the case of any taxable year in which the taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)), the allowance for percentage depletion shall be zero.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2013.
LIMITATION ON DEDUCTION FOR TERTIARY INJECTANTS.
In General.--Section 193 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Application With Respect to Major Integrated Oil Companies.-- ``(1) In general.--This section shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer in any taxable year in which such taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)).
Amortization of amounts not allowable as deductions under paragraph (1).--The amount not allowable as a deduction for any taxable year by reason of paragraph (1) shall be allowable as a deduction ratably over the 60-month period beginning with the month in which the costs are paid or incurred.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2013.
MODIFICATION OF DEFINITION OF MAJOR INTEGRATED OIL COMPANY.
In General.--Paragraph (5) of section 167(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Certain successors in interest.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `major integrated oil company' includes any successor in interest of a company that was described in subparagraph (B) in any taxable year, if such successor controls more than 50 percent of the crude oil production or natural gas production of such company.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (B) of section 167(h)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``except as provided in subparagraph (C),'' after ``For purposes of this paragraph,''.
Taxable years tested.--Clause (iii) of section 167(h)(5)(B) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``does not apply by reason of paragraph (4) of section 613A(d)'' and inserting ``did not apply by reason of paragraph (4) of section 613A(d) for any taxable year after 2004'', and (B) by striking ``does not apply'' in subclause (II) and inserting ``did not apply for the taxable year''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2013.
TITLE II--OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF OIL AND NATURAL GAS SEC.
REPEAL OF OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF DEEP WATER AND DEEP GAS ROYALTY RELIEF.
In General.--Sections 344 and 345 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 15904, 15905) are repealed.
Administration.--The Secretary of the Interior shall not be required to provide for royalty relief in the lease sale terms beginning with the first lease sale held on or after the date of enactment of this Act for which a final notice of sale has not been published.
The net amount of any savings realized as a result of the enactment of this Act and the amendments made by this Act (after any expenditures authorized by this Act and the amendments made by this Act) shall be deposited in the Treasury and used for Federal budget deficit reduction or, if there is no Federal budget deficit, for reducing the Federal debt in such manner as the Secretary of the Treasury considers appropriate.
The budgetary effects of this Act, for the purpose of complying with the Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010, shall be determined by reference to the latest statement titled ``Budgetary Effects of PAYGO Legislation'' for this Act, submitted for printing in the Congressional Record by the Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, provided that such statement has been submitted prior to the vote on passage.