This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Chronic Kidney Disease Management Act of 2002''.
DELAYING ONSET OF ESRD.
Medicare Coverage of Chronic Kidney Disease Patients.-- (1) In general.--Section 226A of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 426-1) is amended-- (A) by redesignating the last subsection as subsection (e); and (B) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d)(1)(A) Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in section 226 or title XVIII, every qualified chronic kidney disease patient (as defined in paragraph (2)) shall, in accordance with the succeeding provisions of this section, be entitled to benefits under part A and eligible to enroll under part B of title XVIII, subject to the deductible, premium, and coinsurance provisions of that title.
No qualified chronic kidney disease patient may enroll under part C of title XVIII.
For purposes of this subsection, the term ``qualified chronic kidney disease patient'' means an individual-- ``(A) who would otherwise be described in subsection (a) but for paragraph (2) of that subsection; ``(B) who has been diagnosed with chronic kidney disease; ``(C) with respect to whom, a physician certifies that-- ``(i) the individual, under generally accepted clinical standards, will likely need dialysis treatments or a kidney transplant within the two-year period beginning on the date of certification; and ``(ii) the individual may benefit from a program of pre-ESRD services (as defined in section 1861(ww)(1)); and ``(D) who certifies that the individual does not have health insurance coverage.''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 1811 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395c) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``or who are qualified chronic kidney disease patient (as defined in section 226A(d)(2))''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall take effect January 1, 2004.
Coverage of pre-ESRD Services.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (U); (B) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (V); and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(W) pre-ESRD services (as defined in subsection (ww)(1)) for an individual who has been diagnosed with chronic kidney disease and, with respect to whom, a physician certifies that-- ``(i) the individual, under generally accepted clinical standards, will likely need dialysis treatments within the two-year period beginning on the date of certification; and ``(ii) the individual may benefit from a program of pre-ESRD services;''.
Services Described.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Pre-ESRD Services ``(ww)(1) The term `pre-ESRD Services' means any or all of the following services: ``(A) Individual and group nutritional counseling services for the purpose of chronic kidney disease management that are furnished by a registered dietitian or nutrition professional (as defined in subsection (vv)(2)) pursuant to a referral by a physician (as defined in subsection (r)(1)).
Counseling furnished by qualified health care providers that-- ``(i) provides comprehensive information regarding the management of comorbidities, and the prevention of uremic complications; ``(ii) ensures active participation of the individual in the choice of therapy or therapies; and ``(iii) provides comprehensive information regarding modalities of treatment for kidney disease and end-stage renal disease, including organ transplantation, hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and home dialysis.
Counseling, items and services, including tissue typing, furnished by qualified health care providers for preparation of possible organ transplantation.
Items and services furnished by qualified health care providers for the preparation of vascular access required for dialysis treatment.
Such other services as the Secretary determines appropriate, in consultation with national organizations representing individuals and entities who furnish pre-ESRD services and patients receiving such services.
The Secretary shall establish such criteria as the Secretary determines appropriate for qualifications required for individuals to furnish pre-ESRD services under paragraph (1).''.
Payment amount.-- (A) In general.--Section 1833(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395l(a)(1)) is amended-- (i) by striking ``and'' before ``(U)''; and (ii) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, and (V) with respect to pre-ESRD services, the amount paid shall be 80 percent of the amount determined under the fee schedule established under section 1834(e)''.
Establishment of fee schedule.--Section 1834 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395m) is amended by inserting after subsection (d) the following new subsection: ``(e) Fee Schedule for pre-ESRD Services.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a fee schedule for payment for pre-ESRD services in accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
Considerations.--In establishing such fee schedule, the Secretary shall-- ``(A) establish mechanisms to promote the efficient delivery of care; ``(B) establish definitions for pre-ESRD services which link payments to the type of services provided; ``(C) consider appropriate regional and operational differences; and ``(D) consider adjustments to payment rates to account for inflation and other relevant factors.
Consultation.--In establishing the fee schedule for pre-ESRD services under this subsection, the Secretary shall consult with various national organizations representing individuals and entities who furnish pre-ESRD services and patients receiving such services.
Coding system.--The Secretary may require the claim for any services for which the amount of payment is determined under this subsection to include a code (or codes) under a uniform coding system specified by the Secretary that identifies the services furnished.''.
Permitting dialysis facilities to bill for pre-ESRD services furnished in the facility.--Section 1881(b) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12) A renal dialysis facility may provide for the furnishing of some or all pre-ESRD services (as defined in section 1861(ww)(2).
The facility may submit to the Secretary a claim for payment for such services furnished in the facility, and the Secretary shall not require the facility, or the employee of the facility who is qualified to furnish such services, to apply for a separate provider number for purposes of payment under this title.