COMMISSION TO REVIEW BENEFITS PROVIDED BY EACH STATE TO DISABLED VETERANS.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``State Veterans' Benefits Commission''.
Duties.--The Commission shall evaluate-- (1) the total amount of benefits provided by each State to a covered veteran residing in such State (including those benefits that a State provides to a resident regardless of whether the resident is a covered veteran); and (2) the method in which each State establishes the amount of benefits for veterans based on the disability rating of the veteran.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of seven members appointed as follows: (A) One individual appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One individual appointed jointly by the President of the Senate and the President pro tempore of the Senate.
One individual appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
One individual appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Three individuals appointed by the President.
Appointments.--Appointments under paragraph (1) shall be made not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Qualifications.--Of the seven individuals appointed under paragraph (1)-- (A) not less than three shall be disabled veterans; and (B) not less than one shall be a medical doctor.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancy.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after each member is appointed under subsection (c)(1), the Commission shall hold its initial meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Quorum.--A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members shall serve without pay.
Travel expense.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.-- (1) Director.--The Commission shall have a director who shall be appointed by the Chairperson.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairperson may appoint additional personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of certain civil service laws.--The director and staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and consultants.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff to federal agencies.--Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this section.
Powers of Commission.-- (1) Hearings and sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of members and agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining official data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative support services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Report.--Not later than 60 days after the initial meeting under subsection (d)(1), the Commission shall submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate a report on the evaluation made under subsection (b), including-- (1) the results of the evaluation; (2) a list of States ranked in order of the amount of benefits provided to covered veterans residing in the State; (3) the recommended amount of benefits the Commission determines necessary for a State to provide covered veterans residing in the State to ensure that such veterans have adequate care, assistance, and financial security; (4) recommendations as to how States can improve the benefits provided to covered veterans residing in the State; (5) relevant background and statistical information associated with the recommendations under paragraphs (3) and (4); and (6) other information the Commission determines appropriate.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the date that is two months after the date on which the Commission submits the report pursuant to subsection (h).
Covered Veteran Defined.--In this section, the term ``covered veteran'' means a veteran with a disability that is-- (1) rated total for the purposes of disability compensation under chapter 11 of title 38, United States Code; and (2) based upon an impairment reasonably certain to continue throughout the life of the veteran.