AVAILABILITY OF PROPORTIONATE SHARE OF DOCKET 74-A TO THE SANTEE SIOUX TRIBE.
In General.--Of the amounts appropriated in satisfaction of the monetary settlement in Docket 74-A, together with the investment income earned thereon, the proportionate share of the Santee Sioux Tribe shall be available in accordance with this Act.
Fund.--The Secretary of the Interior shall hold the amount made available under subsection (a) in trust for the tribe in a trust fund to be known as the ``Santee Sioux Tribe Docket 74-A Fund''.
Investment of Principal.--The Secretary shall invest the principal of the fund in accordance with applicable law.
Availability of Earnings.--The interest and investment income earned under subsection (c) shall be made available on an annual basis to the Santee Sioux Tribe for such social and economic programs and tribal government operations as may be determined by the tribal council of the Santee Sioux Tribe, as follows: (1) 20 percent of such amounts shall be available annually for economic development.
20 percent of such amounts shall be available annually for burials.
60 percent of such amounts shall be available annually for annual budgeting by the tribal council based on local priorities and initiatives.
Restrictions on Use of Moneys for Acquisition of Land Located Outside of Reservation.--Amounts made available under subsection (d) may not be used to acquire any lands or interests in lands located outside the exterior boundaries of the reservation of the Santee Sioux Tribe.
Tax Exemption and Resources Exemption Limitation.--None of the funds which are distributed per capita or held in trust pursuant to this section, including all interest and investment income accrued thereon while such funds are so held in trust, shall be subject to Federal or State income taxes, nor shall such funds nor their availability be considered as income or resources nor otherwise utilized as the basis for denying or reducing the financial assistance or other benefits to which such household or member would otherwise be entitled under the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 301 et sequentes) or, except for per capita shares in excess of $2,000, any Federal or federally assisted program.
Release, Relinquishment, and Extinguishment of Claims.-- (1) Release and relinquishment.--No amount may be made available under subsection (a) until after the Santee Sioux Tribe executes a release and relinquishment, acceptable to the Secretary, of all claims subject to Docket 74-A.
Extinguishment.--By virtue of the execution of a release and relinquishment under paragraph (1), all claims by the Santee Sioux Tribe and any of its members against the United States which are subject to Docket 74-A shall be deemed extinguished as of the date of the execution.
APPLICABILITY OF SETTLEMENT TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SIOUX INDIAN NATION IN DOCKETS 74-A AND 74-B, IF SETTLED.
In General.--If the Sioux Indian Nation accepts the settlement in both Dockets 74-A and 74-B, all amounts remaining in the fund shall be subject to the general terms and conditions applicable to moneys available to the Sioux Indian Nation under such settlement.
Thereafter, section 1 shall not apply.
Sioux Indian Nation.--For the purposes of subsection (a), the term ``Sioux Indian Nation'' means-- (1) the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe of the Cheyenne River Indian Reservation; (2) the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe of the Crow Creek Indian Reservation; (3) the Flandreau Santee Sioux Tribe of South Dakota; (4) the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Indian Reservation; (5) the Oglala Sioux Tribe of the Pine Ridge Reservation; (6) the Rosebud Sioux Tribe of the Rosebud Reservation, South Dakota; (7) the Santee Sioux Tribe of the Santee Reservation, Nebraska; (8) the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe of the Standing Rock Reservation, North and South Dakota; and (9) the Sioux Tribe of the Fort Peck Reservation, Montana.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``Santee Sioux Tribe'' means the Santee Sioux Tribe of the Santee Reservation, Nebraska, a party to Docket 74-A.
The term ``Docket 74-A'' means the action before the United States Claims Court in the case entitled ``Sioux Nation of Indians against the United States'' for the adjudication of claims based on the Treaty of April 29, 1868 (15 United States Statutes at Large 635), and the monetary settlement related thereto, between the United States Government and the Sioux Indian Nation.
Such term does not include claims based on the Act of February 22, 1877 (19 United States Statutes at Large 254), relating to the taking of the Black Hills, designated as Docket 74-B.
The term ``proportionate share'' means 5.11 percent, as provided by the Bureau of Indian Affairs in their ``Results of Research Report'' dated October 1989.
The term ``fund'' means the Santee Sioux Tribe Docket 74-A Fund established by section 2(b).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.