This Act may be cited as the ``Canyons of the Ancients National Conservation Area Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that certain areas located in Dolores and Montezuma Counties, Colorado-- (1) contain unique and valuable historical, cultural, scientific, archaeological, natural, and educational resources; and (2) should be conserved, protected, and enhanced for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish the Canyons of the Ancients, Colorado, as a National Conservation Area.
In this Act: (1) Conservation area.--The term ``Conservation Area'' means the Canyons of the Ancients National Conservation Area established by section 4(a).
Council.--The term ``Council'' means the Canyons of the Ancients National Conservation Area Advisory Council established under section 5(a).
Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan developed for the Conservation Area under section 4(e).
Map.--The term ``Map'' means the map entitled ``Canyon of the Ancients National Conservation Area Proposal'' and dated January 6, 2000.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
CANYONS OF THE ANCIENTS NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA.
In General.--There is established the Canyons of the Ancients National Conservation Area in the State of Colorado.
Areas Included.--The Conservation Area shall consist of approximately 164,000 acres of public land in Dolores and Montezuma Counties, Colorado, as generally depicted on the Map.
Maps and Legal Description.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a map and legal description of the Conservation Area.
Force and effect.--The map and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal description.
Public availability.--Copies of the map and legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in-- (A) the Office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management; (B) the appropriate office of the Bureau of Land Management in Colorado; and (C) the offices of the county clerks of Montezuma and Dolores Counties, Colorado.
Management.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the Conservation Area in a manner that-- (A) conserves, protects, and enhances the resources of the Conservation Area specified in section 2(a); and (B) is in accordance with-- (i) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (ii) other applicable law, including this Act.
Uses.--The Secretary shall allow only such uses of the Conservation Area as the Secretary determines will further the purposes for which the Conservation Area is established.
Vehicular activity.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B) and as needed for administrative purposes or to respond to an emergency, use of motorized vehicles or mechanized transport in the Conservation Area shall be permitted only on roads and trails designated for vehicular use under the management plan.
Access to leases.--Nothing in this Act prohibits vehicular access to any oil, gas, or carbon dioxide lease by road or pipeline right-of-way.
Access to private property.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit reasonable access to private property.
Withdrawals.-- (A) In general.--Subject to valid existing rights (including lease rights) and historic rights of access, and except as provided in subparagraph (B), all Federal land within the Conservation Area and all land and interests in land acquired for the Conservation Area by the United States are withdrawn from-- (i) all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; (ii) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and (iii) disposal under the mineral leasing, mineral materials, and geothermal leasing laws.
Oil and gas leasing.--Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), nothing in this Act prohibits the leasing of oil, gas, or carbon dioxide (including resulting operations) within the Conservation Area under the mineral leasing laws.
Hunting and trapping.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), nothing in this Act affects hunting and trapping within the Conservation Area conducted in accordance with applicable laws (including regulations) of-- (i) the United States; and (ii) the State of Colorado.
Hunting and trapping zones.--The Secretary, after consultation with the Colorado Division of Wildlife, may promulgate regulations designating zones where and establishing periods when no hunting or trapping shall be permitted in the Conservation Area for reasons of-- (i) public safety; (ii) administration; or (iii) public use and enjoyment.
Grazing.--The Secretary shall issue and administer any grazing leases or permits in the Conservation Area in accordance with the same laws (including regulations) and executive orders followed by the Secretary in issuing and administering grazing leases and permits on other land under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management.
Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a comprehensive plan for the long-range protection and management of the Conservation Area.
Purposes.--The management plan shall-- (A) describe the appropriate uses and management of the Conservation Area in accordance with-- (i) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (ii) other applicable law, including this Act; (B) incorporate, as appropriate, decisions contained in any other management or activity plan for the land within or adjacent to the Conservation Area; (C) take into consideration any information developed in studies of the land within or adjacent to the Conservation Area; and (D) give appropriate consideration to the historical involvement of the local community in the interpretation and protection of the resources of the Conservation Area.
No Buffer Zones.-- (1) In general.--There shall be no protective perimeter or buffer zone around the Conservation Area.
Activities outside conservation area.--The fact that an activity on land or a use of land in the Conservation Area is not permitted inside the Conservation Area shall not preclude the activity on land or use of land outside the boundary of the Conservation Area (or, in the Conservation Area, on land that is privately held), consistent with other applicable law.
Acquisition of Land.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may acquire non-federally owned land in the Conservation Area only-- (A) from a willing seller; and (B) through purchase, exchange, or donation.
Modification of boundary.--On acquisition of land under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall modify the boundary of the Conservation Area to include the acquired land.
Management.--Land acquired under paragraph (1) shall be managed as part of the Conservation Area in accordance with this Act.
Interpretive Sites.--The Secretary may establish sites in the Conservation Area to interpret the historical, cultural, scientific, archaeological, natural, and educational resources of the Conservation Area.
Water Rights.--Nothing in this Act constitutes an express or implied reservation of any water right.
Wilderness Acts.--Nothing in this Act alters any provision of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes) or the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) that applies to wilderness resources within the Conservation Area.
National Park Service Lands.--Nothing in this Act affects the management of land that is within the Conservation Area and under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish an advisory council to be known as the ``Canyons of the Ancients National Conservation Area Advisory Council''.
Duty.--The Council shall advise the Secretary with respect to preparation and implementation of the management plan.
Applicable Law.--The Council shall be subject to-- (1) the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
); and (2) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
Members.--The Council shall consist of 15 members, to be appointed by the Secretary, as follows: (1) A member of or nominated by the Dolores County Commission.
A member of or nominated by the Montezuma County Commission.
A member of or nominated by the Ute Mountain Ute Indian Tribe.
12 members residing in, or within reasonable proximity to, southwestern Colorado with recognized backgrounds reflecting-- (A) the purposes for which the Conservation Area was established; and (B) the interests of the stakeholders that are affected by the planning and management of the Conservation Area.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.