CHESAPEAKE BAY ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION AND PROTECTION PROGRAM.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Army (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a pilot program to provide environmental assistance to non-Federal interests in the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
Form.--The assistance shall be in the form of design and construction assistance for water-related environmental infrastructure and resource protection and development projects affecting the Chesapeake Bay estuary, including projects for sediment and erosion control, protection of eroding shorelines, protection of essential public works, wastewater treatment and related facilities, water supply and related facilities, and beneficial uses of dredged material, and other related projects that may enhance the living resources of the estuary.
Public Ownership Requirement.--The Secretary may provide assistance for a project under this section only if the project is publicly owned, and will be publicly operated and maintained.
Local Cooperation Agreement.-- (1) In general.--Before providing assistance under this section, the Secretary shall enter into a local cooperation agreement with a non-Federal interest to provide for design and construction of the project to be carried out with the assistance.
Requirements.--Each local cooperation agreement entered into under this subsection shall provide for the following: (A) Plan.--Development by the Secretary, in consultation with appropriate Federal, State, and local officials, of a facilities or resource protection and development plan, including appropriate engineering plans and specifications and an estimate of expected resource benefits.
Legal and institutional structures.-- Establishment of such legal and institutional structures as are necessary to ensure the effective long-term operation and maintenance of the project by the non-Federal interest.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Federal share.--Except as provided in paragraph (2)(B), the Federal share of the total project costs of each local cooperation agreement entered into under this section shall be 75 percent.
Non-federal share.-- (A) Value of lands, easements, rights-of-way, and relocations.--In determining the non-Federal contribution toward carrying out a local cooperation agreement entered into under this section, the Secretary shall provide credit to a non-Federal interest for the value of lands, easements, rights-of- way, and relocations provided by the non-Federal interest, except that the amount of credit provided for a project under this paragraph may not exceed 25 percent of total project costs.
Operation and maintenance costs.--The non- Federal share of the costs of operation and maintenance of carrying out the agreement under this section shall be 100 percent.
Applicability of Other Federal and State Laws and Agreements.-- (1) In general.--Nothing in this section waives, limits, or otherwise affects the applicability of any provision of Federal or State law that would otherwise apply to a project carried out with assistance provided under this section.
Cooperation.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall cooperate fully with the heads of appropriate Federal agencies, including-- (A) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; (B) the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; (C) the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; and (D) the heads of such other Federal agencies and departments and agencies of a State or political subdivision of a State as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Demonstration Project.--The Secretary shall establish at least one project under this section in each of the States of Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania.
A project established under this section shall be carried out using such measures as are necessary to protect environmental, historic, and cultural resources.
Report.--Not later than December 31, 1998, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report on the results of the program carried out under this section, together with a recommendation concerning whether or not the program should be implemented on a national basis.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $30,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, to remain available until expended.