REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR WETLAND RESTORATION AND CONSERVATION EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
WETLAND RESTORATION AND CONSERVATION EXPENSES.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an eligible taxpayer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year in an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(1) the wetland restoration credit, plus ``(2) the wetland conservation credit, plus ``(3) the wetland easement credit.
Wetland Restoration Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--The wetland restoration credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to the wetland restoration expenditures paid or incurred by the eligible taxpayer for such taxable year.
Wetland restoration expenditures.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `wetland restoration expenditure' means an expenditure for the restoration of farmed wetland or prior converted wetland to fully functioning wetland condition-- ``(A) pursuant to a restoration plan approved by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture, and ``(B) paid or incurred during the first 5 years of the qualified conservation agreement or qualified conservation easement relating to such farmed wetland or prior converted wetland.
Such term shall not include any expenditure which is required to be made pursuant to any Federal or State law.
Wetland Conservation Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--The wetland conservation credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(A) the applicable percentage of the soil- specific Conservation Reserve Program rental rate applicable to the eligible taxpayer's qualified wetland for such taxable year under title XII of the Food Security Act of 1985, plus ``(B) any fee for certification of compliance paid or incurred by the eligible taxpayer in such taxable year with respect to the qualified conservation agreement relating to such qualified wetland.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the applicable percentage is equal to, in the case of an eligible taxpayer who has entered into a qualified conservation agreement with a term of-- ``(A) at least 10 years, but less than 20 years, 50 percent, ``(B) at least 20 years, but less than 30 years, 60 percent, and ``(C) 30 years, 70 percent.
Denial of credit if wetland easement credit is elected.--With respect to any qualified wetland with respect to which the taxpayer makes an election under subsection (d) for any taxable year, the wetland conservation credit with respect to such qualified wetland for such taxable year is zero.
Wetland Easement Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--At the election of the eligible taxpayer, the wetland easement credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to the fair market value of any qualified wetland of the taxpayer subject to a qualified conservation easement.
Determination of value.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the value of such qualified wetland is the fair market value of such qualified wetland in agricultural use (as determined by a certified appraisal) during the taxable year (determined as of the date of the grant of the easement).
Election.--An election under this subsection shall apply to the taxable year for which made.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Eligible taxpayer.--The term `eligible taxpayer' means a taxpayer who-- ``(A) owns property which consists of-- ``(i) wetlands, farmed wetlands, or prior converted wetlands, and ``(ii) the surrounding or immediately adjacent actively farmed cropland, and ``(B) with respect to such property, has entered into a qualified conservation agreement or a qualified conservation easement.
Qualified wetland.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified wetland' means-- ``(i) wetland, including farmed wetland or prior converted wetland, which through the use of wetland restoration expenditures is being converted to fully functioning wetland condition, plus ``(ii) as determined under a qualified conservation agreement or a qualified conservation easement, such surrounding or immediately adjacent nonwetland as is appropriate to buffer the water quality or wildlife habitat values associated with the wetland, but only to the extent the nonwetland acreage is not more than 3 times greater than the wetland acreage.
Certain property excluded.--Such term shall not include any acre of land with respect to which contract or easement payments are received in the taxable year from the Conservation Reserve Program or the Wetlands Reserve Program under title XII of the Food Security Act of 1985.
Wetland, farmed wetland, and prior converted wetland.--The terms `wetland', `farmed wetland', and `prior converted wetland' shall have the meanings given such terms by title XII of the Food Security Act of 1985.
Qualified conservation agreement.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified conservation agreement' means an agreement by the eligible taxpayer-- ``(i) with a governmental unit referred to in section 170(c)(1), ``(ii) for a term of not less than 10 years and not more than 30 years, ``(iii) under which the taxpayer agrees to comply with the conservation requirements of subparagraph (B) with respect to the qualified wetland, and ``(iv) under which the taxpayer agrees to obtain a certification of compliance not less than every 5 years during the period of the agreement.
Conservation requirements.--An eligible taxpayer complies with the conservation requirements of this subparagraph if-- ``(i) the taxpayer does not use the qualified wetland for agricultural production, and ``(ii) the taxpayer does not drain, dredge, fill, level, or otherwise manipulate the qualified wetland (including the removal of woody vegetation, or any activity which results in impairing or reducing the flow, circulation, or reach of water) for the purpose, or that has the effect, of making production of an agricultural commodity or development of built structures on such wetland possible.
Qualified conservation easement.--The term `qualified conservation easement' means an easement granted in perpetuity by the eligible taxpayer restricting the use which may be made of the qualified wetland to a qualified organization exclusively for conservation purposes (as defined in section 170(h)).
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Denial of double benefit.-- ``(A) In general.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any expense for which a deduction or credit is allowed under any other provision of this chapter.
Grants.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any expense to the extent that funds for such expense are received under any Federal, State, or local program.
Married couples must file joint returns.--If the taxpayer is a married individual (within the meaning of section 7703), this section shall apply only if the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse file a joint return for the taxable year.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``, or from section 35 of such Code''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Wetland restoration and conservation expenses.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998.