JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADOPTION OR REVISION OF SCHEDULE OF RATINGS FOR DISABILITIES.
Restatement of Current Authority With Authority for Review.-- The text of section 502 of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) An action of the Secretary to which section 552(a)(1) or 553 of title 5, or both, refers is subject to judicial review.
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), review under subsection (a) shall be in accordance with chapter 7 of title 5, and may be sought only in the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
If review under subsection (a) is sought in connection with an appeal brought under the provisions of chapter 72 of this title, the provisions of that chapter shall apply rather than the provisions of chapter 7 of title 5.
In reviewing under subsection (b)(1) an action relating to the adoption or revision of the schedule of ratings for disabilities adopted under section 1155 of this title, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit shall hold unlawful and set aside the action if the action is found by the Court to be-- ``(1) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law; or ``(2) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or in violation of statutory right.''.
Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
The review described by subsection (c) of section 502 of title 38, United States Code, as so amended, shall be available only for a revision of the schedule of ratings of disabilities under section 1155 of that title that occurs on or after that date.
STANDARD OF REVERSAL BY COURT OF APPEALS FOR VETERANS CLAIMS OF ERRONEOUS FINDING OF FACT BY BOARD OF VETERANS' APPEALS.
Standard of Reversal.--Paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of section 7261 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``if the finding is clearly erroneous'' and inserting ``if such finding is not reasonably supported by a preponderance of the evidence''.
Scope of Authority.--That subsection is further amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``this chapter'' and inserting ``section 7252(a) of this title''; and (2) in paragraph (4), as amended by subsection (a) of this section-- (A) by inserting ``adverse to the claimant that is'' after ``material fact''; and (B) by inserting ``or reverse'' after ``set aside''.
Matters Relating to Findings of Material Fact.--That section is further amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (b), (c), and (d), as subsections (c), (d), and (e), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection (b): ``(b)(1) In making a determination on a finding of material fact under subsection (a)(4), the Court shall utilize the record of proceedings containing such finding, as established for purposes of sections 5107(b) and 7252(c) of this title.
A determination on a finding of material fact under subsection (a)(4) shall specify the evidence or material on which the Court relied in making such determination.''.
Applicability.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b)(2) shall apply with respect to any appeal filed with the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims-- (A) on or after the date of the enactment of this Act; or (B) before the date of the enactment of this Act, but in which a final decision has not been made under section 7291 of title 38, United States Code, as of that date.
REVIEW BY COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT OF DECISIONS OF LAW OF COURT OF APPEALS OF VETERANS CLAIMS.
Review.--Section 7292(c) of title 38, United States Code, is amended in the first sentence by inserting after ``the validity of'' the following: ``a decision of the Court of Veterans Appeals on a rule of law or of''.
Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall apply with respect to any appeal-- (1) filed with the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit on or after the date of the enactment of this Act; or (2) pending with the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit as of the date of the enactment of this Act in which a final decision has not been rendered as of that date.
AUTHORITY OF COURT OF APPEALS FOR VETERANS CLAIMS TO AWARD FEES UNDER EQUAL ACCESS TO JUSTICE ACT FOR NON-ATTORNEY PRACTITIONERS.
The authority of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims to award reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys under section 2412(b) of title 28, United States Code, shall include authority to award fees and expenses of individuals admitted to practice before the Court as non-attorney practitioners under subsection (b) or (c) of Rule 46 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims as if such non-attorney practitioners were attorneys admitted to practice before the Court.