This Act may be cited as the ``Keystone Species Conservation Act of 1999''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Numerous species of fauna have continued to decline to the point that the long-term survival of those species in the wild is in serious jeopardy.
Many of those species are listed under section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533) or in Appendix I, II, or III of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.
There are insufficient resources available for addressing the threats facing those species, which will require the joint commitment and effort of countries within the range of those species, the United States and other countries, and the private sector.
The grant programs established by the Congress for tigers, rhinoceroses, Asian elephants, and African elephants have proven to be extremely successful, provide Federal funds for conservation projects in an efficient and expeditious manner, and encourage additional support for conservation in countries where those species exist in the wild.
A new grant program modeled on the existing programs for tigers, rhinoceroses, and elephants would provide an effective means to assist in the conservation of keystone species for which there are no existing grant programs.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to conserve keystone species of fauna throughout the world, and the ecosystems on which those species depend, by supporting the conservation programs for those species and the CITES Secretariat, promoting partnerships between the public and private sectors, and providing financial resources for those programs and partnerships.
In this Act: (1) Account.--The term ``Account'' means the Keystone Species Conservation Account established by section 5.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
CITES.--The term ``CITES'' means the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, done at Washington March 3, 1973 (27 UST 1087; TIAS 8249), including its appendices and amendments.
Conservation.--The term ``conservation'' means the use of methods and procedures necessary to bring a keystone species to the point at which there are sufficient populations in the wild to ensure that the species does not become extinct, including-- (A) protection and management of populations of a keystone species; (B) maintenance, management, protection, and restoration of habitat of a keystone species; (C) research and monitoring; (D) law enforcement; and (E) community outreach and education.
Fish or wildlife.--The term ``fish or wildlife'' means any member of the animal kingdom, including any mammal, fish, bird, amphibian, reptile, mollusk, crustacean, arthropod, or other invertebrate.
Keystone species.--The term ``keystone species''-- (A) subject to subparagraph (B), means a species of fish or wildlife-- (i) that is listed as an endangered species or threatened species under section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533) or that is listed in Appendix I, II, or III of CITES; and (ii) whose range is partially or wholly outside of the United States; and (B) does not include African elephants, Asian elephants, rhinoceros, and tigers.
KEYSTONE SPECIES CONSERVATION ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Subject to the availability of funds, the Secretary shall use amounts in the Account to provide financial assistance for projects for the conservation of that keystone species throughout the world, for which project proposals are approved by the Secretary in accordance with this section.
Project Proposals.-- (1) Eligible applicants.--A proposal for a project for the conservation of a keystone species may be submitted to the Secretary by-- (A) any relevant wildlife management authority of a country that has within its boundaries any part of the range of a keystone species, if the agency has authority over fish or wildlife and the activities of the agency directly or indirectly affect the species; (B) the CITES Secretariat; or (C) any person with demonstrated expertise in the conservation of that keystone species.
Required information.--A project proposal shall include-- (A) the name of the individual with primary responsibility for conducting the project; (B) a succinct statement of-- (i) the purposes of the project and the methodology for implementing the project, including an assessment of the status of the keystone species that is the subject of the project; and (ii) how the project will benefit that species; (C) a description of the qualifications of the individuals who will conduct the project; (D) an estimate of the funds and time required to complete the project; (E) evidence of support for the project by appropriate governmental entities of countries in which the project will be conducted, if the Secretary determines that such support is required for the success of the project; (F) information regarding the source and amount of matching funds available for the project; and (G) any other information that the Secretary considers to be necessary for evaluating the eligibility of the project for funding under this Act.
Proposal Review and Approval.-- (1) Request for additional information.--If, after receiving a project proposal, the Secretary determines that the project proposal is not complete, the Secretary may request further information from the person that submitted the proposal before complying with the other provisions of this subsection.
Request for comments.--The Secretary shall request written comments, and provide an opportunity of not less than 30 days for comments, on a project proposal from the appropriate governmental authorities of each country in which the project will be conducted.
Decision by the secretary.--After taking into consideration any comments received in a timely manner from governmental authorities under paragraph (2), the Secretary may approve a project proposal if the Secretary determines that the project will promote the conservation of a keystone species.
Notification.--Not later than 180 days after receiving a completed project proposal, the Secretary shall provide written notification of the Secretary's approval or disapproval of a project proposal under paragraph (3) to the person that submitted the proposal.
Priority Guidance.--In funding approved project proposals, the Secretary shall give priority to the following types of projects: (1) Projects that will enhance programs for the conservation of keystone species that are most imperiled, and that are supported by the relevant wildlife management authority in each country in which the program will be conducted.
Projects that receive the greatest level of matching assistance, in cash or in-kind, from non-Federal sources.
Projects that will enhance local capacity for the conservation of keystone species.
Project Reporting.--Each person that receives assistance under this section for a project shall submit to the Secretary periodic reports at such intervals as the Secretary considers necessary, that include all information required by the Secretary for evaluating the progress and success of the project.
Guidelines.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, after providing public notice and opportunity for comment, the Secretary shall develop guidelines to carry out this section.
Priorities and criteria.--The guidelines shall specify-- (A) how the priorities for funding approved projects are to be determined; and (B) criteria for determining which keystone species are most imperiled and which projects provide the greatest conservation benefit.
KEYSTONE SPECIES CONSERVATION ACCOUNT.
Establishment.--There is established in the Multinational Species Conservation Fund of the Treasury a separate account to be known as the ``Keystone Species Conservation Account'', consisting of-- (1) amounts of donations accepted under subsection (d); (2) amounts appropriated to the Account under section 6; and (3) any interest earned on investment of amounts in the Account under subsection (c).
Expenditures From Account.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may expend from the Account, without further Act of appropriation, such amounts as are necessary to carry out section 4.
Administrative expenses.--An amount not to exceed 3 percent of the amounts in the Account shall be available for each fiscal year to pay the administrative expenses necessary to carry out this Act.
Investment of Amounts.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the Account as is not required to meet current withdrawals.
Such investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States.
Acceptance and Use of Donations.--The Secretary may accept and use donations to carry out this Act.
Amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations shall be available until expended, without further Act of appropriation.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Account $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005 to carry out this Act, which may remain available until expended.