This Act may be cited as the ``Community Employment Partnership Act of 1997''.
TREATMENT OF WORK OPPORTUNITY WAGES AS PAYMENT OF EMPLOYMENT TAX LIABILITY.
In General.--Chapter 25 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to general provisions relating to employment taxes) is amended by inserting after section 3510 the following new section: ``SEC.
TREATMENT OF WORK OPPORTUNITY WAGES AS PAYMENT OF EMPLOYMENT TAX LIABILITY.
General Rule.--For purposes of this title, the amount equal to the work opportunity credit amount with respect to any wages paid for any calendar quarter by an eligible tax-exempt employer shall be treated as a payment by such employer of such employer's employment tax liability for such calendar quarter.
Work Opportunity Credit Amount.--For purposes of this section, the work opportunity credit amount for any calendar quarter is the amount of the credit determined under section 51 (relating to work opportunity credit) in accordance with the following: ``(1) Applicable percentages.-- ``(A) Individuals performing at least 400 hours of services.--In the case of an individual who has completed at least 400 hours of services performed for the eligible tax-exempt employer, subsection (a) of section 51 shall be applied by substituting `30 percent' for `40 percent'.
Individuals performing fewer than 400 hours of services.--In the case of an individual who has completed at least 120 hours, but less than 400 hours, of services performed for the eligible tax-exempt employer, subsection (a) of section 51 shall be applied by substituting `20 percent' for `40 percent'.
Denial of credit for individuals performing fewer than 120 hours of services.--No wages shall be taken into account for purposes of this section with respect to any individual unless such individual has completed at least 120 hours of services performed for the employer.
Quarterly estimate of annual hours of services to be performed.--For purposes of subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), in lieu of the hours of services actually performed by an individual during any of the first 3 quarters of a calendar year, an employer may make an estimate of the hours of services an individual is reasonably expected to perform for the employer in such calendar year.
The employer shall adjust the deemed payments in accordance with subsection (c) for the last quarter of such calendar year to reflect the hours of services actually performed by such individual in such calendar year.
Eligible tax-exempt employer.--The term `eligible tax-exempt employer' means any organization which is exempt from tax under subtitle A other than-- ``(A) any governmental unit, and ``(B) any agency or instrumentality of a governmental unit.
Coordination With Depository Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--Any employer who is entitled to treat any amount as a payment under subsection (a) for any calendar quarter may reduce, in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe, by a like amount, the amount otherwise required to be deposited during such quarter by reason of the employment tax liability of such employer.
Quarterly determinations.--The amount of reduction permitted under paragraph (1) for any calendar quarter shall be based on a separate estimate for such quarter of the amount of deemed payments to which the employer reasonably expects to be entitled under subsection (a) for the calendar year which includes such quarter and shall be properly adjusted (under regulations prescribed by the Secretary) to reflect the amount by which prior reductions under subsection (a) during such calendar year were in excess of, or less than, the amounts which would be proper under such estimate.
Year-end adjustments.-- ``(A) Excess of deemed payments allowable over depository benefit claimed.--If the amount of deemed payments to which an employer is entitled under subsection (a) for any calendar year exceeds the amount claimed by the employer under paragraph (1) during such year, such excess shall be treated for purposes of this title as an overpayment made by such employer.
For purposes of determining interest, such overpayment shall be treated as made on January 31 of the following calendar year.
Depository benefit claimed exceeds deemed payment allowable.--If the amount claimed by the employer under paragraph (1) during the calendar year exceeds the amount of deemed payments to which such employer is entitled under subsection (a) for such year, such excess shall be treated for purposes of this title as an underpayment of the tax imposed by this chapter for such calendar year.
For purposes of determining interest, such underpayment shall be allocated ratably among the calendar quarters in such year (or in such other manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe).
Payment Treated as Made on Due Date.--Notwithstanding subsection (c), for purposes of determining interest, any deemed payment under subsection (a) for any calendar quarter shall be treated as made on the due date for the return for such quarter.
Employment Tax Liability.--For purposes of this section, the term `employment tax liability' means liability for the taxes imposed by chapters 21 and 24.
Social Security Trust Funds.--This section shall not be construed to affect amounts appropriated under sections 201 and 1817(a) of the Social Security Act.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 25 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Treatment of work opportunity wages as payment of employment tax liability.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to individuals who begin work for the employer after the date of the enactment of this Act.