This Act may be cited as the ``Preventing Depression in Preadolescent and Adolescent Girls and Women Act of 2002''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Depression is a common disabling disorder affecting more than 19,000,000 Americans per year.
Women are at least twice as likely as men to experience a major depressive episode within a lifetime.
Although the risk for recurrence is the same for women and men, women are more likely to have a recurrence, and when they do, it is often at very critical times in their lives, such as new motherhood.
As with adult women, depression is almost twice as likely to be reported by female adolescents than by male adolescents.
Depression that begins in childhood and adolescence is likely to continue into adulthood and is associated with substantial morbidity and risk for suicide.
However, there is evidence that childhood onset depression does not always continue into adulthood.
Prospective studies have established that the risk for depression increases for many women during adolescence and have suggested that indicated prevention efforts with high-risk females during adolescence may be a good time to intervene.
Suicide is the third leading cause of death among young women aged 15 to 24, and more than 9 out of 10 suicides can be linked to depression.
Although ethnic minority women experience rates of depression comparable to white women, they are at greater risk than white women of having their depression go unrecognized and inadequately treated.
It is important to note that low income populations are less likely to have their depression recognized and treated, and ethnic minority women disproportionately have incomes below the poverty line.
Symptom presentation of psychological distress may be influenced by culture.
For example, degree of acculturation may be associated with depression rates for Latina and Asian/ Pacific Islander females.
Demonstrated by community prevalence rates, the number of women seeking treatment for depression represents only a portion of those who are depressed.
Numerous barriers impede women from receiving needed treatment, including lack of consumer or provider knowledge about mental health symptoms and treatment, stigma, limited time and transportation, and issues regarding child and elder care.
Treatment interventions alone may not be sufficient to reduce the high prevalence of major depression in women.
Experts recommend more emphasis on interventions that will prevent the onset of depression.
Social, cultural, and economic factors influence the prevention, development, diagnosis, and treatment of depression in women and therefore should be examined and integrated in prevention and treatment approaches as indicated.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in collaboration with the National Institutes of Health and the Human Resources and Services Administration, and other Federal officials determined appropriate by the Secretary, may award grants to develop, implement, and evaluate interventions to prevent and treat depression in preadolescent and adolescent girls and in women at-risk for depression in diverse populations.
Use of Funds.--Grants awarded pursuant to subsection (a) may be used to-- (1) develop cultural and language appropriate brief screening measures or modify existing brief screening measures to assess for depression and other mental health problems for wide-scale use in community settings where the target population is commonly found, including schools, churches, day care centers, primary care and other health settings (Obstetrics/Gynecology and pediatric clinics), and public assistance and housing facilities; (2) establish programs to train educational and health professionals who work in community settings to screen the target population for depression and other mental health problems and make appropriate referrals for treatment; (3) develop effective strategies to educate the target population about depression, where to seek treatment, and how to reduce the stigma associated with depression to decrease barriers to treatment; and (4) develop, implement, and evaluate culturally appropriate strategies to prevent and treat depression in the target population.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2004 through 2006.