SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that economically targeted investments violate sections 403 and 404 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1103 and 1104) because such investments violate the principle of undivided loyalty that a fiduciary owes to employee benefit plan participants and beneficiaries and are made with the intent to benefit persons other than plan participants and beneficiaries and to serve interests other than those of plan participants and beneficiaries.
PROHIBITIONS ON DEPARTMENT OF LABOR REGARDING ECONOMICALLY TARGETED INVESTMENTS.
In General.--With respect to the investment by employee benefit plans of plan assets (and the interpretations and decisions by the Department of Labor regarding investment by such plans of plan assets), the application of sections 403 and 404 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1103 and 1104) shall be determined-- (1) without regard to Interpretive Bulletin 94-1, issued by the Secretary of Labor on June 23, 1994 (59 Fed.
32606; 29 Code of Federal Regulations 2509.94-1), and without regard to any other regulation, interpretive bulletin, advisory opinion, information letter, or other determination reaching the same result as, or a result similar to, the result set forth in such Interpretive Bulletin, and (2) with full regard to sections 403 and 404 of such Act.
Restrictions on Activities of the Department of Labor.--No officer or employee of the Department of Labor may travel, lecture, or otherwise expend resources available to such Department for the purpose of promoting, directly or indirectly, economically targeted investments.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) Economically targeted investment.--The term ``economically targeted investment'' has the meaning given such term in Interpretive Bulletin 94-1, as issued by the Secretary of Labor on June 23, 1994 (59 Fed.
32606; 29 Code of Federal Regulations 2509.94-1).
Employee benefit plan.--The term ``employee benefit plan'' means an employee benefit plan within the meaning of section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002(3)) which is covered under section 4 of such Act (29 United States Code 1003).
PROHIBITION ON FEDERAL AGENCIES AGAINST ESTABLISHING OR MAINTAINING ANY CLEARINGHOUSE OR OTHER DATABASE RELATING TO ECONOMICALLY TARGETED INVESTMENTS.
In General.--Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1131 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``prohibition on federal agencies against establishing or maintaining any clearinghouse or other database relating to economically targeted investments ``Sec.
In General.--No agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government may establish or maintain, or contract with (or otherwise provide assistance to) any other party to establish or maintain, any clearinghouse, database, or other listing-- ``(1) for the purpose of making available to employee benefit plans information on economically targeted investments, ``(2) for the purpose of encouraging, or providing assistance to, employee benefit plans or any other party related to an employee benefit plan to undertake or evaluate economically targeted investments, or ``(3) for the purpose of identifying economically targeted investments with respect to which such agency or instrumentality will withhold from undertaking enforcement actions relating to employee benefit plans under any otherwise applicable authority of such agency or instrumentality.
Economically Targeted Investment Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `economically targeted investment' has the meaning given such term in Interpretive Bulletin 94-1, as issued by the Secretary on June 23, 1994 (59 Fed.
32606; 29 Code of Federal Regulations 2509.94- 1).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 2 of such Act is amended by inserting at the end of the items relating to part 5 of subtitle B of title I the following new item: ``Sec.
Prohibition on Federal agencies against establishing or maintaining any clearinghouse or other database relating to economically targeted investments.''.
The head of each agency and instrumentality of the Government of the United States shall immediately take such actions as are necessary and appropriate to terminate any contract or other arrangement entered into by such agency or instrumentality which is in violation of the requirements of the provisions of this Act or the amendments made thereby.
EFFECTIVE DATE The preceding provisions of this Act (and the amendments made thereby) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.