This Act may be cited as the ``Seafood Safety and Mercury Screening Act of 2000''.
REQUIREMENT OF ESTABLISHMENT OF TOLERANCE FOR METHYL MERCURY IN SEAFOOD.
Chapter IV of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 341 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 402(a)(2)(A), by inserting ``methyl mercury in seafood,'' after ``food additive,''; (2) in section 402(a)(2), by inserting after ``section 512; or'' the following: ``(D) if it is seafood that bears or contains methyl mercury that is unsafe within the meaning of section 406A(a); or''; and (3) by inserting after section 406 the following section: ``tolerance for methyl mercury in seafood ``Sec.
In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of the Seafood Safety and Mercury Screening Act of 2000, the Secretary shall by regulation establish a tolerance for the presence of methyl mercury in seafood, which shall be based on a scientific analysis of the health risks attributable to such substance.
Any seafood containing methyl mercury shall be deemed unsafe for purposes of section 402(a)(2)(D) unless the quantity of such substance is within the limits of the tolerance.
Standard.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall ensure that the tolerance under subsection (a) is safe, and shall modify or revoke the tolerance if the Secretary determines that it is not safe.
Determination of safety.--As used in this section, the term `safe', with respect to a tolerance for methyl mercury in seafood, means that the Secretary has determined that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result from aggregate exposure to methyl mercury, including all anticipated dietary exposures and all other exposures for which there is reliable information.
Pregnant Women, Infants, and Children.--In establishing or modifying a tolerance under subsection (a), the Secretary shall ensure that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result to pregnant women, infants, and children from aggregate exposure to methyl mercury.
Sampling System.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of the Seafood Safety and Mercury Screening Act of 2000, the Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall establish a system for the ongoing collection and analysis of samples of seafood to determine the extent of compliance with the tolerance under subsection (a).
Such system shall provide statistically valid monitoring, including market-basket studies, with respect to such compliance.
Public Education and Advisory System.-- ``(1) Public education.--The Secretary, in cooperation with private and public organizations, including the cooperative extension services and appropriate State entities, shall design and implement a national public education program regarding the presence of methyl mercury in seafood.
The program shall provide-- ``(A) information to the public regarding Federal standards and good practice requirements and promotion of public awareness understanding and acceptance of such standards and requirements; ``(B) information to health professionals so that they may improve diagnosis and treatment of mercury- related illness and advise individuals whose health conditions place them in particular risk; and ``(C) such other information or advice to consumers and other persons as the Secretary determines will promote the purposes of this section.
Health advisories.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall work with the States and other appropriate entities to-- ``(A) develop and distribute regional and national advisories concerning the presence of methyl mercury in seafood.
; ``(B) develop standardized formats for written and broadcast advisories regarding methyl mercury in seafood; and ``(C) incorporate State and local advisories into the national public education program required in paragraph (1).''.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.
In carrying out section 406A of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as added by the amendment made by section 2 of this Act), the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, shall consider the findings made by the National Academy of Sciences regarding the Environmental Protection Agency's recommended level for methyl mercury exposure and the presence of methyl mercury in seafood, as such findings are described in the report issued by such Academy in July 2000.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, shall submit to the Congress a report on the progress of the Secretary in establishing the tolerance required by the amendments made by section 2.
The report shall include a description of the research that has been conducted with respect to the tolerance.