AVAILABILITY OF FREE BROADCAST TIME.
Title III of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 301 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 315 the following new section: ``free broadcast time for senate candidates ``Sec.
In addition to broadcast time that a licensee makes available to a candidate under section 315(a), a television station licensee shall make available at no charge, for allocation to Senate candidates within its broadcast area under section 503 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, 3 hours of broadcast time during a prime time access period described in section 501 of that Act to each Senatorial campaign committee designated under section 502 of that Act.
An appearance by a candidate on a news or public service program at the invitation of a television station or other organization that presents such a program shall not be counted toward time made available pursuant to subsection (a).''.
ALLOCATION BY SENATORIAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEES.
The Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new title: ``TITLE V--DISSEMINATION OF POLITICAL INFORMATION ``SEC.
``For the purposes of this title-- ``(1) the term `free broadcast time' means time provided by a television station during a prime time access period pursuant to section 315A of the Communications Act of 1934; ``(2) the term `major party' means a political party whose candidate the Senate in a State placed first or second in the number of popular votes received in either of the 2 most recent general elections; ``(3) the term `minor party' means a political party other than a major party-- ``(A) whose candidate for the Senate in a State received more than 5 percent of the popular vote in the most recent general election; or ``(B) which files with the Commission, not later than 90 days before the date of a general or special election in a State, the number of signatures of registered voters in the State that is equal to 5 percent of the popular vote for the office of Senator in the most recent general or special election in the State; ``(4) the term `prime time access period' means the time between 7:30 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. of a weekday during the period beginning on the date that is 60 days before the date of a general election or special election for the Senate and ending on the day before the date of the election; and ``(5) the term `Senatorial campaign committee' means the committee of a political party designated under section 602.
DESIGNATION OF SENATORIAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEES.
Application.--(1)(A) The national committee of a major party or minor party that has established a committee for the specific purpose of providing support to candidates for the Senate may file with the Commission an application for designation of that committee as the Senatorial campaign committee of that political party for the purposes of this title.
The national committee of a major party or minor party that has not established a committee for the specific purpose of providing support to candidates for the Senate may file with the Commission an application for designation of the national committee as the Senatorial campaign committee of that political party for the purposes of this title.
An application under paragraph (1) shall be in such form as the Commission may require and shall include a certification by the applicant that the Senatorial campaign committee will-- ``(A) allocate free broadcast time in accordance with section 503 to candidates for the Senate in general and special elections in which at least 1 other candidate for the Senate have qualified for the general election ballot; ``(B) keep and furnish to the Commission any books, records, or other information it may request; and ``(C) cooperate in any audit by the Commission.
The Commission shall determine whether to approve or deny an application under this section not later than 7 days after receipt.
If the Commission makes a determination to deny an application under this section, the applicant shall be afforded a hearing with respect to the determination in accordance with section 554 of title 5, United States Code.
ALLOCATION AND USE OF FREE BROADCAST TIME.
Allocation.--A Senatorial campaign committee of a political party shall allocate free broadcast time made available by a television station licensee under section 315A of the Communications Act of 1934 among the candidates of that party for the Senate in the licensee's broadcast area.
Use.--A Senatorial campaign committee shall ensure that-- ``(1) free broadcast time is used in a manner that promotes a rational discussion and debate of issues with respect to the elections involved; ``(2) in programs in which free broadcast time is used, not more than 25 percent of the time of the broadcast shall consist of presentations other than a candidate's own remarks; ``(3) free broadcast time is used in segments of not less than 1 minute; and ``(4) not more than 15 minutes of free broadcast time is used by any 1 candidate in a 24-hour period.
``The Commission shall submit to Congress, not later than June 1 of each year that follows a year in a general election for the Senate is held, a report setting forth the amount of free broadcast time allocated to candidates under section 503.
PARTICIPATION BY COMMISSION IN JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
In General.--The Commission may appear in any action filed under this section, either by attorneys employed in its office or by counsel whom it may appoint without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and whose compensation it may fix without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and title III of chapter 53 of that title.
Enforcement.--The Commission may petition a district court of the United States for declaratory or injunctive relief concerning any civil matter arising under this title, through attorneys and counsel described in subsection (a).
Appeals.--The Commission may, on behalf of the United States, appeal from, and petition the Supreme Court of the United States for certiorari to review, a judgment or decree entered with respect to an action in which it appeared pursuant to this section.