This Act may be cited as the ``Electric Consumer Choice Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the opportunity for all consumers to purchase electric energy in interstate commerce from the supplier of choice is essential to a dynamic, fully integrated and competitive national market for electric energy; (2) the establishment, maintenance or enforcement of exclusive rights to sell electric energy and other State action which unduly discriminates against any consumer who seeks to purchase electric energy in interstate commerce from the supplier of its choice constitutes an unwarranted and unacceptable discrimination against and burden on interstate commerce; (3) in today's technologically driven marketplace there is no justification for the discrimination against and burden imposed on interstate commerce by exclusive rights to sell electric energy or other State action which unduly discriminates against any consumer who seeks to purchase electric energy in interstate commerce from the supplier of its choice; and (4) the electric energy transmission and local distribution facilities of all of the Nation's utilities are essential facilities for the conduct of a competitive interstate retail market in electric energy in which all consumers have the opportunity to purchase electric energy in interstate commerce from the supplier of their choice.
The purpose of this act is to ensure that nothing in the Federal Power Act or any other Federal law exempts or protects from Article I, Section 8, Clause 3 of the Constitution of the United States exclusive rights to sell electric energy or any other State actions which unduly discriminate against any consumer who seeks to purchase electric energy in interstate commerce from the supplier of its choice.
SCOPE OF STATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE FEDERAL POWER ACT.
Section 201 of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824) is amended by adding at the end the following-- ``(h) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, nothing in this Part or any other federal law shall be construed to authorize a State to-- ``(1) establish, maintain, or enforce on behalf of any electric utility an exclusive right to sell electric energy; or, ``(2) otherwise unduly discriminate against any consumer who seeks to purchase electric energy in interstate commerce from any supplier.''.
ACCESS TO TRANSMISSION AND LOCAL DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES.
No supplier of electric energy, who would otherwise have a right of access to a transmission or local distribution facility because such facility is an essential facility for the conduct of interstate commerce in electric energy, shall be denied access to such facility or precluded from engaging in the retail sale of electric energy on the grounds that such denial or preclusion is authorized or required by State action establishing, maintaining, or enforcing an exclusive right to sell, transmit, or locally distribute electric energy.
STATE AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE RECIPROCITY REQUIREMENTS.
Part II of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
STATE AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE RECIPROCITY REQUIREMENTS.
``A State or state commission may prohibit an electric utility from selling electric energy to an ultimate consumer in such State if such electric utility or any of its affiliates owns or controls transmission or local distribution facilities and is not itself providing unbundled local distribution service in a State in which such electric utility owns or operates a facility used for the generation of electric energy.''.
REPEAL OF THE PUBLIC UTILITY HOLDING COMPANY ACT OF 1935.
The Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 (15 United States Code 79a et seq.)
is repealed, effective on and after the enactment of this Act.
PROSPECTIVE REPEAL OF SECTION 210 OF THE PUBLIC UTILITY REGULATORY POLICIES ACT OF 1978.
New Contracts.--No electric utility shall be required to enter into a new contract or obligation to purchase or to sell electricity or capacity under section 210 of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 824a-3).
Existing Rights and Remedies.--Nothing in this section affects the rights or remedies of any party with respect to the purchase or sale of electricity or capacity from or to a facility determined to be a qualifying small power production facility or a qualifying cogeneration facility under section 210 of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 824a-3) under any contract or obligation to purchase or to sell electricity or capacity in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, including the right to recover the costs of purchasing the electricity or capacity.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to-- (1) authorize the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to regulate retail sales or local distribution of electric energy or otherwise expand the jurisdiction of the Commission, or, (2) limit the authority of a State to regulate retail sales and local distribution of electric energy in a manner consistent with article I, section 8, clause 3 of the Constitution of the United States.
Section 5 and the amendment made by section 4 of this Act take effect on January 1, 2002.
The amendment made by section 6 of this Act takes effect on the date of enactment of this Act.