This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Access Improvement Act''.
NONREFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR CERTAIN PRIMARY HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDERS SERVING HEALTH PROFESSIONAL SHORTAGE AREAS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25A the following new section: ``SEC.
PRIMARY HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDERS SERVING HEALTH PROFESSIONAL SHORTAGE AREAS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a qualified primary health services provider, there is allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for any taxable year in a mandatory service period an amount equal to the product of-- ``(1) the lesser of-- ``(A) the number of months of such period occurring in such taxable year, or ``(B) 60 months, reduced by the number of months taken into account under this paragraph with respect to such provider for all preceding taxable years (whether or not in the same mandatory service period), multiplied by ``(2) $1,000.
Qualified Primary Health Services Provider.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified primary health services provider' means any physician who for any month during a mandatory service period is certified by the Bureau to be a primary health services provider who-- ``(1) is providing primary health services-- ``(A) full time, and ``(B) to individuals at least 80 percent of whom reside in a health professional shortage area, ``(2) is not receiving during such year a scholarship under the National Health Service Corps Scholarship Program or the Indian health professions scholarship program or a loan repayment under the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program or the Indian Health Service Loan Repayment Program, ``(3) is not fulfilling service obligations under such Programs, and ``(4) has not defaulted on such obligations.
Mandatory Service Period.--For purposes of this section, the term `mandatory service period' means the period of 60 consecutive calendar months beginning with the first month the taxpayer is a qualified primary health services provider.
In the case of an individual who is such a provider on the date of enactment of the Health Care Access Improvement Act, such term means the period of 60 consecutive calendar months beginning with the first month after such date.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Bureau.--The term `Bureau' means the Bureau of Health Care Delivery and Assistance, Health Resources and Services Administration of the United States Public Health Service.
Physician.--The term `physician' has the meaning given to such term by section 1861(r) of the Social Security Act.
Primary health services provider.--The term `primary health services provider' means a provider of basic health services (as described in section 330(b)(1)(A)(i) of the Public Health Service Act).
Health professional shortage area.--The term `health professional shortage area' means a health professional shortage area (as defined in section 332(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act).
Recapture of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--If, during any taxable year, there is a recapture event, then the tax of the taxpayer under this chapter for such taxable year shall be increased by an amount equal to the product of-- ``(A) the applicable percentage, and ``(B) the aggregate unrecaptured credits allowed to such taxpayer under this section for all prior taxable years.
Applicable recapture percentage.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, the applicable recapture percentage shall be determined from the following table: ``If the recapture The applicable recap- event occurs during: ture percentage is: Months 1-24.............. 100 Months 25-36............. 75 Months 37-48............. 50 Months 49-60............. 25 Months 61 and thereafter.
Timing.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), month 1 shall begin on the first day of the mandatory service period.
Recapture event defined.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `recapture event' means the failure of the taxpayer to be a qualified primary health services provider for any month during any mandatory service period.
Cessation of designation.--The cessation of the designation of any area as a rural health professional shortage area after the beginning of the mandatory service period for any taxpayer shall not constitute a recapture event.
Secretarial waiver.--The Secretary may waive any recapture event caused by extraordinary circumstances.
No credits against tax.--Any increase in tax under this subsection shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any credit under subpart A, B, or D of this part.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Primary health services providers serving health professional shortage areas.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.