SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT.
In General.--This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Water Infrastructure Financing Act of 1999''.
Amendment of Federal Water Pollution Control Act.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251-1387).
GENERAL AUTHORITY FOR CAPITALIZATION GRANTS.
Section 601(a) (33 United States Code 1381(a)) is amended by striking ``(1) for construction'' and all that follows through the period and inserting ``to accomplish the purposes of this Act.''.
Requirements for Construction of Treatment Works.--Section 602(b)(6) (33 United States Code 1382(b)(6)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``before fiscal year 1995''; and (2) by striking ``201(b)'' and all that follows through ``218'' and inserting ``211''.
Guidance for Small Systems.--Section 602 (33 United States Code 1382) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Guidance for Small Systems.-- ``(1) Simplified procedures.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall assist the States in establishing simplified procedures for small systems to obtain assistance under this title.
Publication of manual.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subsection, and after providing notice and opportunity for public comment, the Administrator shall publish a manual to assist small systems in obtaining assistance under this title and publish in the Federal Register notice of the availability of the manual.
Small system defined.--For purposes of this title, the term `small system' means a system for which a municipality or intermunicipal, interstate, or State agency seeks assistance under this title and which serves a population of 20,000 or less.''.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL REVOLVING FUNDS.
Activities Eligible for Assistance.--Section 603(c) (33 United States Code 1383(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Activities Eligible for Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--The amounts of funds available to each State water pollution control revolving fund shall be used only for providing financial assistance to activities which have as a principal benefit the improvement or protection of water quality of navigable waters to a municipality, intermunicipal agency, interstate agency, State agency, or other person.
Such activities may include the following: ``(A) Construction of a publicly owned treatment works.
Implementation of lake protection programs and projects under section 314.
Implementation of a management program under section 319.
Implementation of a conservation and management plan under section 320.
Restoration or protection of publicly or privately owned riparian areas, including acquisition of property rights.
Implementation of measures to improve the efficiency of public water use.
Development and implementation of plans by a public recipient to prevent water pollution.
Acquisition of lands necessary to meet any mitigation requirements related to construction of a publicly owned treatment works.
Fund amounts.--The water pollution control revolving fund of a State shall be established, maintained, and credited with repayments, and the fund balance shall be available in perpetuity for providing financial assistance described in paragraph (1).
Fees charged by a State to recipients of such assistance may be deposited in the fund for the sole purpose of financing the cost of administration of this title.''.
Extended Repayment Period for Disadvantaged Communities.-- Section 603(d)(1) (33 United States Code 1383(d)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A) by inserting after ``20 years'' the following: ``or, in the case of a disadvantaged community, the lesser of 40 years or the expected life of the project to be financed with the proceeds of the loan''; and (2) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``not later than 20 years after project completion'' and inserting ``upon the expiration of the term of the loan''.
Loan Guarantees for Innovative Technology.--Section 603(d)(5) (33 United States Code 1383(d)(5)) is amended to read as follows: ``(5) to provide loan guarantees for-- ``(A) similar revolving funds established by municipalities or intermunicipal agencies; and ``(B) developing and implementing innovative technologies.''.
Administrative Expenses.--Section 603(d)(7) (33 United States Code 1383(d)(7)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or $400,000 per year or \1/2\ percent per year of the current valuation of such fund, whichever is greater, plus the amount of any fees collected by the State for such purpose under subsection (c)(2)''.
Technical and Planning Assistance for Small Systems.--Section 603(d) (33 United States Code 1383(d)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (6); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(8) to provide to small systems technical and planning assistance and assistance in financial management, user fee analysis, budgeting, capital improvement planning, facility operation and maintenance, repair schedules, and other activities to improve wastewater treatment plant operations; except that such amounts shall not exceed 2 percent of all grant awards to such fund under this title.''.
Consistency With Planning Requirements.--Section 603(f) (33 United States Code 1383(f)) is amended by striking ``is consistent'' and inserting ``is not inconsistent''.
Construction Assistance.--Section 603(g) (33 United States Code 1383(g)) is amended to read as follows: ``(g) Construction Assistance.-- ``(1) Priority list requirement.--The State may provide financial assistance from its water pollution control revolving fund with respect to a project for construction of a publicly owned treatment works only if such project is on the State's priority list under section 216 of this Act without regard to the rank of such project on the State's priority list.
Eligibility of certain treatment works.--A treatment works shall be treated as a publicly owned treatment works for purposes of subsection (c) if the treatment works, without regard to ownership, would be considered a publicly owned treatment works and is principally treating municipal waste water or domestic sewage.''.
Interest Rates.--Section 603 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i) Interest Rates.--In any case in which a State makes a loan pursuant to subsection (d)(1) to a disadvantaged community, the State may charge a negative interest rate of not to exceed 2 percent to reduce the unpaid principal of the loan.
The aggregate amount of all such negative interest rate loans the State makes in a fiscal year shall not exceed 20 percent of the aggregate amount of all loans made by the State from its revolving loan fund in such fiscal year.
Disadvantaged Community Defined.--In this section, the term `disadvantaged community' means the service area of a publicly owned treatment works with respect to which the average annual residential sewage treatment charges for a user of the treatment works meet affordability criteria established by the State in which the treatment works is located (after providing for public review and comment) in accordance with guidelines to be established by the Administrator, in cooperation with the States.''.
Section 607 (33 United States Code 1387) is amended by striking ``the following sums:'' and all that follows through the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``$3,000,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.