This Act may be cited as the ``Air Traffic Equity Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Federal Aviation Administration (in this section referred to as the ``FAA'') requested an exemption from Federal personnel regulations to create a performance-based system.
The Administrator of the FAA elected to implement a system adversely impacting air traffic employees and contrary to the basic tenets of fairness and Federal employment in general.
The report of the General Accounting Office on managers and supervisors identified the FAA as worse, in general, than the rest of the Government in multiple aspects.
The Inspector General of the Department of Transportation found that the new FAA compensation system is inequitable, imposes disparate compensation on employees, has no link between pay and performance, and is not based on experience, qualifications, position, duties, or responsibilities.
The Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives concluded that the personnel reform efforts of the FAA have been a failure and should receive special review in future reauthorizations.
An independent study by the National Academy of Public Administration found that the FAA has not met many of the key goals of personnel reform.
The Administrator of the FAA has ignored all applications for redress to correct these ongoing disparities and the inequitable treatment of employees.
These actions elicit from FAA employees a sense of betrayal of trust and commitment at a critical juncture in the national response to security events.
The actions of the Administrator of the FAA violate the basic tenets from which the exemption to Federal personnel regulations were requested and authorized.
Definitions.--In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Air traffic control specialized compensation system.-- The term ``air traffic control specialized compensation system'' means the compensation system implemented beginning on October 1, 1998, for air traffic controllers in conjunction with a collective bargaining agreement with the National Air Traffic Controllers Association.
Air traffic controller.--The term ``air traffic controller'' means an employee of the Federal Aviation Administration in a position classified in the 2152 occupation series in the Federal Wage System, regardless of the employee's assigned location or position.
Air traffic mss employee.--The term ``air traffic MSS employee'' means an air traffic controller assigned as a manager, supervisor, or staff specialist or any additional employee designated by the Administrator or the Director of the Air Traffic Service as critical to accomplishing the air traffic control mission of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Covered air traffic mss employee.--The term ``covered air traffic MSS employee'' means an air traffic MSS employee covered by the air traffic control specialized compensation system.
FAA field facilities.--The term `FAA field facilities' means the air traffic control towers, terminal radar approach controls, and enroute centers of the Federal Aviation Administration.
FAA headquarters.--The term ``FAA headquarters'' means the headquarters of the Federal Aviation Administration in Washington, D.C., including organizations that have elements that are physically resident at other locations (such as the Federal Aviation Administration Academy and the William J. Hughes Technical Center).
FAA regional offices.--The term ``FAA regional offices'' means the 9 regional offices of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Uncovered air traffic mss employee.--The term ``uncovered air traffic MSS employee'' means an air traffic MSS employee not covered by the air traffic control specialized compensation system.
ADJUSTMENT IN PAYMENT RATES.
In General.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall adjust the annual rates of basic pay applicable to uncovered air traffic MSS employees to align the rates with the annual rates of basic pay applicable to covered air traffic MSS employees.
Adjustments.--In adjusting annual rates of basic pay under subsection (a), the Administrator shall-- (1) align staff specialists assigned to FAA field facilities with MSS-1 positions under the air traffic control specialized compensation system; (2) align staff specialists assigned to FAA regional offices and FAA headquarters with MSS-2 positions under the air traffic control specialized compensation system; (3) align special assistants assigned to FAA regional offices and FAA headquarters, and branch managers assigned to FAA headquarters, with MSS-3 positions under the air traffic control specialized compensation system; and (4) align branch managers assigned to FAA regional offices, and division mangers and deputy division managers assigned to FAA Headquarters, with MSS-4 positions under the air traffic control specialized compensation system.
Pay Level.--The adjusted annual rate of basic pay established under subsection (a) for an uncovered air traffic MSS employee shall be based on the highest air traffic control level in the employee's geographic area of responsibility.
Increases.--With respect to an employee who was employed as an uncovered air traffic MSS employee during all or any portion of the period beginning on October 1, 1998, and ending on the date of enactment of this Act, the adjusted annual rate of pay of the employee established under subsection (a) shall take into account any increase that the employee would have received had the employee been covered by the air traffic control specialized compensation system during the period of such employment.
Limitation.--The Administrator shall not reduce the annual rate of basic pay of any employee as the result of a pay adjustment under this section.
In General.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and subject to amounts being made available in advance in appropriations Acts, the Administrator shall make a lump sum payment to each individual employed as an uncovered air traffic MSS employee during all or any portion of the period beginning on October 1, 1998, and ending on the date of enactment of this Act, including former air traffic MSS employees.
Amount of Payment.--The amount of a lump sum payment to an employee under subsection (a) shall equal the difference between-- (1) the amount of basic pay that the employee would have received for employment as an air traffic MSS employee in the period beginning on October 1, 1998, and ending on the date of enactment of this subsection had the employee been covered by the air traffic control specialized compensation system during the period of such employment; and (2) the amount of basic pay actually received by the employee for such employment in such period.
Inclusion of Retirement Benefits.--In determining the amount of basic pay of an employee under this section, the Administrator shall include future retirement benefits attributable to the employee's annual rate of basic pay, as estimated by the Administrator.
TREATMENT OF GROUPS OF EMPLOYEES.
In calculating the amount of a pay adjustment under section 3 and a lump sum payment under section 4, the Administrator may group employees in similar positions, in similar locations, and with similar lengths of service in order to avoid making a separate calculation with respect to each employee.
In General.--An individual aggrieved by a final determination under this Act shall be entitled to appeal such determination to the Merit Systems Protection Board under title 5, United States Code, or through any contractual grievance procedure that is applicable to the employee as a member of a collective bargaining unit.
Compensation Appeals.--The Office of Personnel Management shall by regulation establish procedures under which individuals may bring an appeal to the Office with respect to any failure to have been properly compensated in accordance with this Act.
A final determination under this subsection shall be appealable under subsection (a).
Election of Forum.--Where a determination may be contested through more than one of the indicated forums (such as the contractual grievance procedure or that of the Merit Systems Protection Board), an employee must elect the forum through which the matter will be contested.
Nothing in this section is intended to allow an employee to contest an action through more than one forum unless otherwise authorized by law.
The Administrator shall promptly coordinate implementation of the requirements of this Act with the unions representing employees affected by this Act.
If an agreement is not reached within sufficient time to implement the provisions of this Act by the specified deadlines, the lack of an agreement shall not delay that implementation for those employees for whom an agreement has been reached or where such an agreement is not required.