This Act may be cited as the ``Old San Francisco Mint Commemorative Coin Act''.
Denominations.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) $1 silver coins.--Not more than 1,000,000 $1 coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Half dollar clad coins.--Not more than 1,000,000 half dollar coins which shall-- (A) weigh 11.34 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) be minted to the specifications for half dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the Old San Francisco Mint, its role in the coinage of gold, and the educational mission of the Old San Francisco Mint Museum.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``1995''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with Friends of the Mint and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Definition.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``Friends of the Mint'' means The Old Mint Corporation, organized under the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law of California and incorporated under articles of incorporation endorsed and filed in the office of the Secretary of State of California on June 24, 1994 (and any successor thereto).
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--All coins minted under this Act shall be struck at the United States Mint facility in San Francisco, California and shall bear the ``S'' mark of such facility.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may mint coins under this Act only during the period beginning on January 1, 1995, and ending on December 31, 1995.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of-- (1) $10 per coin for the $1 coin; and (2) $2 per coin for the half dollar coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to Friends of the Mint for the purposes of-- (1) refurbishing sections of the Old San Francisco Mint building; and (2) constructing additions to, operating, and maintaining the Old San Francisco Mint.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of Friends of the Mint as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under subsection (a).
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.
The Secretary shall submit to the Congress semiannual reports regarding the activities carried out under this Act.