This Act may be cited as the ``Border Infrastructure Safety and Congestion Relief Act of 1996''.
Congress finds that-- (1) although the United States Customs Service has collected increased duties, merchandise fees, and revenues from other commerce-related activities because of the approval and implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement, these increased revenues have not been accompanied by Federal funding for improving transportation facilities along the international borders of the United States to ensure the free and safe flow of trade destined for all States and regions of the United States; (2) because of NAFTA, all 4 States along the United States- Mexico border will require significant investments in highway infrastructure capacity and motor carrier safety enforcement at a time when border States face extreme difficulty in meeting current highway funding needs; (3) the full benefits of increased international trade can be realized only if delays at the borders are significantly reduced; and (4) the increased revenues to the general fund of the Treasury described in paragraph (1) should be sufficient to provide Federal funding for transportation improvements required to accommodate NAFTA-generated traffic, in an amount above and beyond regular Federal transportation funding apportionments.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Border region.--The term ``border region'' means the region located within 60 miles of the United States border with Mexico.
Border state.--The term ``border State'' means California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Border Transportation Infrastructure Fund established under section 4(g).
NAFTA.--The term ``NAFTA'' means the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
DIRECT FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR BORDER CONSTRUCTION AND CONGESTION RELIEF.
In General.--Using amounts in the Fund, the Secretary shall make grants under this section to border States that submit an application that demonstrates need, due to increased traffic resulting from the implementation of NAFTA, for assistance in carrying out transportation projects that are necessary to relieve traffic congestion or improve enforcement of motor carrier safety laws.
Grants for Connectors to Federal Border Crossing Facilities.-- The Secretary shall make grants to border States for the purposes of connecting, through construction or reconstruction, the National Highway System designated under section 103(b) of title 23, United States Code, with Federal border crossing facilities located in the United States in the border region.
Grants for Weigh-in-Motion Devices in Mexico.--The Secretary shall make grants to assist border States in the purchase, installation, and maintenance of weigh-in-motion devices and associated electronic equipment that are to be located in Mexico if real time data from the devices is provided to the nearest United States port of entry and to State commercial vehicle enforcement facilities that serve the port of entry.
Grants for Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Facilities.--The Secretary shall make grants to border States to construct, operate, and maintain commercial vehicle enforcement facilities located in the border region.
Limitations on Expenditures of Funds.-- (1) Cost sharing.--A grant under this section shall be used to pay the Federal share of the cost of a project.
The Federal share shall be 80 percent.
Allocation among states.-- (A) In general.--For each fiscal year, the Secretary shall allocate amounts remaining in the Fund, after any transfers under section 5, among border States in accordance with an equitable formula established by the Secretary in accordance with subparagraphs (B) and (C).
Considerations.--Subject to subparagraph (C), in establishing the formula, the Secretary shall consider-- (i) the annual volume of international commercial vehicle traffic at the ports of entry of each border State as compared to the annual volume of international commercial vehicle traffic at the ports of entry of all border States, based on the data provided in the most recent report submitted under section 8; (ii) the percentage by which international commercial vehicle traffic in each border State has grown during the period beginning on the date of the enactment of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (Public Law 103-182) as compared to that percentage for each other border State; and (iii) the extent of border transportation improvements carried out by each border State during the period beginning on the date of the enactment of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (Public Law 103- 182).
Minimum allocation.--Each border State shall receive not less than 5 percent of the amounts made available to carry out this section during the period of authorization under subsection (i).
Eligibility for Reimbursement for Previously Commenced Projects.--The Secretary shall make a grant under this section to a border State that reimburses the border State for a project for which construction commenced after January 1, 1994, if the project is otherwise eligible for assistance under this section.
Border Transportation Infrastructure Fund.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States the Border Transportation Infrastructure Fund to be used in carrying out this section, consisting of such amounts as are appropriated to the Fund under subsection (i).
Expenditures from fund.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), upon request by the Secretary, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer from the Fund to the Secretary of Transportation such amounts as the Secretary of Transportation determines are necessary to make grants under this section and transfers under section 5.
Administrative expenses.--An amount not exceeding 1 percent of the amounts in the Fund shall be available for each fiscal year to pay the administrative expenses necessary to carry out this section.
Applicability of Title 23.--Title 23, United States Code, shall apply to grants made under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund to carry out this section and section 5 $125,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2001.
The appropriated amounts shall remain available for obligation until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the amounts are appropriated.
CONSTRUCTION OF TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.
At the request of the Attorney General, the Secretary may transfer up to $10,000,000 of the amounts from the Fund for fiscal years 1998 through 2001 to the Attorney General for the construction of transportation infrastructure necessary for law enforcement in border States.
BORDER INFRASTRUCTURE INNOVATIVE FINANCING.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are-- (1) to encourage the establishment and operation of State infrastructure banks in accordance with section 350 of the National Highway System Designation Act of 1995 (109 United States Statutes at Large 618; 23 United States Code 101 note); and (2) to advance transportation infrastructure projects supporting international trade and commerce.
Federal Line of Credit.--Section 350 of the National Highway System Designation Act of 1995 (109 United States Statutes at Large 618; 23 United States Code 101 note) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (l) as subsection (m); and (2) by inserting after subsection (k) the following: ``(l) Federal Line of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated from the general fund of the Treasury $100,000,000 to be used by the Secretary to enter into agreements to make lines of credit available to-- ``(A) border States that have established infrastructure banks under this section; and ``(B) the State of New Mexico which has established a border authority that has bonding capacity.
Amount.--The line of credit available to each participating border State shall be equal to the product of-- ``(A) the amount appropriated under paragraph (1); and ``(B) the quotient obtained by dividing-- ``(i) the contributions of the State to the Highway Trust Fund during the latest fiscal year for which data are available; by ``(ii) the total contributions of all participating border States to the Highway Trust Fund during that fiscal year.
Use of line of credit.--The line of credit under this subsection shall be available to provide Federal support in accordance with this subsection for funding agreements with-- ``(A) a State infrastructure bank engaged in providing credit enhancement to creditworthy eligible public and private multimodal projects that support international trade and commerce in the border region; and ``(B) the New Mexico Border Authority; (each referred to in this subsection as a `border infrastructure bank').
Limitations.-- ``(A) In general.--A line of credit under this subsection may be drawn on only-- ``(i) with respect to a completed project described in paragraph (3) that is receiving credit enhancement through a border infrastructure bank; ``(ii) when the cash balance available in the border infrastructure bank is insufficient to pay a claim for payment relating to the project; and ``(iii) when all subsequent revenues of the project have been pledged to the border infrastructure bank.
Third party creditor rights.--No third party creditor of a public or private entity carrying out a project eligible for assistance from a border infrastructure bank shall have any right against the Federal Government with respect to a line of credit under this subsection, including any guarantee that the proceeds of a line of credit will be available for the payment of any particular cost of the public or private entity that may be financed under this subsection.
Interest rate and repayment period.--Any draw on a line of credit under this subsection shall-- ``(A) accrue, beginning on the date the draw is made, interest at a rate equal to the current (as of the date the draw is made) market yield on outstanding, marketable obligations of the United States with maturities of 30 years; and ``(B) shall be repaid within a period of not more than 30 years.
Relationship to state apportionment.--Funds made available to States to carry out this subsection shall be in addition to funds apportioned to States under section 104 of title 23, United States Code.
Definitions.--In this subsection, terms `border State' and `border region' have the meaning such terms have under section 3 of the Border Infrastructure Safety and Congestion Relief Act of 1996.''.
RAILROAD REHABILITATION AND IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to provide assistance for freight rail projects in border States that benefit international trade and relieve highways of increased traffic resulting from NAFTA.
Issuance of Obligations.--The Secretary shall issue to the Secretary of the Treasury notes or other obligations pursuant to section 512 of the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976 (45 United States Code 832), in such amounts, and at such times, as may be necessary to-- (1) pay any amounts required pursuant to the guarantee of the principal amount of an obligation under section 511 of such Act (45 United States Code 831) for any eligible freight rail project described in subsection (c) during the period that the guaranteed obligation is outstanding; and (2) during the period referred to in paragraph (1), meet the applicable requirements of this section and sections 511 and 513 of such Act (45 United States Code 832 and 833).
Eligibility.--Assistance provided under this section shall be limited to those freight rail projects located in the United States that provide intermodal connections that enhance cross-border traffic in the border region.
Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the aggregate unpaid principal amounts of obligations that may be guaranteed by the Secretary under this section may not exceed $100,000,000 during any of fiscal years 1998 through 2001.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to make loan guarantees under this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2001.
In General.--The Secretary shall annually submit to Congress and the Governor of each border State a report concerning-- (1) the volume and nature of international commercial vehicle traffic crossing the border between the United States and Mexico; and (2)(A) the number of international commercial vehicle inspections conducted by each border State at each United States port of entry; and (B) the rate of out-of-service violations of international commercial vehicles found through the inspections.
Information Provided by United States Customs Service.--For the purpose of preparing each report under subsection (a)(1), the Commissioner of Customs shall provide to the Secretary such information described in subsection (a)(1) as the Commissioner has available.