This Act may be cited as the ``Grand Staircase-Escalante Resource Protection Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the designation of the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument applies only to Federal land within the boundary of the Monument; (2) multiple use has been and continues to be the guiding principle in the management of public land; (3) in accordance with Proclamation 6920, issued by the President on September 18, 1996 (61 Fed.
50223 (1996), Federal land within the Monument should remain open for multiple uses; (4) the United States should not lay claim to Federal water rights in lands within the Monument except in accordance with the substantive and procedural requirements of the State of Utah, and designation of the Monument and enactment of this Act should not impair exercise of water rights by the State of Utah; (5) mining revenues from Federal and State School and Institutional Trust Lands have generated considerable revenues for Utah schools; (6) an estimated 176,000 acres of surface land containing significant coal and other resources managed by the School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration for the benefit of Utah's school children are located within the boundary of the Monument; (7) the creation of the Monument must not come at the expense of Utah's school children; (8) designation of the Monument will produce a considerable loss of future Federal royalties, State royalties, and school trust royalties resulting in significant revenue loss to Utah's school children; and (9) the lack of congressional, State, and local consultation prior to designation of the Monument and the failure of the Proclamation to establish a specific boundary for the Monument are certain to give rise to disputes that will require boundary adjustments.
In this Act: (1) Advisory committee.--The term ``advisory committee'' means the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument Advisory Committee established under section 12.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
Existing.--The term ``existing'' means in existence as of September 18, 1996.
Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan for the Monument submitted to Congress under section 9.
Monument.--The term ``Monument'' means the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument established by Proclamation of the President on September 18, 1996.
Multiple use.--The term ``multiple use'' has the meaning given in section 103 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1702).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Special management area.--The term ``special management area'' means an area that is managed by the Secretary in accordance with the principles of multiple use and sustained yield in accordance with this Act.
Sustained yield.--The term ``sustained yield'' has the meaning given in section 103 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1702).
MANAGEMENT OF THE MONUMENT.
Special Management Area.-- (1) In general.--The Monument shall be managed by the Secretary as a special management area in accordance with this Act.
Multiple use and sustained yield.--The Secretary shall manage the resources within the Monument in accordance with the principles of multiple use and sustained yield (including recreation, range, timber, minerals, oil and gas, watershed, wildlife, fish, and natural scenic, scientific, and historical values), using principles of economic and ecologic sustainability.
Protection of resources.--The Secretary shall provide for the protection, interpretation, and responsible use of Monument resources.
Economic sustainability.--The Secretary shall manage the Monument resources in a way that provides for economic sustainability of local communities.
Management Authority.-- (1) Delegation to the director.--The Secretary shall delegate authority to manage the Monument to the Director.
Lead agency.--The Bureau of Land Management shall be the lead agency in all management decisions concerning the Monument, pursuant to all applicable legal authorities, and shall act in consultation with other Federal agencies, State and local government authorities, and the advisory committee.
Future Action.--Nothing in this Act precludes the revocation of the Proclamation 6920 by Act of Congress or by Executive order, but, so long as land within the Monument remains subject to designation as a national monument under Proclamation 6920, any successor proclamation, or an Act of Congress, the Monument shall be managed in accordance with this Act.
VALID EXISTING RIGHTS AND USES.
Exercise of Valid Existing Rights.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall recognize and give due deference to the exercise of any valid existing right, lease, permit, or authorization under any law, including-- (A) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); (B)(i) sections 2319-28, 2331, 2333-2337, and 2344 of the Revised Statutes (commonly known as the ``General Mining Law of 1872'') (30 United States Code 22-24, 26- 28, 29-30, 33-35, 37, 39-42, 47); and (ii) the Act entitled ``An Act to promote the mining of coal, phosphate, oil, oil shale, gas, and sodium on the public domain'', approved February 25, 1920 (commonly known as the ``Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920'') (30 United States Code 181 et sequentes); (C) section 2477 of the Revised Statutes (43 United States Code 932) (to the extent of any rights-of-way existing on October 21, 1976); (D) the Act of June 28, 1934 (48 United States Statutes at Large 1269, chapter 865; 43 United States Code 315 et sequentes) (commonly known as the ``Taylor Grazing Act''); (E) the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 United States Code 1201 et sequentes); and (F) any other applicable law.
No restriction.--Neither designation of the Monument nor adoption and implementation of the applicable management plan shall restrict or prevent the exercise of valid existing rights by persons that exercise those rights in compliance with all applicable laws.
Roads and Rights-of-Way.--The Secretary shall permit routine maintenance and improvement of roads and rights-of-way within Monument boundaries to ensure public safety and a high-quality visitor experience.
Takings.--Any valid existing right determined to be taken as a result of designation of the Monument shall be subject to compensation by the Secretary.
Grazing of Livestock.--Grazing of livestock within the Monument shall continue and shall not be curtailed by reason of designation of the Monument.
Designation of the Monument shall not affect existing grazing leases, grazing permits, and levels of livestock grazing within the Monument.
Water Rights.--The Secretary shall not require a grazing permittee or grazing lessee to transfer or relinquish any part of the permittee's or lessee's water right to another person (including the United States) as a condition of granting, renewing, or transferring a grazing permit or grazing lease.
No existing withdrawal, reservation, or appropriation shall be revoked except in accordance with section 204 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1714).
NO FEDERAL RESERVATION OF WATER RIGHT.
No Federal Reservation.--Nothing in this Act, any other Act, or any action taken under any Act creates an expressed or implied reservation of water rights in the United States for any purpose.
Acquisition and Exercise of Water Rights Under Utah Law.-- (1) Acquisition.--The United States may acquire such water rights as the Secretary considers to be necessary to carry out responsibilities of the Secretary with respect to any land within the Monument only in accordance with the substantive and procedural requirements of the law of the State of Utah.
Exercise.--Any rights to water granted under the law of the State of Utah may be exercised only in accordance with the substantive and procedural requirements of the law of the State of Utah.
Eminent domain.--Nothing in this Act authorizes the use of the power of eminent domain by the United States to acquire water rights on land within the Monument.
Facilities Not Affected.--Nothing in this Act or any other Act relating to management of land within the Monument authorizes any action to be taken that may affect the capacity, operation, repair, construction, maintenance, modification, or repair of municipal, agricultural, livestock, or wildlife water facilities within or outside the Monument or water resources that flow through the Monument.
Water Resource Projects.--Nothing in this Act or any other Act relating to management of land within the Monument limits, or establishes any matter to be taken into consideration in connection with approval or denial by any Federal official of access to, or use of, the Federal land within or outside the Monument for development and operation of water resource projects (including reservoir projects).
Management in Accordance With FLPMA.-- (1) In general.--Not later than September 18, 1999, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a management plan for the Monument.
Multiple use and sustained yield.--In the development and revision of the management plan, the Secretary shall use and observe the principles of multiple use and sustained yield and shall use a systematic interdisciplinary approach to achieve integrated consideration of physical, biological, economic, and other sciences.
Requirements.--In the management plan, the Secretary shall specifically address-- (1) the multiple uses of all of the resources of the Monument (including recreation, range, timber, mineral, oil and gas, watershed, wildlife, fish, and natural scenic, scientific, and historical resources) in a responsible manner, under all applicable laws and authorities; and (2) the economic impacts of the Monument on the economies of local communities.
Notice and Comment.--The management plan shall be made available for public review and comment as required by law.
Utilization of Monument Resources.--Development and utilization of resources within the Monument shall be authorized if-- (1) the President or Congress determines it to be in the interests of the United States; or (2) in case of a national emergency.
Interim Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall modify any guidelines in existence on the date of enactment of this Act regarding management of the Monument to conform to the requirements of this Act.
Pending applications.--No lease on land within the Monument with respect to which an application of any kind was pending on September 18, 1996, or is pending on the date of enactment of this Act shall expire if the Secretary has not acted on the application.
STATE JURISDICTION WITH RESPECT TO FISH AND WILDLIFE.
Nothing in this Act-- (1) affects the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State of Utah with respect to fish and wildlife management activities (including hunting, fishing, trapping, predator control, and the stocking or transplanting of fish and wildlife); or (2) precludes the State of Utah from developing water resources for fish and wildlife purposes under State law.
SCHOOL TRUST LANDS EXCHANGE.
Expedition of Exchanges.--The Secretary shall provide necessary resources to expedite all exchanges of school trust lands within the Monument when sought by the School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration of the State of Utah.
Valuation.--The Secretary shall value school trust land sections as if surrounding unencumbered Federal lands were available for mineral development, and all reasonable differences in valuation shall be resolved in favor of the school trust.
Analysis of Lost Royalties.--Not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress an analysis of the loss of Federal royalties that can be expected to result from designation of the Monument, based on research compiled by the United States Geological Survey.
Access to State Sections.--The Secretary shall not deny access to school trust lands within the Monument by agencies of the State of Utah and designated permittees of those agencies.
Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish and convene a meeting of an advisory committee to be known as the ``Grand Staircase- Escalante National Monument Advisory Committee''.
Duties and Responsibilities.--The advisory committee shall advise the Secretary, the Director, and the Governor of the State of Utah concerning the development, management, and interpretation of Monument resources and the development, exchange, or disposal of State school trust lands.
Membership.--The advisory committee shall consist of-- (1) the Secretary, the Governor of the State of Utah, the member of the House of Representatives from the third congressional district, and the 2 members of the Senate from the State of Utah; and (2) 10 members appointed by the Secretary of the Interior from among persons recommended by the Governor of Utah, including-- (A) 1 representative of agricultural interests; (B) 1 representative of mining and oil and gas interests; (C) 1 representative of recreational interests; (D) 1 representative of environmental interests; (E) 1 representative of the School Institutional Trust Lands Administration of the State of Utah; (F) 1 representative of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Utah; (G) 1 representative of other agencies of the State of Utah; (H) 1 representative of local communities; (I) 1 representative of Native Americans; and (J) 1 representative of the public at large.
Terms.--A member of the advisory committee shall serve for a term not to exceed 5 years, determined by the Secretary in consultation with the Governor of the State of Utah, and may serve more than 1 term.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the advisory committee shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment is made.
A member of the advisory committee may serve until a successor is appointed.
Chairperson.--The advisory committee shall select 1 member to serve as chairperson.
Meetings.--The advisory committee shall meet regularly.
Quorum.--A majority of members shall constitute a quorum.
Compensation.--Members of the advisory committee shall serve without compensation, except that members shall be entitled to reimbursement of travel expenses including per diem while engaged in the business of the advisory committee, in accordance with section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
The Secretary shall provide that the Monument planning team formed by the Secretary to prepare the management plan for the Monument includes at least 5 persons appointed by the Governor of the State of Utah to represent the State and local governments.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to-- (1) provide for development and implementation of management plans, protection of Monument resources, visitor services and facilities, law enforcement, public safety, additional payments in lieu of taxes to impacted counties, economic mitigation, and the operation of the Monument advisory committee; and (2) facilitate the exchange of school trust lands.