SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Enterprise Capital Formation Act of 1997''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The Congress hereby finds that-- (1) investments in small business venture capital stock should be encouraged because of both the special risks and the social and economic benefits associated with such investments, (2) the exclusion from income of gain on small business venture capital stock is an important incentive for individuals and corporations to invest in such stock, and (3) tax incentives for investments in capital assets in general should be supplemented with an effective tax incentive for investments in small business venture capital stock.
MODIFICATIONS TO EXCLUSION OF GAIN ON CERTAIN SMALL BUSINESS STOCK.
Increase in Exclusion Percentage.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 1202 is amended-- (A) by striking ``50 percent'' and inserting ``75 percent'', and (B) by striking ``50-Percent'' in the heading and inserting ``Partial''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) The heading for section 1202 is amended by striking ``50-percent'' and inserting ``Partial''.
The table of sections for part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 is amended by striking ``50-percent'' in the item relating to section 1202 and inserting ``Partial''.
Reduction in Holding Period.--Subsection (a) of section 1202 is amended by striking ``5 years'' and inserting ``3 years''.
Exclusion Available to Corporations.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 1202 is amended by striking ``other than a corporation''.
Technical amendment.--Subsection (c) of section 1202 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Stock held among members of controlled group not eligible.--Stock of a member of a parent-subsidiary controlled group (as defined in subsection (d)(3)) shall not be treated as qualified small business stock while held by another member of such group.''.
Repeal of Minimum Tax Preference.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 57 is amended by striking paragraph (7).
Technical amendment.--Subclause (II) of section 53(d)(1)(B)(ii) is amended by striking ``, (5), and (7)'' and inserting ``and (5)''.
Stock of Larger Businesses Eligible for Exclusion.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 1202(d) is amended by striking ``$50,000,000'' each place it appears and inserting ``$100,000,000''.
Subsection (d) of section 1202 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Inflation adjustment of asset limitation.--In the case of stock issued in any calendar year after 1997, the $100,000,000 amount contained in paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, determined by substituting `calendar year 1996' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
If any amount as adjusted under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $10,000, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $10,000.''.
Repeal of Per-Issuer Limitation.--Section 1202 is amended by striking subsection (b).
Other Modifications.-- (1) Repeal of working capital limitation.--Paragraph (6) of section 1202(e) is amended-- (A) by striking ``2 years'' in subparagraph (B) and inserting ``5 years'', and (B) by striking the last sentence.
Exception from redemption rules where business purpose.--Paragraph (3) of section 1202(c) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Waiver where business purpose.--A purchase of stock by the issuing corporation shall be disregarded for purposes of subparagraph (B) if the issuing corporation establishes that there was a business purpose for such purchase and one of the principal purposes of the purchase was not to avoid the limitations of this section.''.
Qualified Trade or Business.--Section 1202(e)(3) is amended by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking ``, and'' at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting a period, and by striking subparagraph (E).
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to stock issued after August 10, 1993.
Special rule.--The amendments made by subsections (b), (c), and (e) shall apply to stock issued after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Election To Apply Amendments to Stock Issued After August 10, 1993.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by subsections (b), (c), and (e) shall apply to any qualified stock issued after August 10, 1993, if the taxpayer elects to apply such amendments with respect to such stock.
Qualified stock.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term ``qualified stock'' means stock-- (A) which is held by the taxpayer on the date of the enactment of this Act, and (B) which was not qualified small business stock (as defined section 1202(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) when issued but which would be qualified small business stock (as so defined) if the amendments made by subsections (b), (c), and (e) applied to stock issued after August 10, 1993.
Recognition of gain.--For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986-- (A) In general.--Any qualified stock to which the election under paragraph (1) applies shall be treated-- (i) as having been sold on the date of the enactment of this Act for an amount equal to its fair market value on such date, and (ii) as having been reacquired on such date for an amount equal to such fair market value.
The preceding sentence shall not apply for purposes of determining whether the stock is qualified small business stock (as so defined).
Treatment of gain or loss.-- (i) Any gain resulting from subparagraph (A) shall be treated as received or accrued on the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall be recognized notwithstanding any provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Any loss resulting from subparagraph (A) shall not be allowed for any taxable year.
Election.--An election under paragraph (1) shall be made in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe and shall specify the stock for which such election is made.
Such an election, once made with respect to any stock, shall be irrevocable.
ROLLOVER OF GAIN FROM SALE OF QUALIFIED STOCK.
In General.--Part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ROLLOVER OF GAIN FROM QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESS STOCK TO ANOTHER QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESS STOCK.
Nonrecognition of Gain.--In the case of any sale of qualified small business stock with respect to which the taxpayer elects the application of this section, eligible gain from such sale shall be recognized only to the extent that the amount realized on such sale exceeds-- ``(1) the cost of any qualified small business stock purchased by the taxpayer during the 60-day period beginning on the date of such sale, reduced by ``(2) any portion of such cost previously taken into account under this section.
This section shall not apply to any gain which is treated as ordinary income for purposes of this title.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified small business stock.--The term `qualified small business stock' has the meaning given such term by section 1202(c).
Eligible gain.--The term `eligible gain' means any gain from the sale or exchange of qualified small business stock held for more than 3 years.
Purchase.--A taxpayer shall be treated as having purchased any property if, but for paragraph (4), the unadjusted basis of such property in the hands of the taxpayer would be its cost (within the meaning of section 1012).''
Basis adjustments.--If gain from any sale is not recognized by reason of subsection (a), such gain shall be applied to reduce (in the order acquired) the basis for determining gain or loss of any qualified small business stock which is purchased by the taxpayer during the 60-day period described in subsection (a).
Special Rules for Treatment of Replacement Stock.-- ``(1) Holding period for accrued gain.--For purposes of this chapter, gain from the disposition of any replacement qualified small business stock shall be treated as gain from the sale or exchange of qualified small business stock held more than 3 years to the extent that the amount of such gain does not exceed the amount of the reduction in the basis of such stock by reason of subsection (b)(4).
Tacking of holding period for purposes of deferral.-- Solely for purposes of applying this section, if any replacement qualified small business stock is disposed of before the taxpayer has held such stock for more than 3 years, gain from such stock shall be treated eligible gain for purposes of subsection (a).
Replacement qualified small business stock.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `replacement qualified small business stock' means any qualified small business stock the basis of which was reduced under subsection (b)(4).''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 1016(a)(23) is amended-- (A) by striking ``or 1044'' and inserting ``, 1044, or 1045'', and (B) by striking ``or 1044(d)'' and inserting ``, 1044(d), or 1045(b)(4)''.
The table of sections for part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Rollover of gain from qualified small business stock to another qualified small business stock.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to stock sold or exchanged after the date of the enactment of this Act.