This Act may be cited as the ``Fuel-Efficient Fleets Act of 2006''.
FUEL ECONOMY OF THE FEDERAL FLEET.
Section 32917 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) New Vehicles.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), or by a waiver granted by the Adminstrator of the General Services Administration, each passenger automobile purchased, or leased for at least 60 consecutive days, by an executive agency after the date of enactment of the Fuel-Efficient Fleets Act of 2006 shall achieve a minimum fuel economy as follows: ``(A) For vans (except minivans), not less than 15 miles per gallon.
For minivans, not less than 20 miles per gallon.
For pickup trucks, not less than 24 miles per gallon.
For sport utility vehicles, not less than 36 miles per gallon.
For passenger automobiles not described in subparagraphs (A) through (D), not less than 45 miles per gallon.
Phase-in period.--Of the automobiles described in paragraph (1), not fewer than-- ``(A) 25 percent of such automobiles purchased by an executive agency during the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of the Fuel-Efficient Fleets Act of 2006 shall achieve the minimum fuel economy described in paragraph (1)(D); ``(B) 50 percent of such automobiles purchased by an executive agency during the 1-year period beginning 1 year after the date of the enactment of the Fuel- Efficient Fleets Act of 2006 shall achieve the minimum fuel economy described in paragraph (1)(D); and ``(C) 75 percent of such automobiles purchased by an executive agency during the 1-year period beginning 2 years after the date of the enactment of the Fuel- Efficient Fleets Act of 2006 shall achieve the minimum fuel economy described in paragraph (1)(D); and ``(D) 100 percent of such automobiles purchased by an executive agency during the 1-year period beginning 3 years after the date of the enactment of the Fuel- Efficient Fleets Act of 2006 shall achieve the minimum fuel economy described in paragraph (1)(D).''.
FUEL ECONOMY STANDARD EVALUATION.
Study.--The Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, shall annually evaluate the fuel economy standards under section 32917(c)(1) of title 49, United States Code, based on relevant technological advances during the previous year.
Increased Standards.--If the Secretary of Energy determines that significant technological improvements make it feasible to achieve higher fuel economy, the Secretary shall increase the fuel economy standards under section 32917(c)(1) of title 49, United States Code consistent with such determination.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Transportation may award grants to assist States to purchase vans, trucks, sport utility vehicles, minivans, or passenger automobiles that meet the fuel economy requirements for new federal fleet vehicles described in section 32917(c) of title 49, United States Code, as added by section 2.
Eligibility.--Grants shall be made available to States that comply with the minimum fuel economy standards described in section 32917(c) of title 49, United States Code.
Duration.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible States under this section for periods not to exceed 1 year.
Use of Funds.--Grants awarded under this section shall be used to purchase vehicles that meet the fuel economy requirements described in subsection (b).
Application.--The appropriate official of a State seeking a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary of Transportation, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may require, containing a vehicle purchase plan in accordance with subsection (b).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2007, which shall remain available for the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, for grants to eligible States under this section.
An executive agency (as defined in section 32917(a) of title 49, United States Code) that purchases or leases (for at least 60 consecutive days) passenger automobiles (as defined in section 32901 of title 49, United States Code) shall, when determining which models to purchase, give a preference to automobiles that are assembled in the United States from components, of which not less than 50 percent were manufactured in the United States.