This Act may be cited as the ``Terrorism Elimination Act of 2001''.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfer to Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund of Amounts Designated.-- ``(1) In general.--There is hereby appropriated to the Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6097 and received in the Treasury.
Other contributions.--The Secretary shall prescribe procedures under which persons may make contributions to the Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund other than as provided in section 6097.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--Amounts in the Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, for purposes of making expenditures for counter-terrorism efforts by the United States.
Administrative expenses.--Amounts in the Counter- Terrorism Trust Fund shall be available to pay the administrative expenses of the Department of the Treasury directly allocable to-- ``(A) modifying the income tax return forms to carry out section 6097, ``(B) carrying out this chapter with respect to such Fund, and ``(C) processing amounts received under section 6097 and transferring such amounts to such Fund.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
AUTHORIZATION FOR THE ISSUANCE OF FREEDOM BONDS.
Section 3102 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Issuance of Freedom Bonds.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may issue bonds under this section, to be known as `Freedom Bonds', in response to the acts of terrorism perpetrated against the United States on September 11, 2001.
Use of proceeds.--Proceeds from the issuance of Freedom Bonds shall be used to raise funds to assist in recovery operations following the terrorist acts referred to in paragraph (1) and for efforts to combat terrorism.
Form.--The bonds authorized by paragraph (1) shall be in such form and denominations, and shall be subject to such terms and conditions of issue, conversion, redemption, maturation, payment, and rate of interest as the Secretary may prescribe.''.
DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS FOR COUNTER- TERRORISM EFFORTS.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS FOR COUNTER- TERRORISM EFFORTS ``Sec.
In General.--With respect to each taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the tax imposed by chapter 1, such taxpayer may designate that-- ``(1) a specified portion (but not less than $1) of any overpayment of tax for such taxable year, and ``(2) any cash contribution which the taxpayer includes with such return, shall be deposited into the Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year only at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Overpayments Treated as Refunded.--For purposes of this title, any portion of an overpayment of tax designated under subsection (a) shall be treated as being refunded to the taxpayer as of the last date prescribed for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 (determined without regard to extensions) or, if later, the date the return is filed.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of overpayments and contributions for counter- terrorism efforts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
VISA APPLICATION SURCHARGE FOR COUNTER-TERRORISM.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in addition to such other fees as are authorized to be charged for the consideration or processing of an application for an immigrant or nonimmigrant visa under the Immigration and Nationality Act, the Attorney General shall impose an additional 15 percent surcharge.
Deposit of Surcharge Into the Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund.-- Amounts collected pursuant to the surcharge under subsection (a) shall be held in a separate account and transferred to the Counter-Terrorism Trust Fund established under section 9511 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.