Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Patient Communications Protection Act of 1996''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Patients need access to all relevant information to make appropriate decisions, with their physicians, about their health care.
Restrictions on the ability of physicians to provide full disclosure of all relevant information to patients making health care decisions violate the principles of informed consent and practitioner ethical standards.
The offering and operation of health plans affect commerce among the States.
Health care providers located in one State serve patients who reside in other States as well as that State.
In order to provide for uniform treatment of health care providers and patients among the States, it is necessary to cover health plans operating in one State as well as those operating among the several States.
PROHIBITION OF INTERFERENCE WITH CERTAIN MEDICAL COMMUNICATIONS.
In General.-- (1) Prohibition of certain provisions.--Subject to paragraph (2), an entity offering a health plan (as defined in subsection (d)(2)) may not include any provision that prohibits or restricts any medical communication (as defined in subsection (b)) as part of-- (A) a written contract or agreement with a health care provider, (B) a written statement to such a provider, or (C) an oral communication to such a provider.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing an entity from exercising mutually agreed upon terms and conditions not inconsistent with paragraph (1), including terms or conditions requiring a physician to participate in, and cooperate with, all programs, policies, and procedures developed or operated by the person, corporation, partnership, association, or other organization to ensure, review, or improve the quality of health care.
Nullification.--Any provision described in paragraph (1) is null and void.
Medical Communication Defined.--In this section, the term ``medical communication'' means a communication made by a health care provider with a patient of the provider (or the guardian or legal representative of such patient) with respect to the patient's physical or mental condition or treatment options.
Enforcement Through Imposition of Civil Money Penalty.-- (1) In general.--Any entity that violates paragraph (1) of subsection (a) shall be subject to a civil money penalty of up to $15,000 for each violation.
No such penalty shall be imposed solely on the basis of an oral communication unless the communication is part of a pattern or practice of such communications and the violation is demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence.
Procedures.--The provisions of subsections (c) through (l) of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7a) shall apply to civil money penalties under paragraph (1) in the same manner as they apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a) of such Act.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Health care provider.--The term ``health care provider'' means anyone licensed under State law to provide health care services, including a practitioner such as a nurse anesthetist or chiropractor who is so licensed.
Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' means any public or private health plan or arrangement (including an employee welfare benefit plan) which provides, or pays the cost of, health benefits, and includes an organization of health care providers that furnishes health services under a contract or agreement with such a plan.
Coverage of third party administrators.--In the case of a health plan that is an employee welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974), any third party administrator or other person with responsibility for contracts with health care providers under the plan shall be considered, for purposes of this section, to be an entity offering such health plan.
Non-Preemption of State Law.--A State may establish or enforce requirements with respect to the subject matter of this section, but only if such requirements are consistent with the Act and are more protective of medical communications than the requirements established under this section.
Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to medical communications made on or after such date.