HOLD-HARMLESS AMOUNTS FOR PAYMENTS RELATING TO FEDERAL ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.
Section 8002 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7702) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(g) Former Districts.-- ``(1) In general.--Where the school district of any local educational agency described in paragraph (2) is formed at any time after 1938 by the consolidation of two or more former school districts, such agency may elect (at any time such agency files an application under section 8005) for any fiscal year to have (A) the eligibility of such local educational agency, and (B) the amount which such agency shall be eligible to receive, determined under this section only with respect to such of the former school districts comprising such consolidated school districts as such agency shall designate in such election.
Eligible local educational agencies.--A local educational agency referred to in paragraph (1) is any local educational agency that, for fiscal year 1994 or any preceding fiscal year, applied for and was determined eligible under section 2(c) of the Act of September 30, 1950 (Public Law 874, 81st Congress) as such section was in effect on September 30, 1994.
Hold-Harmless Amounts.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2)(A), the total amount that the Secretary shall pay a local educational agency under subsection (b)-- ``(A) for fiscal year 1995 shall not be less than 85 percent of the amount such agency received for fiscal year 1994 under section 2 of the Act of September 30, 1950 (Public Law 874, 81st Congress) as such section was in effect on September 30, 1994; or ``(B) for fiscal year 1996 shall not be less than 85 percent of the amount such agency received for fiscal year 1995 under subsection (b).
Ratable reductions.--(A)(i) If necessary in order to make payments to local educational agencies in accordance with paragraph (1) for any fiscal year, the Secretary first shall ratably reduce payments under subsection (b) for such year to local educational agencies that do not receive a payment under this subsection for such year.
If additional funds become available for making payments under subsection (b) for such year, then payments that were reduced under clause (i) shall be increased on the same basis as such payments were reduced.
(i) If the sums made available under this title for any fiscal year are insufficient to pay the full amounts that all local educational agencies in all States are eligible to receive under paragraph (1) after the application of subparagraph (A) for such year, then the Secretary shall ratably reduce payments under paragraph (1) to all such agencies for such year.
If additional funds become available for making payments under paragraph (1) for such fiscal year, then payments that were reduced under clause (i) shall be increased on the same basis as such payments were reduced.''.
APPLICATIONS FOR INCREASED PAYMENTS.
Payments.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- (1) the Bonesteel-Fairfax School District Number 26-5, South Dakota, and the Wagner Community School District Number 11-4, South Dakota, shall be eligible to apply for payment for fiscal year 1994 under section 3(d)(2)(B) of the Act of September 30, 1950 (Public Law 874, 81st Congress) (as such section was in effect on September 30, 1994); and (2) the Secretary of Education shall use a subgroup of 10 or more generally comparable local educational agencies for the purpose of calculating a payment described in paragraph (1), and the local contribution rate applicable to such payment, for a local educational agency described in such paragraph.
Application.--In order to be eligible to receive a payment described in subsection (a), a school district described in such subsection shall apply for such payment within 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a local educational agency that received a payment under section 3(d)(2)(B) of the Act of September 30, 1950 (Public Law 874, 81st Congress) (as such section was in effect on September 30, 1994) for fiscal year 1994 to return such payment or a portion of such payment to the Federal Government.
Subparagraph (B) of section 8003(f)(3) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7703(f)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) Special rule.--The Secretary shall determine the maximum amount that a local educational agency described in clause (ii) or (iii) of paragraph (2)(A) may receive under this subsection in accordance with the following computations: ``(i) The Secretary shall multiply the average per-pupil expenditure for all States by 0.7, except that such amount may not exceed 125 percent of the average per-pupil expenditure for all local educational agencies in the State.
The Secretary shall next multiply the product determined under clause (i) by the number of students who are served by the local educational agency and described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1).
The Secretary shall next subtract the total amount of payments received by the local educational agency under subsections (b) and (d) for a fiscal year from the amount determined under clause (ii).''.
Passed the Senate December 22, 1995.
Attest: KELLY D. JOHNSTON, Secretary.