This Act may be cited as the ``Technology Education Incentive Act of 2003''.
EMPLOYER CREDIT FOR EMPLOYEE VOLUNTEER SERVICES IN GRADES K-12.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by inserting after section 45F the following new section: ``SEC.
EMPLOYER CREDIT FOR EMPLOYEE VOLUNTEER SERVICES IN GRADES K-12.
In General.--For purposes of section 38, the volunteer education services credit determined under this section for the taxable year is an amount equal to 20 percent of the wages paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year for qualified employee services.
Maximum Credit Per Employee.--The credit determined under this section with respect to services performed by an employee during the taxable year shall not exceed $1,000.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified employee services.--The term `qualified employee services' means any service furnished by an employee of the taxpayer if-- ``(A) the services are performed at a qualified K- 12 school, ``(B) the services are related to science, mathematics, or engineering education at grades K-12 at a qualified K-12 school, ``(C) the employee receives no additional compensation for performing such services and the employer receives no compensation for such services, and ``(D) the services are determined by the qualified K-12 school to be valuable to the school in providing education in grades K-12 in the areas of science, mathematics, or engineering.
Qualified k-12 school.--The term `qualified K-12 school' means any school located in the United States which provides education in grades K-12 and which meets the requirements of State law for providing such education.
Wages.--The term `wages' has the meaning given to such term by section 51(c).
Controlled Groups.--Rules similar to the rules of section 1397(b) shall apply for purposes of this section.''
Denial of Double Benefit.--Subsection (a) of section 280C of such Code is amended by inserting ``45G(a),'' after ``45A(a),''.
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code (relating to current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (14), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(16) volunteer education services credit determined under section 45G(a).''.
Limitation on carryback.--Subsection (d) of section 39 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) No carryback of volunteer education services credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the credit determined under section 45G may be carried back to any taxable year ending before the date of the enactment of this paragraph.''.
Deduction for certain unused business credits.-- Subsection (c) of section 196 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (10) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding after paragraph (10) the following new paragraph: ``(11) the volunteer education services credit determined under section 45G(a).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 45F the following new item: ``Sec.
Employer credit for employee volunteer services in grades K- 12.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Study.--The Secretary of Education and the Secretary of the Treasury shall jointly conduct a study of the effect of the credit under section 45G of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this Act, on the providing of volunteer services to which such credit applies.
The results of such study, together with any recommendations for improving the effectiveness of such credit, shall be submitted to the Congress not later than the date which is 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.