This Act may be cited as the ``Bi-State Aircraft Noise Correction Act of 1996''.
FINDINGS, DECLARATION, AND PURPOSE.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the Expanded East Coast Plan of the Federal Aviation Administration has resulted in significantly increased levels of aircraft noise over New Jersey; (2) over the past 30 years, and especially since the implementation of the Expanded East Coast Plan, relentless noise from aircraft departing from Newark International Airport has adversely affected the residents of northwestern Staten Island, New York; (3) the Federal Aviation Administration has stalled, obfuscated, resisted, and delayed any meaningful attempt to mitigate the aircraft noise problem in New Jersey created by the Administration through implementation of the Expanded East Coast Plan; and (4) the efforts of the Federal Aviation Administration to mitigate aircraft noise levels on Staten Island have been inadequate.
Declaration.--Congress declares that the Federal Aviation Administration should remedy the problem it has created, to the maximum extent practicable, by formulating and implementing plans to mitigate aircraft noise over certain areas of New Jersey and Staten Island.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to compel the Administrator to mitigate aircraft noise over certain areas of New Jersey and Staten Island.
REDUCTION IN AIRCRAFT NOISE OVER NEW JERSEY.
Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Administrator'') shall develop and publish, without compromising safety, a comprehensive plan to reduce aircraft generated noise in New Jersey by 6 decibels (yearly day-night average sound level) for at least 80 percent of the people residing within 18 nautical miles of Newark International Airport, relative to the noise values reported in the Federal Aviation Administration document, ``Environmental Impact Statement, Runway 11 ILS at Newark International Airport (September 16, 1993)'', and excluding regions where aircraft-generated noise exceeds 65 decibels (yearly day-night average sound level).
REDUCTION IN AIRCRAFT NOISE OVER STATEN ISLAND.
Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall develop and publish a plan to investigate and test southbound departure procedures from runway 22 of Newark International Airport that will fully utilize, without compromising safety, all of the allowable and available climbout airspace and that will result in a minimum 25 percent decrease in aircraft noise on the ground in northwestern Staten Island.
The Administrator shall also investigate a straight-out southbound departure from runway 22.
Remediation Efforts.--The Administrator shall undertake such remediation efforts as may be necessary to mitigate aircraft noise within the sound level contour described in section 3 pursuant to part 150 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations.
Nonapplicability of EIS Requirement.--In carrying out the activities under this Act, the Administrator shall not be required to prepare an environmental impact statement in accordance with the National Environment Policy Act of 1969 or any other law.
Standing.--In order to ensure compliance with this Act by the Administrator-- (1) the New Jersey Citizens for Environmental Research, and (2) a group to be designated by the Staten Island Borough President, shall have standing in United States district court to compel the Administrator to comply with this Act.
Venue.--The venue for any such action shall be the United States district court in Newark, New Jersey.
Attorney's Fees.-- (1) Award.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Administrator shall pay court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the organizations referred to in subsection (a) with respect to an action to compel the Administrator to comply with this Act.
Punitive damages may not be awarded.
Limitation.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the judge imposes a sanction under rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure on an attorney, law firm, or party in the plaintiff's case or if the suit is dismissed by a judge on a motion by the defendants for summary judgment.
Deadlines.--The Federal Aviation Administration shall begin implementation of-- (1) the plan described in section 3 on or before 90th day after the date of publication of the plan; (2) the plan described in section 4 on or before 90th day after the date of publication of the plan; and (3) the plan described in section 3 or 4 on or before 90th day after the date of any judicial order or settlement agreement which is issued or entered into in response to a civil action brought in accordance with section 6(a) and which requires the implementation of such plan.
Limitation.--No plan described in section 3 or 4 shall have the effect of reducing aircraft arrivals to or departures from Newark International Airport.