This Act may be cited as the ``Food Stamp Anti-Fraud Act of 1993''.
TITLE I--RETAIL FOOD STORES AND WHOLESALE FOOD CONCERNS SEC.
USE OF APPLICATION INFORMATION.
Section 9(c) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2018(c)) is amended-- (1) by designating the first sentence as paragraph (1); (2) by designating the second and third sentences as subparagraphs (A) and (C), respectively, of paragraph (2); and (3) in paragraph (2)-- (A) in subparagraph (A) (as so designated), by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or officers or employees of Federal or State law enforcement or investigative agencies for purposes of administering or enforcing the provisions of this Act or any other Federal or State law and the regulations issued under this Act or such law''; (B) by inserting after subparagraph (A) (as so designated) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) An officer or employee described in subparagraph (A) who publishes, divulges, discloses, or makes known in any manner or to any extent not authorized by law any information obtained under the authority granted by this subsection shall be subject to section 1905 of title 18, United States Code.
''; and (C) in subparagraph (C) (as so designated), by striking ``Such purposes'' and inserting ``The purposes referred to in subparagraph (A)''.
PENALTIES FOR TRAFFICKING IN FOOD STAMPS.
Section 12(b)(3)(B) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2021(b)(3)(B)) is amended by striking ``(except that the amount of civil money penalties imposed during a 2-year period may not exceed $40,000)''.
PENALTIES FOR STORES FOR TRADING FIREARMS, AMMUNITION, EXPLOSIVES, OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES FOR FOOD STAMPS.
Section 12(b)(3)(C) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2021(b)(3)(C)) is amended by striking ``(except that the amount of civil money penalties imposed during a 2-year period may not exceed $40,000)''.
USE OF TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS.
Social Security Account Numbers.--Clause (iii) of section 205(c)(2)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 405(c)(2)(C)(iii)) (as added by section 1735(a)(3) of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-624; 104 United States Statutes at Large 3791)) is amended-- (1) in the second sentence-- (A) by inserting after ``Department of Agriculture'' the following: ``, or officer or employee of a Federal or State law enforcement or investigative agency,''; and (B) by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or for the administration or enforcement of such Act or any other Federal or State law''; and (2) in the third sentence, by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or officers and employees of Federal or State law enforcement or investigative agencies whose duties or responsibilities require access for the administration or enforcement of such Act or any other Federal or State law''.
Employer Identification Numbers.--Section 6109(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to access to employer identification numbers by the Secretary of Agriculture for purposes of the Food Stamp Act of 1977) is amended-- (1) in the second sentence of paragraph (1)-- (A) by inserting after ``Secretary of Agriculture'' the following: ``, or an officer or employee of a Federal or State law enforcement or investigative agency,''; and (B) by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or for the administration or enforcement of such Act or any other Federal or State law''; and (2) in the first sentence of paragraph (2), by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or officers and employees of Federal or State law enforcement or investigative agencies whose duties or responsibilities require access for the administration or enforcement of such Act or any other Federal or State law''.
PERMANENT DISQUALIFICATION OF RECIPIENTS FOR TRADING FIREARMS, AMMUNITION, EXPLOSIVES, OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES FOR FOOD STAMPS.
Section 6(b)(1) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2015(b)(1)) is amended by striking clause (iii) and inserting the following new clause: ``(iii) permanently upon-- ``(I) the third occasion of any such determination (except as provided in subclause (II)); or ``(II) the first occasion of a finding of the trading of firearms, ammunition, explosives, or controlled substances (as the term is defined in section 802 of title 21, United States Code) for coupons.''.
USE OF PENALTIES COLLECTED FROM RETAIL FOOD STORES AND WHOLESALE FOOD CONCERNS.
Section 18 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2027) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Funds collected from claims against retail food stores or wholesale food concerns under section 12 shall-- ``(1) be credited to the food stamp program appropriation account for the fiscal year in which the collection occurs, and remain available until expended; and ``(2) be used for investigation and enforcement activities under this Act relating to retail food stores and wholesale food concerns.''.
TITLE III--EFFECTIVE DATES (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the amendments made by this Act shall become effective and implemented not later than 120 days after the date of issuance of final regulations by the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out the amendments.
Exceptions.--The amendments made by sections 102, 103, and 202 shall become effective on the date of enactment of this Act.