Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Driver's Privacy Protection Act of 1993''.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to protect the personal privacy and safety of licensed drivers consistent with the legitimate needs of business and government.
AMENDMENT TO TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
Title 18 of the United States Code is amended by inserting immediately after chapter 121, the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 122--PROHIBITION ON RELEASE OF CERTAIN PERSONAL INFORMATION ``Sec.
Prohibition on release of certain personal information.
Unlawful use of personal information.
Effect on State and local laws.
Prohibition on release of certain personal information ``(a) Disclosure.--It is unlawful for any department of motor vehicles of any State or any other person or organization to disclose or obtain, except as authorized by this chapter, personal information about any individual obtained by such department in connection with a motor vehicle operator's permit, motor vehicle title, identification card, or motor vehicle registration issued by the department to that individual, unless such individual has authorized such disclosure.
Exceptions.--It is not unlawful to disclose or obtain personal information, otherwise unlawful under this chapter, for any of the following routine uses if the person receiving such information has certified to the Department that the information will be used only for one of the specified permissible purposes: ``(1) For the use of any Federal, State or local court in carrying out its functions.
For the use of any Federal, State or local agency in carrying out its functions, including a law enforcement agency.
For the use in connection with matters of automobile and driver safety, including manufacturers of motor vehicles conducting a recall of motor vehicles.
For the use in any civil or criminal proceeding in any Federal, State or local court, if such proceeding involves a motor vehicle.
For use in research activities, if the motor vehicle department determines that such information will not be used to contact the individual and that individual is not identified or associated with the requested personal information.
For use in marketing activities if the motor vehicle department-- ``(A) has provided the individual with regard to whom the information is requested with the opportunity, in a clear and conspicuous manner, to prohibit a disclosure of such information for marketing activities; ``(B) has received assurances that the information will be used, rented, or sold solely for a permissible use under this chapter, including marketing activities; and ``(C) has received assurances from any person purchasing such information from a motor vehicle department for marketing purposes that such person will keep complete records identifying any person to whom they sell or rent the information and the permissible purpose for which the purchaser will use the information.
For use by any insurer or insurance support organization, or their employees, agents, and contractors, in connection with claims investigation activities and antifraud activities.
For use by any organization, or its agent, in connection with a business transaction, when the purpose is to verify the accuracy of personal information submitted to that business or agent by the person to whom such information pertains, or, if the information submitted is not accurate, to obtain correct information for the purpose of pursuing remedies against a person who provided false information or presented a check or similar item that was not honored.
(A) For use by any organization, if such organization has certified that it has obtained a statement from the person to whom the information pertains authorizing the disclosure of such information under this chapter in accordance with an agreement entered into pursuant to subparagraph (B).
Any motor vehicle department of a State is authorized to enter into an agreement with any organization under subparagraph (A) pursuant to which the motor vehicle department may subsequently release information to that organization on the basis of a certification that the entity has obtained or will have obtained consent from the individual to whom the information pertains to obtain such personal information from the State motor vehicle department.
Unlawful use of personal information ``(a) Unlawful Acts by State Motor Vehicle Departments, Organizations or Persons.--It is unlawful for any State motor vehicle department or organization or person to disclose, sell or otherwise make available, or use personal information about any individual referred to in section 2720 except in accordance with this chapter.
Unlawful Acts by Persons or Organizations.--It is unlawful for any person or organization-- ``(1) to make any false representation to obtain personal information from a department of motor vehicles of any State or other person about any individual referred to in section 2720; or ``(2) to use personal information obtained from any department of motor vehicles of any State or other person for any purpose other than as requested by that person or organization, or other than the purpose for which such information was disclosed.
Exception.--The prohibition referred to in subsection (a) of section 2720 and subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to any person to whom the information pertains.
Definitions ``As used in this chapter: ``(1) The term `personal information' includes an individual's photograph, driver's identification number, name, address, telephone number, social security number, and medical and disability information.
Such term does not include information on vehicular accidents, driving violations, and driver's status.
The term `person' means any individual.
The term `State' means each of the several States, District of Columbia, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
The term `organization' means any person other than an individual, including but not limited to, a corporation, association, institution, a car rental agency, employer, and insurers, insurance support organization, and their employees, agents, or contractors.
Penalties ``(a) Willful Violations.-- ``(1) Any person who willfully violates this chapter shall be fined under this title, or imprisoned for a period not exceeding 12 months, or both.
Any organization who willfully violates this chapter shall be fined under this title.
Nonwillful Violations.--Any person or organization who violates this chapter, other than a willful violation, shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $5,000.
Violations by State Department of Motor Vehicles.--Any State department of motor vehicles which willfully violates this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $10,000.
Each day of continued noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation.
Effect on State and local laws ``The provisions of this chapter shall supersede only those provisions of law of any State or local government which would require or permit the disclosure or use of personal information which is otherwise prohibited by this chapter.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect upon the expiration of the 270-day period following the date of its enactment.