This Act may be cited as the ``Campaign Reform Act of 2006''.
MATCHING FUNDS FOR HOUSE CANDIDATES.
Matching Funds.--The Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE V--MATCHING FUNDS FOR HOUSE CANDIDATES ``SEC.
AVAILABILITY OF MATCHING FUNDS.
In General.--An eligible House of Representatives candidate shall be entitled to receive payments under this title in support of the candidate's campaign for election in an amount equal to the amount of qualified contributions received by the candidate, but not to exceed the aggregate matching payment limit under subsection (b).
Aggregate Matching Payment Limit for Candidate.--The aggregate matching payment limit with respect to an eligible House of Representatives candidate in an election is $175,000, subject to the following adjustments: ``(1) If any opponent of the candidate who is not an eligible House of Representatives candidate receives contributions with respect to the election in an aggregate amount exceeding $500,000, the aggregate matching payment limit shall be equal to the aggregate amount of contributions received by the opponent.
In the case of an election which is a contested primary election (as determined by the Commission), if any opponent of the candidate receives contributions in an aggregate amount exceeding $50,000, the aggregate matching payment limit shall be increased by $75,000.
In the case of an election which is a runoff election, the aggregate matching payment limit shall be increased by $50,000.
Qualified Contribution Defined.--In this section, the term `qualified contribution' means, with respect to a candidate for an election, a contribution-- ``(1) which is made by an individual residing in the State in which the candidate seeks election whose aggregate contributions to the candidate for the election do not exceed $500; and ``(2) which is in the form of a gift of money made by a written instrument that identifies the individual making the contribution.
Source of Payments.--All payments made under this title shall be made from the House of Representatives Election Campaign Account described in section 503.
ELIGIBLE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATE DEFINED.
In General.--For purposes of this title, an `eligible House of Representatives candidate' means a candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress who files a statement of participation with the Commission in which the candidate certifies each of the following: ``(1) In the election cycle, the candidate has received $10,000 in contributions from individuals.
The candidate qualifies for the primary or general election ballot.
The candidate has an opponent on the primary or general election ballot.
The candidate will not receive contributions or make expenditures with respect to the election in excess of-- ``(A) $500,000; or ``(B) the aggregate matching payment limit for the candidate under section 501(b), whichever is greater.
The candidate agrees to cooperate in the case of any audit by the Commission by furnishing such campaign records and other information as the Commission may require.
Repayment of Matching Funds.--If an eligible House of Representatives candidate receives contributions or makes expenditures in excess of the spending limit specified in subsection (a)(4), the candidate shall repay the House of Representatives Election Campaign Account described in section 503 an amount equal to the amounts spent in excess of such limit.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTION CAMPAIGN ACCOUNT.
Account.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall maintain in the Presidential Election Campaign Fund established by section 9006(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, in addition to any other accounts maintained under such section, a separate account to be known as the House of Representatives Election Campaign Account.
Amounts.--The Secretary shall deposit in the Account, for use by eligible House of Representatives candidates-- ``(A) the amounts available after the Secretary determines that the amounts in the Presidential Election Campaign Fund necessary for payments under subtitle H of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are adequate; ``(B) any repayments made under section 502(b); and ``(C) any amount appropriated pursuant to the supplemental authorization described in paragraph (3).
Supplemental authorization.--If the Secretary issues a certification that amounts in the Account will not be adequate to make payments under this title during a fiscal year, there are authorized to be appropriated for such fiscal year for deposit in the Account such sums as may be necessary to ensure that amounts in the Account will be adequate to make such payments (as provided by the Secretary in the certification).
Availability.--All amounts in the Account shall remain available without fiscal year limitation.
Certification and Payment.-- ``(1) Certification.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), not later than 5 days after receiving a request for payment under this title from an eligible House of Representatives candidate, the Commission shall submit to the Secretary of the Treasury a certification for payment of the amount to which a candidate is entitled under section 501.
Upon receipt of such a certification, the Secretary shall promptly pay to the candidate from the House of Representatives Election Campaign Account maintained pursuant to subsection (a) the amount certified by the Commission.
Payments.--The initial payment under this section to an eligible candidate shall be $10,000.
All payments shall be-- ``(A) made not later than 48 hours after certification under paragraph (1); and ``(B) subject to proportional reduction in the case of an insufficient balance in the Account maintained pursuant to subsection (a).
Incorrect request.--If the Commission determines that any portion of a request is incorrect, the Commission shall withhold the certification for that portion only and inform the candidate as to how the candidate may correct the request.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to elections occurring after December 2006.