This Act may be cited as the ``Citizen Representative Reform Act Stop Special Treatment Provision''.
TITLE I--CONGRESSIONAL EXEMPTIONS SEC.
General Rule.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the laws specified in subsection (b) shall, to the extent that they relate to the terms and conditions of employment (including hiring, promotion or demotion, salary, benefits, work assignments or reassignments, overtime, and termination), the health and safety of employees, and the rights and responsibilities of employers and employees, apply to the Congress in the same manner and to the same extent as they apply-- (1) in the case of a private person, to such a person; and (2) in the case of an Executive agency (as defined by section 105 of title 5, United States Code), to such an agency.
Laws Made Applicable to Congress by This Act.--The laws referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (1) Social Security Act (42 United States Code 301 et sequentes).
National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 151 et sequentes).
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 201 et seq.).
Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 United States Code 621 et sequentes).
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes).
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 701 et sequentes).
Privacy Act of 1974 (5 United States Code 552a, 552a note).
Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 United States Code 6101 et seq.).
Ethics in Government Act of 1978.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Application of the Freedom of Information Act.--The Congress, and the instrumentalities of Congress, shall be subject to section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Freedom of Information Act'') to the same extent that Executive agencies (as defined by section 105 of title 5, United States Code) are subject to such section 552.
Application of Independent Counsel Provisions.--Chapter 40 of title 28, United States Code (relating to independent counsel), shall apply to the Congress, such that the individuals referred to in subsection (e)(1), (2), (3), (6), and (7) of this Act shall be deemed to be included in section 519(b) of title 28, United States Code.
Individuals Covered by Act.--This Act shall apply to the following individuals: (1) A Senator or Representative in, or Resident Commissioner or Delegate to, the Congress (hereafter in this Act referred to as ``Members'').
An employee of either House of Congress, of a committee of either House, or a joint committee of the two Houses.
An elected officer of either House who is not a Member.
The Legislative Counsel of either House and an employee of the Legislative Counsel.
A member of the Capitol Police.
An employee of a Member if the pay of the employee is paid by the Secretary of the Senate or the Clerk of the House of Representatives.
An employee of the instrumentalities of Congress, including the Congressional Research Service, the Office of Technology Assessment, the General Accounting Office, the Office of the Architect of the Capitol, the Botanic Gardens, the Government Printing Office, the Library of Congress, the Congressional Budget Office, and the Copyright Royalty Tribunal.
Employees in the District or State Office of a Member.--For the purposes of determining whether the individuals employed in the district or State office of a Member are subject to the laws set forth in section 2, the district or State office shall be treated as if it were an affiliated branch of a private employer under the laws in section 2.
Place of Residence and Political Affiliation.--Notwithstanding the laws set forth in section 2, a Member may consider the political affiliation and place of residence of an individual seeking employment on the personal staff of that Member.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 509 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (104 United States Statutes at Large 373) is repealed.
Application of Small Business Exemption to Members.--To the extent that a law referred to in section 2 contains an exemption for a small business, such an exemption shall apply to a Member if the aggregate number of employees of the Member and employees attributable to the Member does not exceed the number of employees necessary to qualify as a small business under the exemption.
For the purposes of this subsection, the number of employees attributable to a Member equals the result of the sum of the employees specified in subsection (e)(2), (3), (4), (6) and (7) who work in the District of Columbia and are employed by the House in which that Member sits, divided by the number of Members of that House.
If any individual referred to in section 2(e) is aggrieved by an action taken pursuant to this Act, such individual may seek review of that action in a Federal district court of competent jurisdiction and shall have the same rights and remedies provided to private persons under the laws referred to in section 2.
TITLE II--CONGRESSIONAL PERKS SEC.
PAYMENT FOR MEDICAL CARE FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
Payment.--All Members of the House of Representatives and Senators shall pay full market value for all medical services, medical tests, and medications provided by the Office of the Attending Physician.
Establishment of Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a revolving fund within the contingent fund of the House of Representatives to be known as the Office of the Attending Physician Revolving Fund (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``revolving fund'').
Deposits and Expenditures.-- (1) All moneys received by the Office of the Attending Physician from payments made under subsection (a) or from any other source shall be deposited to the fund credit of the revolving fund.
Moneys in the revolving fund shall be available without fiscal year limitation for disbursement by the Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper of the House of Representatives for necessary supplies and expenses of the Office of the Attending Physician.
On or before December 31 of each year, the House Administrator of the House of Representatives shall withdraw from the revolving fund and deposit in the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts all moneys in excess of $5,000 in the revolving fund at the close of the preceding fiscal year.
Disbursements from the revolving fund shall be made upon vouchers signed by the Sergeant at Arms.
ELIMINATION OF HOUSE BARBER SHOPS AND BEAUTY SALONS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all beauty shops and barber shops located on the premises of any property belonging to the House of Representatives shall be closed ninety days after the date of enactment of this Act.
EXPRESSING A SENSE OF CONGRESS THAT PAYMENT SHOULD BE MADE FOR PARKING AT NATIONAL AIRPORT FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the House of Representatives that Members of Congress should be charged rates comparable to those in other parking facilities at Washington National Airport, and that records of such expenses be made accessible to the public.
ESTABLISH MARKET RATES FOR HEALTH FACILITIES FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
Payment.--All Members of the House of Representatives shall pay full market value for the use of the health facilities located on the premises of the Capitol or any House office building.
Deposit.--The House Administrator shall submit amounts paid under subsection (a) for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury.
EXPRESSING A SENSE OF CONGRESS THAT MEMBERS OF CONGRESS SHOULD PAY THE ENTIRE EXPENSE ASSOCIATED WITH THEIR HEALTH INSURANCE.
It is the sense of the House of Representatives that the Federal Government shall not bear any of the cost of health insurance for Members of the House of Representatives.
STUDY TO IDENTIFY THE ALL BENEFITS THAT ACCRUE TO MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
Study.--The General Accounting Office shall conduct a study to identify all benefits that accrue to Members of the House of Representatives and shall determine the market value or a close approximation of each of those benefits and the extent to which tax dollars are used to pay for each service.
Report to Congress.--Before the end of the six month period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the General Accounting Office shall submit a report to the Congress on the findings and conclusions made with respect to the study under subsection (a).
PROMULGATION OF IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS.
Not later than a one hundred and eighty-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the House of Representatives and the Senate shall each promulgate rules and regulations to carry out this Act, including specifically implementing each of the laws set forth in section 101.
Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with Federal law.