This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Pension Forfeiture Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) Members of Congress pledge to uphold the Constitution and the laws of the United States; (2) Members of Congress are elected to serve in the public trust and pledge to uphold the public trust; (3) a breach of the public trust by a Member of Congress is a serious offense that should have serious consequences; and (4) taxpayers should not pay for the retirement benefits of Members of Congress who have breached the public trust.
Civil Service Retirement System.--Section 8332 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(o)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the service of an individual convicted of an offense described in paragraph (2) shall not, if or to the extent rendered as a Member (irrespective of when rendered), be taken into account for purposes of this subchapter.
Any such individual (or other person determined under section 8342(c), if applicable) shall be entitled to be paid so much of such individual's lump-sum credit as is attributable to service to which the preceding sentence applies.
(A) An offense described in this paragraph is any offense described in subparagraph (B) for which the following apply: ``(i) The offense is committed by the individual (referred to in paragraph (1)) while a Member.
The conduct on which the offense is based is directly related to the individual's service as a Member.
The offense is committed during the One Hundred Fifth Congress or later.
The offenses described in this subparagraph are as follows: ``(i) An offense within the purview of-- ``(I) section 201 of title 18 (bribery of public officials and witnesses); ``(II) section 203 of title 18 (compensation to Members of Congress, officers, and others in matters affecting the Government); ``(III) section 204 of title 18 (practice in United States Court of Federal Claims or the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit by Members of Congress); ``(IV) section 207 of title 18 (restrictions on former officers, employees, and elected officials of the executive and legislative branches); ``(V) section 219 of title 18 (officers and employees acting as agents of foreign principals); ``(VI) section 286 of title 18 (conspiracy to defraud the Government with respect to claims); ``(VII) section 287 of title 18 (false, fictitious, or fraudulent claims); ``(VIII) section 371 of title 18 (conspiracy to commit offense or to defraud the United States; ``(IX) section 597 of title 18 (expenditures to influence voting); ``(X) section 599 of title 18 (promise of appointment by candidate); ``(XI) section 602 of title 18 (solicitation of political contributions); ``(XII) section 606 of title 18 (intimidation to secure political contributions); ``(XIII) section 607 of title 18 (place of solicitation); ``(XIV) section 641 of title 18 (public money, property or records); ``(XV) section 1001 of title 18 (statements or entries generally); ``(XVI) section 1341 of title 18 (frauds and swindles); ``(XVII) section 1343 of title 18 (fraud by wire, radio, or television); ``(XVIII) section 1503 of title 18 (influencing or injuring officer or juror); ``(XIX) section 1951 of title 18 (interference with commerce by threats or violence); ``(XX) section 1952 of title 18 (interstate and foreign travel or transportation in aid of racketeering enterprises); ``(XXI) section 1962 of title 18 (prohibited activities); or ``(XXII) section 7201 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (attempt to evade or defeat tax).
Perjury committed under the statutes of the United States in falsely denying the commission of an act which constitutes an offense within the purview of a statute named by clause (i).
Subornation of perjury committed in connection with the false denial of another individual as specified by clause (ii).
An individual convicted of an offense described in paragraph (2) shall not, after the date of the conviction, be eligible to participate in the retirement system under this subchapter while serving as a Member.
Except as provided in paragraph (5), the Office shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this subsection, including provisions under which interest on any lump-sum payment under the second sentence of paragraph (1) shall be limited in a manner similar to that specified in the last sentence of section 8316(b).
The Executive Director (within the meaning of section 8401(13)) shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this subsection with respect to the Thrift Savings Plan.
Regulations under this paragraph shall include provisions requiring the return of all vested amounts.
Nothing in this subsection shall restrict any authority under subchapter II or any other provision of law to deny or withhold benefits authorized by statute.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `Member' has the meaning given such term by section 2106, notwithstanding section 8331(2).''.
Federal Employees' Retirement System.--Section 8411 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the service of an individual convicted of an offense described in paragraph (2) shall not, if or to the extent rendered as a Member (irrespective of when rendered), be taken into account for purposes of this chapter.
Any such individual (or other person determined under section 8424(d), if applicable) shall be entitled to be paid so much of such individual's lump-sum credit as is attributable to service to which the preceding sentence applies.
An offense described in this paragraph is any offense described in section 8332(o)(2)(B) for which the following apply: ``(A) The offense is committed by the individual (referred to in paragraph (1)) while a Member.
The conduct on which the offense is based is directly related to the individual's service as a Member.
The offense is committed during the One Hundred Fifth Congress or later.
An individual convicted of an offense described in paragraph (2) shall not, after the date of the conviction, be eligible to participate in the retirement system under this chapter while serving as a Member.
Except as provided in paragraph (5), the Office shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this subsection, including provisions under which interest on any lump-sum payment under the second sentence of paragraph (1) shall be limited in a manner similar to that specified in the last sentence of section 8316(b).
The Executive Director shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this subsection with respect to the Thrift Savings Plan.
Regulations under this paragraph shall include provisions requiring the return of all vested amounts.
Nothing in this subsection shall restrict any authority under subchapter II of chapter 83 or any other provision of law to deny or withhold benefits authorized by statute.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `Member' has the meaning given such term by section 2106, notwithstanding section 8401(20).''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 26, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.