This Act may be cited as the ``Nevada National Forest Land Disposal Act of 2003''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The United States owns, and the Forest Service administers, land in small and large parcels in Carson City and Douglas County, Nevada.
Much of this Federal land is interspersed with or adjacent to private land, which renders the Federal land difficult, inefficient, and expensive for the Forest Service to manage and more appropriate for disposal.
In order to promote responsible and orderly development in Carson City and Douglas County, Nevada, appropriate parcels of the Federal land should be sold by the Federal Government based on recommendations made by units of local government and the public.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide for the sale of certain parcels of Federal land in Carson City and Douglas County, Nevada.
DISPOSAL OF NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LANDS, CARSON CITY AND DOUGLAS COUNTY, NEVADA.
Disposal Required.--The Secretary of Agriculture (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'' shall sell any right, title, or interest of the United States in and to the following parcels of National Forest System lands in Carson City or Douglas County, Nevada: (1) The parcel of land referred to as the ``Carson Parcel'', consisting of approximately 3 acres, and more particularly described as being a portion of the southeast quarter, section 31, township 15 north, range 20 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian.
The parcel of land referred to as the ``Jacks Valley/ Highway 395 Parcel'', consisting of approximately 28 acres, and more particularly described as being a portion of the southeast quarter, section 6, township 14 north, range 20 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian.
The parcel of land referred to as the ``Indian Hills Parcel'', consisting of approximately 75 acres, and more particularly described as being a portion of the southwest quarter, section 18, township 14 north, range 20 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian.
The parcel of land referred to as the ``Mountain House Area Parcel'', consisting of approximately 40 acres, and more particularly described as being a portion of the northwest quarter northeast quarter, section 12, township 10 north, range 21 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian.
The parcel of land referred to as the ``Holbrook Junction Area Parcel'', consisting of approximately 80 acres, and more particularly described as being a portion of the west half of the southwest quarter, section 7, township 10 north, range 22 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian.
The two parcels of land referred to as the ``Topaz Lake Parcels'', consisting of approximately 5 acres (approximately 2.5 acres per parcel), and more particularly described as being portions of the northwest quarter, section 29, township 10 north, range 22 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian.
Modification of Descriptions.--The Secretary may-- (1) correct typographical or clerical errors in the descriptions of land specified in subsection (a); and (2) for the purposes of soliciting offers for the sale of such land, modify the descriptions based on-- (A) a survey; or (B) a determination by the Secretary that the modification is in the best interest of the public.
Selection and Sale.-- (1) Coordination.--The Secretary shall coordinate the sale of land under this section with the unit of local government in which the land is located.
Existing rights.--The sale of land under this section shall be subject to all valid existing rights, such as rights- of-way, in effect as of the date of the sale.
Zoning laws.--The sale of land under this section shall be in accordance with local land use planning and zoning laws and regulations.
Solicitations of offers.--The Secretary shall solicit offers for the sale of land under this section, subject to any terms or conditions that the Secretary may prescribe.
The Secretary may reject any offer made under this section if the Secretary determines that the offer is not adequate or not in the public interest.
Method of sale.--The Secretary may sell the land described in subsection (a) at public auction.
Disposition of Proceeds.-- (1) Payments and deposits.--Of the gross proceeds from any sale of land under this section, the Secretary shall-- (A) pay five percent to the State of Nevada for use for the general education program of the State; (B) pay five percent to the Carson Water Subconservancy District in the State; (C) deposit 25 percent in the fund established under Public Law 90-171 (commonly known as the ``Sisk Act''; 16 United States Code 484a); and (D) retain and use, without further appropriation, the remaining funds for the purpose of expanding the Minden Interagency Dispatch Center in Minden, Nevada, as provided in paragraph (3).
Use of sisk act funds.--The amounts deposited under paragraph (1)(C) shall be available to the Secretary until expended, without further appropriation, for the following purposes: (A) Reimbursement of costs incurred by the local offices of the Forest Service in carrying out land sales under this section, not to exceed 10 percent of the total proceeds of the land sales.
The development and maintenance of parks, trails, and natural areas in Carson City or Douglas County, Nevada, in accordance with a cooperative agreement entered into with the unit of local government in which the park, trail, or natural area is located.
Minden interagency dispatch center.--The Minden Interagency Dispatch Center is located on land made available by the State of Nevada in Minden, Nevada, and will serve as a joint facility for the Forest Service and the Nevada Division of Forestry for the purpose of fighting wildland fires.
The expansion of the center shall include living quarters and office space for the Blackmountain Hotshot Crew, a guard station for housing engines and patrol vehicles, an air traffic control tower, a training facility, and a warehouse.
Limitation.--None of the amounts made available to the Carson Water Subconservancy District under paragraph (1)(B) shall be used to pay the costs of litigation.
Relation to Other Property Management Laws.--The land described in subsection (a) shall not be subject to chapter 5 of title 40, United States Code, as codified by Public Law 107-217 (116 United States Statutes at Large 1062).
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal land described in subsection (a) is withdrawn from location, entry, and patent under the public land laws, mining laws, and mineral leasing laws, including geothermal leasing laws.
Revocation of Public Land Orders.-- (1) In general.--To facilitate the sale of parcels of land described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall revoke any public land orders in existence on the date of the enactment of this Act that withdraw the parcels from all forms of appropriation under the public land laws, to the extent that the orders apply to land described in such subsection (a).
Effective date.--A revocation under paragraph (1) shall be effective on the date on which the instrument conveying the parcels of land subject to the public land order is executed.
Report.--The Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate an annual report on all land sales made under this section.