This Act may be cited as the ``Savage Rapids Dam Act of 2000''.
This Congress finds that-- (1) the Savage Rapids Dam has provided water since 1921 from the Rogue River in the State of Oregon to the Grants Pass Irrigation District (hereafter referred to as the ``District''), a governmental subdivision under Oregon State Statutes; (2) the State of Oregon, the National Marine Fisheries Service and the District have agreed, in principle, that removal of the Savage Rapids Dam and its replacement with modern irrigation pumps will provide improved protection to the salmon and steelhead resources of the Rogue River basin; (3) it is in the public interest to have the Federal Government purchase the Savage Rapids Dam from the District; and (4) it is appropriate to enact measures that both enhance and protect natural resources while ensuring the operational and financial stability of the District and reasonable costs for the delivery of irrigation water to its patrons.
CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION, DAM ACQUISITION, DAM REMOVAL.
Prior to the removal of Savage Rapids Dam, the Secretary of the Interior (hereafter referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall design and install modern electric irrigation pumps and associated infrastructure at or near Savage Rapids Dam on the Rogue River in order to supply water to the District in the amount of 150 cubic feet per second.
The Savage Rapids Dam is located on the Rogue River at a point adjacent to the Josephine County easterly line and the Jackson County westerly line running south to north: Southeast corner of Section 24, Township 36 south, Range 5 west, Willamette Meridian, State of Oregon.
The Secretary shall install fish screens at the pump stations, ensure and certify that the pumping facility is operational and in conformity with all applicable State and Federal environmental regulations prior to dam removal.
Following the completion of activities authorized under subsections (a) and (b), the Secretary is authorized to acquire the dam described in subsection (a).
Acquisition shall only include the dam itself, and shall not include any lands adjacent to or underlying the dam structure.
The Secretary is authorized and directed to remove the dam, following its acquisition.
For five years after the dam removal is completed, the Secretary shall also correct any deficiencies in the design, specification, and installation of the pumps, including any problems that may be caused by accumulated sediments.
Title to the pumping facilities will be held by the District, and the District shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of these facilities, except as specified in Sec.
The Secretary is authorized to proceed with activities under this Act on the basis of the Environmental Impact Statement published by the Bureau of Reclamation in 1995, ``Fish Passage Improvements, Savage Rapids Dam, Planning Report and Final Environmental Statement, Josephine County Water Management Improvement Study, Oregon, Rogue River Basin, Oregon.''.
MONITORING, MITIGATION AND RESTORATION ACTIVITIES.
For ten years after the date of the removal of Savage Rapids Dam, the Bureau of Reclamation, in conjunction with the National Marine Fisheries Service and the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, shall monitor any impacts downstream from the dam resulting from dam removal and will implement appropriate remedial actions as necessary.
The Bureau of Reclamation and the United States Reports Fish and Wildlife Service, acting through the Southwest Oregon Resource Conservation and Development Council, shall identify and implement riparian restoration and other fisheries enhancement projects upstream of the site of the Savage Rapids Dam and downstream to the mouth of the Applegate River to minimize the impact, and maximize the benefit, of dam removal.
The Federal cost-share for activities under this subsection shall be seventy-five percent.
The Secretary shall work with the State of Oregon and the Counties of Josephine and Jackson to identify and implement community recreational enhancement projects.
The Federal cost-share for activities under this subsection shall be fifty percent.
There are authorized to be appropriated $13,500,000 for activities under this Act, except as provided in paragraphs (b) through (d) below.
There are authorized to be appropriated $3,700,000 for activities under Sec.
There are authorized to be appropriated $2,500,000 for activities under Sec.
There are authorized to be appropriated $2,500,000 for activities under Sec.
APPLICATION OF THE RECLAMATION REFORM ACT.
Activities funded under this Act shall not be considered a supplemental or additional benefit under the Act of June 17, 1902 (82 United States Statutes at Large 388) and all Acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto.