This Act may be cited as the ``Juvenile Corrections Act of 1995''.
GRANTS FOR VIOLENT AND CHRONIC JUVENILE FACILITIES.
Grants.--The Administrator may make grants to States and units of local government or combinations thereof to assist them in planning, establishing, and operating secure facilities, staff-secure facilities, detention centers, and other correctional programs for violent and serious chronic juvenile offenders.
Applications.-- (1) In general.--The chief executive officer of a State or unit of local government that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit to the Administrator an application, in such form and in such manner as the Administrator may prescribe.
Contents.--An application under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) provide assurances that each facility or program funded with a grant under this section will provide appropriate educational and vocational training and substance abuse treatment for juvenile offenders; and (B) provide assurances that each facility or program funded with a grant under this section will afford juvenile offenders intensive post-release supervision and services.
Minimum Amount.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each qualifying State, together with units of local government within the State, shall be allocated for each fiscal year not less than 1.0 percent of the total amount appropriated for that fiscal year for grants under subsection (b).
Exception.--The United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands shall each be allocated 0.2 percent of the total amount appropriated for that fiscal year for grants under subsection (b).
Performance Evaluation.-- (1) Evaluation components.-- (A) In general.--Each facility or program funded under this section shall contain an evaluation component developed pursuant to guidelines established by the Administrator.
Outcome measures.--The evaluations required by this subsection shall include outcome measures that can be used to determine the effectiveness of the funded programs, including the effectiveness of such programs in comparison with other correctional programs or dispositions in reducing the incidence of recidivism, and other outcome measures.
Periodic review and reports.-- (A) Review.--The Administrator shall review the performance of each grant recipient under this section.
Reports.--The Administrator may require a grant recipient to submit to the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention the results of the evaluations required under paragraph (1) and such other data and information as are reasonably necessary to carry out the Administrator's responsibilities under this section.
Technical Assistance and Training.--The Administrator shall provide technical assistance and training to States and units of local government that receive grants under this section to achieve the purposes of this section.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Programs; (2) the term ``qualifying State'' means a State that has submitted, or a State in which an eligible unit of local government has submitted, a grant application that meets the requirements of subsections (b) and (d); and (3) the term ``State'' means a State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section-- (1) $75,000,000 for fiscal year 1996; (2) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1997; (3) $190,000,000 for fiscal year 1998; (4) $200,000,000 for fiscal year 1999; and (5) $207,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
COMPENSATING REDUCTION OF AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
Section 20109 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 is amended by striking paragraphs (2) through (6) and inserting the following: ``(2) $675,000,000 for fiscal year 1996; ``(3) $900,000,000 for fiscal year 1997; ``(4) $1,710,000,000 for fiscal year 1998; ``(5) $1,800,000,000 for fiscal year 1999; and ``(6) $1,863,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.''.
REPORT ON ACCOUNTABILITY AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES IN JUVENILE CORRECTIONS PROGRAMS.
In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall, after consultation with the National Institute of Justice and other appropriate governmental and nongovernmental organizations, submit to Congress a report regarding the possible use of performance-based criteria in evaluating and improving the effectiveness of juvenile corrections facilities and programs.
Contents.--The report required under this section shall discuss-- (1) the range of performance-based measures that might be utilized as evaluation criteria, including measures of recidivism among juveniles who have been incarcerated in facilities or have participated in correctional programs; (2) the feasibility of linking Federal juvenile corrections funding to the satisfaction of performance-based criteria by grantees (including the use of a Federal matching mechanism under which the share of Federal funding would vary in relation to the performance of a program or facility); (3) whether, and to what extent, the data necessary for the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention to utilize performance-based criteria in its administration of juvenile corrections programs are collected and reported nationally; and (4) the estimated cost and feasibility of establishing minimal, uniform data collection and reporting standards nationwide that would allow for the use of performance-based criteria in evaluating juvenile corrections programs and facilities and administering Federal juvenile corrections funds.