This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Health Care Reform Act of 2003''.
REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR HEALTH CARE COSTS.
In General.--Section 35 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to health insurance costs of eligible individuals) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by subtitle A an amount equal to the amount paid by the taxpayer for insurance which constitutes medical care for the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse and dependents.
Limitation.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed the sum of-- ``(1) the taxpayer's net income tax for the taxable year, and ``(2) the taxpayer's social security taxes (as defined in section 24(d)) for such taxable year.
For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `net income tax' means the sum of the regular tax liability and the tax imposed by section 55, reduced by the credits allowable under this part (other than this subpart).
Denial of Double Benefit.--Any amount allowed as a credit under this section shall not be taken into account in determining the amount of any deduction under this chapter.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 162(l) of such Code is hereby repealed.
Section 202 of the Trade Act of 2002, and the amendments made by such section, is hereby repealed, and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be applied as if such section had not been enacted.
The item relating to section 35 in the table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.
DISPOSITION OF UNUSED HEALTH BENEFITS IN CAFETERIA PLANS AND FLEXIBLE SPENDING ARRANGEMENTS.
In General.--Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to cafeteria plans) is amended by redesignating subsections (h) and (i) as subsections (i) and (j), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (g) the following: ``(h) Carryforwards or Payments of Certain Unused Health Benefits.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, a plan or other arrangement shall not fail to be treated as a cafeteria plan solely because qualified benefits under such plan include a health flexible spending arrangement under which not more than $500 of unused health benefits may be-- ``(A) carried forward to the succeeding plan year of such health flexible spending arrangement, or ``(B) paid to or on behalf of an employee as compensation as of the end of such plan year or upon the termination of, or failure to re-enroll in, such plan or arrangement.
Distribution of unused health benefits on behalf of employee.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), unused health benefits paid as compensation on behalf of an employee by the employer shall be-- ``(A) includible in gross income and wages of the employee, whether or not a deduction for such payment is allowable under this title to the employee, and ``(B) excludable from-- ``(i) gross income to the extent provided under section 402(e), 457(a) (with respect to contributions to an eligible deferred compensation plan (as defined in section 457(b)) of an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A)), or 220, and ``(ii) wages to the extent otherwise provided for amounts so excludable.
Health flexible spending arrangement.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `health flexible spending arrangement' means a flexible spending arrangement (as defined in section 106(c)) that is a qualified benefit and only permits reimbursement for expenses for medical care (as defined in section 213(d)(1) (without regard to subparagraphs (C) and (D) thereof).
Unused health benefits.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `unused health benefits' means the excess of-- ``(A) the maximum amount of reimbursement allowable during a plan year under a health flexible spending arrangement, over ``(B) the actual amount of reimbursement during such year under such arrangement.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.
EXPANSION OF AVAILABILITY OF ARCHER MEDICAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.
Repeal of Dollar Limitations on Amount That May Be Contributed to Archer MSA.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 220 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to limitations) is amended by striking paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) and by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (7) as (1) through (4), respectively.
Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (1) of section 106(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``to the extent'' and all that follows and inserting a period.
Repeal of Limitations on Number of Medical Savings Accounts.-- (1) In general.--Subsections (i) and (j) of section 220 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are hereby repealed.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Paragraph (1) of section 220(c) of such Code is amended by striking subparagraph (D).
Section 138 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (f).
Availability Not Limited to Accounts for Employees of Small Employers and Self-Employed Individuals.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 220(c)(1) of such Code (relating to eligible individual) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible individual' means, with respect to any month, any individual if-- ``(i) such individual is covered under a high deductible health plan as of the 1st day of such month, and ``(ii) such individual is not, while covered under a high deductible health plan, covered under any health plan-- ``(I) which is not a high deductible health plan, and ``(II) which provides coverage for any benefit which is covered under the high deductible health plan.''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 220(c)(1) of such Code is amended by striking subparagraph (C).
Section 220(c) of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (4) (defining small employer) and by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4).
Section 220(b) of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (4) (relating to deduction limited by compensation) and by redesignating paragraphs (5), (6), and (7) as paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), respectively.
Both Employers and Employees May Contribute to Medical Savings Accounts.--Paragraph (4) of section 220(b) of such Code (as redesignated by subsection (b)(2)(C)) is amended to read as follows: ``(4) Coordination with exclusion for employer contributions.--The limitation which would (but for this paragraph) apply under this subsection to the taxpayer for any taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount which would (but for section 106(b)) be includible in the taxpayer's gross income for such taxable year.''.
Reduction of Permitted Deductibles Under High Deductible Health Plans.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 220(c)(2) of such Code (defining high deductible health plan) is amended-- (A) by striking ``$1,500'' in clause (i) and inserting ``$1,000''; and (B) by striking ``$3,000'' in clause (ii) and inserting ``$2,000''.
Conforming amendment.--Subsection (g) of section 220 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(g) Cost-of-Living Adjustment.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 1998, each dollar amount in subsection (c)(2) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which such taxable year begins by substituting `calendar year 1997' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
Special rules.--In the case of the $1,000 amount in subsection (c)(2)(A)(i) and the $2,000 amount in subsection (c)(2)(A)(ii), paragraph (1)(B) shall be applied by substituting `calendar year 2002' for `calendar year 1997'.
Rounding.--If any increase under paragraph (1) or (2) is not a multiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $50.''.
Providing Incentives for Preferred Provider Organizations To Offer Medical Savings Accounts.--Clause (ii) of section 220(c)(2)(B) of such Code is amended by striking ``preventive care if'' and all that follows and inserting ``preventive care.''
Medical Savings Accounts May Be Offered Under Cafeteria Plans.--Subsection (f) of section 125 of such Code is amended by striking ``106(b),''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.
REPEAL OF 7.5 PERCENT THRESHOLD ON DEDUCTION FOR MEDICAL EXPENSES.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 213 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to deduction for medical expenses) is amended by striking ``to the extent that such expenses exceed 7.5 percent of adjusted gross income''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.