This Act may be cited as the ``Meat Safety and Accountability Act of 2010''.
Congress finds that it is essential and in the public interest that-- (1) the health and welfare of consumers be protected by ensuring that meat and meat food products distributed to consumers are wholesome and not adulterated or contaminated; and (2) Federal meat inspection programs identify all sources, including the slaughterhouse source, of original adulteration and contamination of enteric foodborne pathogens in meat in any case in which-- (A) lab samples test positive for enteric pathogen adulteration or contamination; or (B) adulterated or contaminated meat is found in commerce, including foodborne outbreaks.
Section 1 of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(x) Enteric Foodborne Pathogen.--The term `enteric foodborne pathogen' means live bacteriological matter that is commonly present in the digestive systems of animals for slaughter, specifically E. coli 0157: H7 and salmonella, the presence of which in meat food products may indicate unsanitary conditions at the point of slaughter.
Establishment.--The term `establishment' means any person, firm, meat broker, renderer, or animal food manufacturer.''.
PROTECTION AGAINST ADULTERATED AND CONTAMINATED MEAT OR MEAT FOOD PRODUCTS.
Section 8 of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 608) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Sec.
The Secretary'' and inserting the following: ``SEC.
PROTECTION AGAINST ADULTERATED AND CONTAMINATED MEAT OR MEAT FOOD PRODUCTS.
In General.--The Secretary''; (2) by inserting ``or contaminated'' after ``adulterated''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Sampling Protocols.-- ``(1) In general.--In carrying out this Act, the Secretary shall implement sampling protocols using methods and technologies to enable personnel of the Food Safety and Inspection Service to rapidly trace potential adulteration and contamination of meat and meat food products by enteric foodborne pathogens to possible preceding sources of the adulteration and contamination, including preparation, packaging, and slaughtering establishments, to determine the original site source of the adulteration or contamination.
Requirements.-- ``(A) In general.--Sampling protocols shall include the collection of documentary and other relevant material to enable rapid tracing, including-- ``(i) establishment identification data; ``(ii) a description of the meat or meat food product; ``(iii) shipping marks; ``(iv) bar coding; and ``(v) disclosure of sole-source or multiple-source origin.
Timing.--The collection of documentary and other relevant material to enable rapid tracing under subparagraph (A) shall occur at the time that samples of the relevant meat or meat food product are collected.
Certification.--The onsite inspector and a responsible establishment representative shall certify that the documentary and other tracing material collected under subparagraph (A) is complete and accurate.
Tracing of adulterated and contaminated meat and meat food products.--If a meat or meat food product sample tests positive or is indicated to test positive for adulteration or contamination by enteric foodborne pathogens, the Secretary shall immediately conduct a trace-- ``(A) to identify all sites of adulteration and contamination, including preparation, packaging, and slaughtering establishments; and ``(B) to identify the original source of adulteration or contamination.
Subsequent sampling.--If a raw ground meat sample tests positive or is indicated to test positive for adulteration or contamination by enteric foodborne pathogens at a preparation, packaging, or slaughtering establishment, the Secretary shall require subsequent sampling at the establishment, and any establishments supplying that establishment, each day for a minimum of 15 consecutive days after the date on which the adulterated or contaminated sample is collected.