This Act may be cited as the ``Nigerian Democracy and Civil Society Empowerment Act of 1999''.
FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The rule by successive military regimes in Nigeria has harmed the lives of the people of Nigeria, undermined confidence in the Nigerian economy, damaged relations between Nigeria and the United States, and threatened the political and economic stability of West Africa.
The current military regime, under the leadership of Gen. Abdusalami Abubakar, has made significant progress in liberalizing the political environment in Nigeria, including the release of many political prisoners, increased respect for freedom of assembly, expression and association, and the establishment of a timeframe for a transition to civilian rule.
Previous military regimes allowed Nigeria to become a haven for international drug trafficking rings and other criminal organizations, although the current government has taken some steps to cooperate with the United States Government in halting such trafficking.
Since 1993, the United States and other members of the international community have imposed limited sanctions against Nigeria in response to human rights violations and political repression, although some of these sanctions have been lifted in response to recent political liberalization.
Despite the progress made in protecting certain freedoms, numerous decrees are still in force that suspend the constitutional protection of fundamental human rights, allow indefinite detention without charge, and revoke the jurisdiction of civilian courts over executive actions.
As a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, and a signatory to the Harare Commonwealth Declaration, Nigeria is obligated to fairly conduct elections that guarantee the free expression of the will of the electors.
As the leading military force within the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) peacekeeping force, Nigeria has played a major role in attempting to secure peace in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Despite the optimism expressed by many observers about the progress that has been made in Nigeria, the country's recent history raises serious questions about the potential success of the transition process.
In particular, events in the Niger Delta over the New Year underscore the critical need for ongoing monitoring of the situation and indicate that a return by the military to repressive methods is still a possibility.
Declaration of Policy.--Congress declares that the United States should encourage political, economic, and legal reforms necessary to ensure rule of law and respect for human rights in Nigeria and support a timely, effective, and sustainable transition to democratic, civilian government in Nigeria.
International Cooperation.--It is the sense of Congress that the President should actively seek to coordinate with other countries to further-- (1) the United States policy of promoting the rule of law and respect for human rights; and (2) the transition to democratic civilian government.
United Nations Human Rights Commission.--It is the sense of Congress that, in light of the importance of Nigeria to the region and the severity of successive military regimes, the President should instruct the United States Representative to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) to use the voice and vote of the United States at the annual meeting of the Commission-- (1) to condemn human rights abuses in Nigeria, as appropriate, while recognizing the progress that has been made; and (2) to press for the continued renewal of the mandate of, and continued access to Nigeria for, the special rapporteur on Nigeria.
ASSISTANCE TO PROMOTE DEMOCRACY AND CIVIL SOCIETY IN NIGERIA.
Development Assistance.-- (1) In general.--Of the amounts made available for fiscal years 2000, 2001, and 2002 to carry out chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes), not less than $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, not less than $12,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, and not less than $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 should be available for assistance described in paragraph (2) for Nigeria.
Assistance described.-- (A) In general.--The assistance described in this paragraph is assistance provided to nongovernmental organizations for the purpose of promoting democracy, good governance, and the rule of law in Nigeria.
Additional requirement.--In providing assistance under this subsection, the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development shall ensure that nongovernmental organizations receiving such assistance represent a broad cross- section of society in Nigeria and seek to promote democracy, human rights, and accountable government.
Grants for promotion of human rights.--Of the amounts made available for fiscal years 2000, 2001, and 2002 under paragraph (1), not less than $500,000 for each such fiscal year should be available to the United States Agency for International Development for the purpose of providing grants of not more than $25,000 each to support individuals or nongovernmental organizations that seek to promote, directly or indirectly, the advancement of human rights in Nigeria.
USIA Information Assistance.--Of the amounts made available for fiscal years 2000, 2001, and 2002 under subsection (a)(1), not less than $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, $1,500,000 for fiscal year 2001, and $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 should be made available to the United States Information Agency for the purpose of supporting its activities in Nigeria, including the promotion of greater awareness among Nigerians of constitutional democracy, the rule of law, and respect for human rights.
Staff Levels and Assignments of United States Personnel in Nigeria.-- (1) Finding.--Congress finds that staff levels at the office of the United States Agency for International Development in Lagos, Nigeria, are inadequate.
Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development should-- (A) increase the number of United States personnel at such Agency's office in Lagos, Nigeria, from within the current, overall staff resources of such Agency in order for such office to be sufficiently staffed to carry out subsection (a); and (B) consider placement of personnel elsewhere in Nigeria.
PROHIBITION ON ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO THE GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA; PROHIBITION ON MILITARY ASSISTANCE FOR NIGERIA; REQUIREMENT TO OPPOSE MULTILATERAL ASSISTANCE FOR NIGERIA.
Prohibition on Economic Assistance.-- (1) In general.--Economic assistance (including funds previously appropriated for economic assistance) shall not be provided to the Government of Nigeria.
Economic assistance defined.--As used in this subsection, the term ``economic assistance''-- (A) means-- (i) any assistance under part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) and any assistance under chapter 4 of part II of such Act (22 United States Code 2346 et sequentes) (relating to economic support fund); and (ii) any financing by the Export-Import Bank of the United States, financing and assistance by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and assistance by the Trade and Development Agency; and (B) does not include disaster relief assistance, refugee assistance, or narcotics control assistance under chapter 8 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2291 et sequentes).
Prohibition on Military Assistance or Arms Transfers.-- (1) In general.--Military assistance (including funds previously appropriated for military assistance) or arms transfers shall not be provided to Nigeria.
Military assistance or arms transfers.--The term ``military assistance or arms transfers'' means-- (A) assistance under chapter 2 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2311 et sequentes) (relating to military assistance), including the transfer of excess defense articles under section 516 of that Act (22 United States Code 2321j); (B) assistance under chapter 5 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2347 et sequentes) (relating to international military education and training); (C) assistance under the ``Foreign Military Financing Program'' under section 23 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2763); or (D) the transfer of defense articles, defense services, or design and construction services under the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2751 et sequentes), including defense articles and defense services licensed or approved for export under section 38 of that Act (22 United States Code 2778).
Requirement To Oppose Multilateral Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States executive director to each of the international financial institutions described in paragraph (2) to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose any assistance to the Government of Nigeria.
International financial institutions described.--The international financial institutions described in this paragraph are the African Development Bank, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, the Multilateral Investment Guaranty Agency, and the International Monetary Fund.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING ADMISSION INTO THE UNITED STATES OF CERTAIN NIGERIAN NATIONALS.
It is the sense of Congress that unless the President determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees by July 1, 1999, that a democratic transition to civilian rule has taken place in Nigeria, the Secretary of State should deny a visa to any alien who is a senior member of the Nigerian government or a military officer currently in the armed forces of Nigeria.
WAIVER OF PROHIBITIONS AGAINST NIGERIA IF CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS MET.
In General.--The President may waive any of the prohibitions contained in section 5 or 6 for any fiscal year if the President makes a determination under subsection (b) for that fiscal year and transmits a notification to Congress of that determination under subsection (c).
Presidential Determination Required.--A determination under this subsection is a determination that-- (1) the Government of Nigeria-- (A) is not harassing or imprisoning human rights and democracy advocates and individuals for expressing their political views; (B) has implemented the transition program announced in July 1998; (C) is respecting freedom of speech, assembly, and the media, including cessation of harassment of journalists; (D) has released the remaining individuals who have been imprisoned without due process or for political reasons; (E) is continuing to provide access for independent international human rights monitors; (F) has repealed all decrees and laws that-- (i) grant undue powers to the military; (ii) suspend the constitutional protection of fundamental human rights; (iii) allow indefinite detention without charge, including the State of Security (Detention of Persons) Decree No.
2 of 1984; or (iv) create special tribunals that do not respect international standards of due process; and (G) has ensured that the policing of the oil producing communities is carried out without excessive use of force or systematic and widespread human rights violations against the civilian population of the area; or (2) it is in the national interests of the United States to waive the prohibition in section 5 or 6, as the case may be.
Congressional Notification.--Notification under this subsection is written notification of the determination of the President under subsection (b) provided to the appropriate congressional committees not less than 15 days in advance of any waiver of any prohibition in section 5 or 6, subject to the procedures applicable to reprogramming notifications under section 634A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2394-1).
REPORT OF CORRUPTION IN NIGERIA.
Not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually for the next 5 years thereafter, the Secretary of State shall prepare and submit to the appropriate congressional committees, and make available to the public, a report on corruption in Nigeria.
This report shall include-- (1) evidence of corruption by government officials in Nigeria; (2) the impact of corruption on the delivery of government services in Nigeria; (3) the impact of corruption on United States business interests in Nigeria; (4) the impact of advance fee fraud, and other fraudulent business schemes originating in Nigeria, on United States citizens; and (5) the impact of corruption on Nigeria's foreign policy.
APPROPRIATE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES DEFINED.
Except as provided in section 6, in this Act, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (1) the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives; (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate; and (3) the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
The provisions of this Act shall terminate on September 30, 2004.