This Act may be cited as the ``Tuition Account Assistance Act of 1995''.
TREATMENT OF PARTICIPATION IN STATE PREPAID TUITION PROGRAM.
In General.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by redesignating section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after section 136 the following new section: ``SEC.
TREATMENT OF PARTICIPATION IN STATE PREPAID TUITION PROGRAM.
General Rule.--No amount shall be includible in the gross income of any person by reason of-- ``(1) education furnished to a designated beneficiary pursuant to a qualified State prepaid tuition program, or ``(2) earnings on any amount paid to such a program for the purchase of tuition credits for a designated beneficiary.
Qualified State Prepaid Tuition Program.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified State prepaid tuition program' means a program established and maintained by a State or any agency thereof under which-- ``(A) an individual may purchase tuition credits for tuition for the undergraduate education of a designated beneficiary, ``(B) the value of the tuition credits is not limited to the amounts paid for such credits and earnings thereon, ``(C) the individual has no authority to direct the investment of amounts paid to the program, and ``(D) the requirements of paragraph (3) are met with respect to any refund of amounts paid to the program.
Subparagraph (B) shall not apply to tuition at an institution of higher education which is not required by the laws of such State to participate in such program.
Treatment of excess tuition credits.--A program shall not fail to be treated as a qualified State prepaid tuition program by reason of permitting tuition credits to be used other than for tuition for an undergraduate education if-- ``(A) the only other purposes for which such credits may be used are-- ``(i) for tuition for a graduate degree program of the designated beneficiary, or ``(ii) for education expenses (other than tuition) of such beneficiary, and ``(B) the program provides a significant reduction in the value of such credits if used for such other purposes.
Restrictions on refunds.--A refund meets the requirements of this paragraph if the refund meets the requirements of any of the following subparagraphs.
Death or disability of designated beneficiary.--A refund meets the requirements of this subparagraph if the refund is made on account of the death or disability of the designated beneficiary.
Scholarships.--A refund meets the requirements of this subparagraph if the refund is made on account of a scholarship received by the designated beneficiary and the amount of the refund does not exceed the amount of the scholarship which is used for tuition.
Failure to gain admission.--A refund meets the requirements of this subparagraph if the refund is made on account of the failure of the designated beneficiary to gain admission to an institution of higher education (after making a good faith attempt, as determined by the program, to gain admission) and the amount of the refund does not exceed 90 percent of the value of the designated beneficiary's account.
Other withdrawals from participation.--A refund meets the requirements of this subparagraph if the refund is made on account of a termination of participation in the qualified State prepaid tuition program (other than for a reason described in any of the preceding subparagraphs) and the amount of the refund does not exceed the lesser of-- ``(i) 90 percent of the value of the designated beneficiary's account, or ``(ii) the aggregate amount paid to such program for the benefit of the designated beneficiary.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Tuition credit.--The term `tuition credit' means the amount of tuition which is paid by the qualified State prepaid tuition program reason of payments to such program.
Tuition.--The term `tuition' means tuition and related expenses (as defined in section 117(b)(2)).
Designated beneficiary.--The term `designated beneficiary' means the individual designated at the commencement of participation in the qualified State prepaid tuition program (or any substitute beneficiary to the extent provided by the program) as the beneficiary of amounts paid (or to be paid) to the program.
Value of designated beneficiary's account.--The value of a designated beneficiary's account is an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(A) the aggregate amount paid to the qualified State prepaid tuition program for the benefit of such designated beneficiary, plus ``(B) such amount's pro rata share of the earnings (if any) on the aggregate amount paid to such program for all designated beneficiaries.
Person.--The term `person' includes a State and any agency of a State.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such part III is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Treatment of participation in State prepaid tuition program.
Cross references to other Acts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after September 30, 1993.