SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Integrity in Offshore Energy Resources Act of 2008''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--EMPLOYEES OF SERVICE Sec.
TITLE II--PROGRAMS OF SERVICE Sec.
Suspension of royalty-in-kind program.
Prohibition on use of royalty-in-kind revenues for administrative costs.
In this Act: (1) Department.--The term ``Department'' means the Department of the Interior.
Mineral.--The term ``mineral'' has the meaning given the term ``minerals'' in section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331).
Mineral mining.-- (A) In general.--The term ``mineral mining'' means-- (i) any activity carried out on Federal land on or off a claim (with or without a discovery) for mineral leasing, preleasing, any related activity, prospecting, exploration, development, mining, extraction, milling, beneficiation, processing, or storage of mined or processed materials with respect to any mineral that is under the jurisdiction of the Service and uses reasonably incident to the activity; and (ii) any reclamation activity for any mineral and uses reasonably incident to the activity.
Inclusions.--The term ``mineral activity'' includes the construction and use of roads, transmission lines, pipelines, utility corridors, and other means of access across Federal land for an ancillary facility.
Royalty-in-kind program.--The term ``royalty-in-kind program'' means the program established under-- (A) section 342 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 15902); (B) section 36 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 192); (C) section 27 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1353); or (D) any other similar provision of law.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Service.--The term ``Service'' means the Minerals Management Service.
TITLE I--EMPLOYEES OF SERVICE SEC.
Gifts.-- (1) Prohibition.-- (A) In general.--An employee of the Service may not knowingly accept a gift from an entity that is engaged in the business of mineral mining.
Exceptions.--Except for the value exception, the regulations providing exceptions to the gift rules for Federal employees for gifts from outside sources (5 Code of Federal Regulations Part 2635) shall apply to subparagraph (A).
Violation.--Whoever violates paragraph (1) shall be guilty of a felony and fined under title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than 2 years, or both.
Financial Disclosure.--The filing requirements of section 101(f) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 shall apply to an employee of the Service in a position classified at an annual income equivalent to GS-13 or higher.
Divestiture Requirement.--An employee of the Service may not own stock or any other interest in an entity that is engaged in the business of mineral mining during the period of employment of that employee by the Service.
Outside Employment.--An employee of the Service may not be employed by any entity that is engaged in the business of mineral mining during the period of employment of that employee by the Service.
Revolving Door.-- (1) Any work for the industry.--An employee of the Service shall not work for an entity engaged in the business of mineral mining during the 1 year period after the termination of his or her employment with the Service.
Violation.--Whoever violates paragraph (1) shall be guilty of a felony and punished as provided in section 216 of title 18, United States Code.
TITLE II--PROGRAMS OF SERVICE SEC.
SUSPENSION OF ROYALTY-IN-KIND PROGRAM.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the authority of the Secretary to carry out each royalty-in-kind program is suspended during the period-- (1) beginning on the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) ending on the date the Secretary certifies to Congress that the Secretary, acting through the Service, has-- (A) conducted a comprehensive review to determine if the Service is accurately collecting royalties and reported the results of the review to Congress; (B) conducted a thorough review to ensure that metering equipment properly measures what royalties are owed to the Federal Government and reported the results of the review to Congress; (C) implemented a robust training program for employees of the Service that culminates in a certification signed by an employee that the employee understands the ethics laws (including regulations); and (D) created an ombudsman position that-- (i) monitors the progress of the Service in carrying out the actions described in this paragraph; and (ii) is appointed by, and reports exclusively to, the Inspector General of the Department.
Application.--Subsection (a) applies to a contract entered into on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Number of Audits.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall ensure that by fiscal year 2009 the Service shall perform each fiscal year not less that 550 audits of oil and gas leases entered into by the Secretary for which payment is made under a royalty-in-kind program.
Compliance reviews.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a compliance review shall not be considered an audit.
Standards.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations that-- (1) require that all employees that conduct audits or compliance reviews of oil and gas leases entered into by the Secretary shall meet professional auditor qualifications that are consistent with the latest revision of the Government Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and (2) ensure that all audits conducted by the Department are performed in accordance with the Standards.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act and each year thereafter, the Inspector General of the Department shall submit to Congress a report that evaluates-- (1) the performance of the Secretary in carrying out each royalty-in-kind program; and (2) whether the royalty-in-kind program costs or saves taxpayer dollars as compared to receiving revenues in cash.
PROHIBITION ON USE OF ROYALTY-IN-KIND REVENUES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
Section 342(b)(5) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 15902(b)(5)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Limitation.--'' and all that follows through ``subparagraph (B), the'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``Limitation.--The''; and (2) by striking subparagraph (B).