This Act may be cited as the ``Cesar Chavez National Historical Park Act''.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Cesar E. Chavez National Monument was established by Presidential Proclamation 8884 on October 8, 2012, for the purposes of protecting and interpreting the nationally significant resources associated with the property in Keene, California, known as Nuestra Senora Reina de la Paz.
Nuestra Senora Reina de la Paz served as the national headquarters of the United Farm Workers movement, and was the home and workplace of Cesar Chavez, his family, union members, and supporters.
While Cesar E. Chavez National Monument marks the extraordinary achievements and contributions to the history of the United States by Cesar Chavez and the farm worker movement, there are other significant sites in California and Arizona that are important to the story of the farm worker movement.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish the Cesar Chavez National Historical Park-- (1) to help preserve, protect, and interpret the nationally significant resources associated with Cesar Chavez and the farm worker movement; (2) to interpret and provide for a broader understanding of the extraordinary achievements and contributions to the history of the United Sates made by Cesar Chavez and the farm worker movement; and (3) to support and enhance the network of sites and resources associated with Cesar Chavez and the farm worker movement.
In this section: (1) Historical park.--The term ``historical park'' means the Cesar Chavez National Historical Park established by section 4(a).
Map.--The term ``map'' means the map entitled, ``___'', numbered ___, and dated ___, __.
Route.--The term ``route'' means the ``American Farm Worker Movement Interpretive Route'' established by section 5.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Interior.
States.--The term ``States'' means-- (A) the State of California; and (B) the State of Arizona.
CESAR CHAVEZ NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Establishment.--There is established in the States a unit of the National Park System to be known as the ``Cesar Chavez National Historical Park''.
Boundary.--The boundary of the historical park shall include the following areas as generally depicted on the map: (1) The Forty Acres and Filipino Community Hall in Delano, California.
Cesar E. Chavez National Monument, which includes La Nuestra Senora Reina de la Paz, in Keene, California.
McDonnell Hall in San Jose, California.
Santa Rita Center in Phoenix, Arizona.
Availability of Map.--The map shall be available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service, Department of Interior.
Land Acquisition.--The Secretary may acquire land and interests in land that are within the boundary of the historical park by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange.
Abolishment of Cesar E. Chavez National Monument.-- (1) In general.--Cesar E. Chavez National Monument is hereby abolished and the lands and interests therein are incorporated within and made part of the historical park.
Any funds available for purposes of the monument shall be available for purposes of the historical park.
References.--Any reference in a law (other than in this Act), regulation, document, record, map or other paper of the United States to Cesar E. Chavez National Monument shall be considered a reference to the historical park.
Administration.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall administer the historical park in accordance with this section, and the laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including-- (A) those sections of title 54, United States Code, formerly part of the Act of August 25, 1916 (commonly known as the National Park System Organic Act); and (B) sections 320101 through 320106 and section 309101 of title 54, United States Code.
Interpretation.--The Secretary may provide staff and technical assistance for the purpose of interpreting historic sites, museums, and resources on lands not administered by the Secretary relating to the life of Cesar Chavez and the history of the farm worker movement.
Cooperative agreements.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the States, local governments, public and private organizations, and individuals-- (i) to mark, interpret, preserve, and restore nationally significant historic or cultural resources relating to the life of Cesar Chavez or the history of the farm worker movement within the boundaries of the historical park, if the agreement provides for reasonable public access; (ii) to conduct research relating to the life of Cesar Chavez or the history of the farm worker movement; or (iii) to design, construct, operate, or maintain National Park Service visitor, interpretive, or administrative facilities for the historical park.
Cost-sharing requirement.-- (i) Federal share.--The Federal share of the total cost of an activity carried out under this paragraph shall not exceed 50 percent.
Form of non-federal share.--The non- Federal share of the cost of carrying out an activity under this paragraph may be in the form of in-kind contributions or goods or services, fairly valued.
General Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date on which funds are made available to carry out this section, the Secretary shall prepare a general management plan for the historical park in accordance with section 100502 of title 54, United States Code.
Additional sites.--The general management plan shall include a determination of whether there are additional representative sites in the States that should be added to the historical park or sites in the rest of the United States that relate to the farm worker movement that should be linked to and interpreted at the historical park.
Consultation.--The general management plan shall be prepared in consultation with-- (A) owners of properties that are included within the boundaries of the historical park; and (B) appropriate Federal, State, public and private organizations and individuals, including-- (i) the National Chavez Center; and (ii) the Cesar Chavez Foundation.
AMERICAN FARM WORKER MOVEMENT INTERPRETIVE ROUTE.
Establishment of Route.--The Secretary, with the concurrence of the agency having jurisdiction over the relevant roads, trails, and properties, may designate a vehicular tour route known as the ``American Farm Worker Movement Interpretive Route'' to link properties in the States that are historically and thematically associated with Cesar Chavez and the farm worker movement.
Elements of Route.--Subject to the consent of the owner of the property, the Secretary may designate as an official stop on the route-- (1) all units and programs of the historical park relating to the life of Cesar Chavez and the history of the farm worker movement; (2) other Federal, State, local, and privately owned properties that the Secretary determines have a verifiable connection to Cesar Chavez and the farm worker movement; and (3) other governmental and nongovernmental facilities and programs of an educational, commemorative, research, or interpretive nature that the Secretary determines to be related to Cesar Chavez and the history of the farm worker movement.
Administration of Route.--The route shall be administered by the Secretary.
Activities.--To facilitate the establishment of the route and the dissemination of information regarding the route, the Secretary may-- (1) work with interested entities and individuals to mark, interpret and preserve sites associated with Cesar Chavez and the farm worker movement; (2) produce and disseminate appropriate educational materials regarding the route, such as handbooks, maps, exhibits, signs, interpretive guides, and electronic information; (3) coordinate the management, planning, and standards of the route in partnership with participating properties, other Federal agencies, and State and local governments; (4) create and adopt an official uniform symbol or device to mark the route; and (5) issue guidelines for the use of the symbol or device adopted under paragraph (4).