THE TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY AS AN ESTABLISHMENT UNDER THE INSPECTOR GENERAL ACT OF 1978.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) Inspectors General serve an important function in preventing and eliminating fraud, waste, and abuse in the Federal Government; and (2) independence is vital for an Inspector General to function effectively.
Establishment of Inspector General.--The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) in section 8G(a)(2) by striking ``the Tennessee Valley Authority,''; and (2) in section 11-- (A) in paragraph (1) by striking ``or the Commissioner of Social Security, Social Security Administration;'' and inserting ``the Commissioner of Social Security, Social Security Administration; or the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority;''; and (B) in paragraph (2) by striking ``or the Social Security Administration;'' and inserting ``the Social Security Administration, or the Tennessee Valley Authority;''.
Executive Schedule Position.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to the Inspector General of the Small Business Administration the following: ``Inspector General, Tennessee Valley Authority.''.
Effective Date and Application.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Inspector general.--The person serving as Inspector General of the Tennessee Valley Authority on the effective date of this section-- (A) may continue such service until the President makes an appointment under section 3(a) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
consistent with the amendments made by this section; and (B) shall be subject to section 8G (c) and (d) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
as applicable to the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority, unless that person is appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to be Inspector General of the Tennessee Valley Authority.
ESTABLISHMENT OF INSPECTORS GENERAL CRIMINAL INVESTIGATOR ACADEMY AND INSPECTORS GENERAL FORENSIC LABORATORY.
Inspectors General Criminal Investigator Academy.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established the Criminal Investigator Academy within the Department of the Treasury.
The Criminal Investigator Academy is established for the purpose of performing investigator training services for offices of inspectors general created under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
Executive director.--The Criminal Investigator Academy shall be administered by an Executive Director who shall report to an inspector general for an establishment as defined in section 11 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
(A) designated by the President's Council on Integrity and Efficiency; or (B) if that council is eliminated, by a majority vote of the inspectors general created under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
Inspectors General Forensic Laboratory.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established the Inspectors General Forensic Laboratory within the Department of the Treasury.
The Inspectors General Forensic Laboratory is established for the purpose of performing forensic services for offices of inspectors general created under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
Executive director.--The Inspectors General Forensic Laboratory shall be administered by an Executive Director who shall report to an inspector general for an establishment as defined in section 11 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
(A) designated by the President's Council on Integrity and Efficiency; or (B) if that council is eliminated, by a majority vote of the inspectors general created under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
Separate Appropriations Account.--Section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(33) a separate appropriation account for appropriations for the Inspectors General Criminal Investigator Academy and the Inspectors General Forensic Laboratory of the Department of the Treasury.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and each fiscal year thereafter.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.