This Act may be cited as the ``Uniformed Services Former Spouses Equity Act of 1997''.
TERMINATION OF PAYMENTS UPON REMARRIAGE OF FORMER SPOUSE.
In General.--Section 1408(c) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Payment from the monthly disposable retired pay of a member to a former spouse of the member pursuant to this section shall terminate upon the remarriage of that former spouse, except to the extent that the amount of such payment includes an amount other than an amount resulting from the treatment by the court under paragraph (1) of disposable retired pay of the member as property of the member or property of the member and his spouse.
Any such termination shall be effective as of the last day of the month in which the remarriage occurs.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to marriages terminated by court orders issued before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
In the case of such a court order issued before the date of the enactment of this Act, such amendment shall apply only with respect to amounts of a member's retired pay that are payable for months beginning more than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
AWARD OF RETIRED PAY TO BE BASED ON RETIREE'S LENGTH OF SERVICE AND PAY GRADE AT TIME OF DIVORCE.
In General.--Section 1408(c) of title 10, United States Code, as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) In the case of a member as to whom a final decree of divorce, dissolution, annulment, or legal separation is issued before the date on which the member begins to receive retired pay, the disposable retired pay of the member that a court may treat in the manner described in paragraph (1) shall be computed based on the pay grade, and the length of service of the member while married, that are creditable toward entitlement to basic pay and to retired pay as of the date of the final decree.
Amounts so calculated shall be increased by the cumulative percentage of increases in retired pay between the date of the final decree and the effective date of the member's retirement.''.
Implementation.--With respect to payments to a former spouse from a member's disposable retired pay pursuant to court orders issued before the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) within 90 days of such date, recompute the amounts of those payments in accordance with paragraph (5) of section 1408(c) of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a); and (2) within 180 days of such date, adjust the amount of disposable retired pay payable to that former spouse accordingly.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to court orders issued on or after June 25, 1981.
LIMITATION ON TIME FOR SEEKING DIVISION OF RETIRED PAY.
In General.--Subsection (c)(4) of section 1408 of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(4) A court may not after the date of the enactment of the Uniformed Services Former Spouses Equity Act of 1997 treat the disposable retired pay of a member in the manner described in paragraph (1) unless-- ``(A) the court has jurisdiction over the member by reason of (i) the member's residence, other than because of military assignment, in the territorial jurisdiction of the court, (ii) the member's domicile in the territorial jurisdiction of the court, or (iii) the member's consent to the jurisdiction of the court; and ``(B) the member's spouse or former spouse obtains a court order for apportionment of the retired pay of the member not later than (i) two years after the date of final decree of divorce, dissolution, annulment, or legal separation, including a court ordered, ratified, or approved property settlement incident to such a decree, or (ii) the end of the six-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of the Uniformed Services Former Spouses Equity Act of 1997, whichever is later.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to final decrees of divorce, dissolution, annulment, or legal separation issued on or after June 25, 1981.
LIMITATION ON APPORTIONMENT OF DISABILITY PAY WHEN RETIRED PAY HAS BEEN WAIVED.
In General.--Subsection (e)(4) of section 1408 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a court may not treat as part of the disposable retired pay of a member under this section or as part of amounts to be paid pursuant to legal processes under section 459 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 659) amounts which are deducted from the retired pay of such member as a result of a waiver of retired pay required by law in order to receive compensation under title 38.''.
Amendments to Social Security Act.--Section 459(h) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 659(h)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(A)(ii)-- (A) by inserting ``or'' at the end of subclause (III); (B) by striking out ``or'' at the end of subclause (IV) and inserting in lieu thereof ``and''; and (C) by striking out subclause (V); and (2) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) and (F) as subparagraphs (F) and (G), respectively; and (B) by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) are paid by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs as compensation for a service-connected disability under title 38, United States Code, when military retired pay has been waived in order to receive such compensation;''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply to court orders and legal processes issued on or after June 25, 1981.
In the case of a court order or legal process issued before the date of the enactment of this Act, such amendments shall apply only with respect to retired pay payable for months beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.