This Act may be cited as the ``International Extradition Enforcement Act of 1999''.
ANNUAL REPORT ON EXTRADITION EFFORTS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS.
Annual Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than January 1 of each year, the Secretary of State, in conjunction with the Attorney General, shall prepare and submit to the Congress an annual report on efforts between the United States and the governments of foreign countries to extradite to the United States individuals described in paragraph (2) during the preceding year.
Individuals described.--An individual described in this paragraph is an individual who is being held in custody by the government of a foreign country (or who is otherwise known to be in the foreign country), and with respect to which a competent authority of the United States-- (A) has charged with a major extraditable offense described in paragraph (3); (B) has found guilty of committing a major extraditable offense described in paragraph (3); or (C) is seeking extradition in order to complete a judicially pronounced penalty of deprivation of liberty for a major extraditable offense described in paragraph (3).
Major extraditable offenses described.--A major extraditable offense described in this paragraph is an offense of murder, attempted murder, manslaughter, aggravated assault, kidnapping, abduction, or other false imprisonment, or rape.
Additional Requirements.--The annual report required under subsection (a) shall also include the following: (1) The aggregate number of individuals described in subsection (a)(2) who are being held in custody by all governments of foreign countries (or are otherwise known to be in the foreign countries) during the preceding year.
With respect to each individual described in subsection (a)(2), the reasons why the individual has not been extradited to the United States and the specific actions the United States has taken to obtain extradition.
SANCTIONS AGAINST FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS THAT ARE UNCOOPERATIVE IN EXTRADITION EFFORTS WITH THE UNITED STATES.
Prohibition on Development and Security Assistance.-- (1) Prohibition.--Development assistance and security assistance may not be provided to a foreign government that the President identifies under subsection (d) as uncooperative in extradition efforts with the United States.
Definitions.--In this subsection: (A) Development assistance.--The term ``development assistance'' means assistance under chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes).
Security assistance.--The term ``security assistance'' means assistance under-- (i)(I) chapter 2 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2311 et sequentes); and (II) chapter 5 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2347 et sequentes); and (ii) the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2751 et sequentes).
Opposition to Multilateral Assistance.--The President shall instruct the United States Executive Director at each international financial institution (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act) to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States to oppose any proposal to provide any kind of assistance that would primarily benefit a foreign government that the President identifies under subsection (d) as uncooperative in extradition efforts with the United States.
Denial of Visas.--No consular officer shall issue a visa to, and the Attorney General shall exclude from the United States, any alien who the Secretary of State determines is a high-ranking official of the government of a country that the President identifies under subsection (d) as uncooperative in extradition efforts with the United States.
Identification and Report.-- (1) Identification.--The President shall identify on an annual basis those foreign governments that are uncooperative in extradition efforts with the United States.
In making an identification with respect to a foreign government under this paragraph, the President shall take into account information in the annual report required under section 2 and the following: (A) The extent to which the foreign government has a policy to refuse to extradite to the United States its citizens who are charged with, or found guilty of committing, major extraditable offenses described in section 2(a)(3), by such other countries.
Whether or not the foreign government, upon request by competent authorities of the United States, has failed to extradite to the United States during the preceding year 1 or more citizens of the United States who are described in section 2(a)(2).
Whether or not the foreign government, upon request by competent authorities of the United States (and in accordance with subsection (f), if applicable), has failed to extradite to the United States during the preceding 2-year period 5 or more individuals (involving unrelated extradition requests) described in section 2(a)(2).
The extent to which corruption in the foreign government jeopardizes the extradition process of that country.
Report.--Not later than March 1 of each year, the President shall prepare and transmit to the Congress a report containing a list of the foreign governments identified under paragraph (1).
Waiver by President.-- (1) Waiver.--The President may waive the prohibition on development assistance and security assistance under subsection (a), the requirement to oppose multilateral assistance under subsection (b), or the denial of visas under subsection (c), with respect to a foreign government if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that it is in the vital national interests of the United States to do so.
Congressional review.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), if, not later than 60 calendar days after receipt of a certification of the President with respect to a foreign government under paragraph (1), a joint resolution is enacted disapproving the certification, then-- (A) funds may not be obligated or expended for development assistance or security assistance for the foreign country in accordance with subsection (a); (B) the requirement to oppose multilateral assistance under subsection (b) shall apply; and (C) the requirement to deny visas for high-ranking officials of the government of that country under subsection (c) shall apply.
Formal Complaint Procedures Relating to Denial of Extradition Requests.--The Attorney General shall establish procedures under which a competent authority of a State, which is requesting extradition of 1 or more individuals from a foreign country as described in subsection (d)(1)(C) and with respect to which the foreign country has failed to comply with such request, may submit to the Attorney General a formal complaint for purposes of determining whether or not the country has failed to extradite to the United States during the preceding 2-year period 5 or more individuals (involving unrelated extradition requests) in accordance with such subsection (d)(1)(C).
Increased Penalty for Flight To Avoid Prosecution.--Section 1073 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``five years'' and inserting ``15 years''.
Transfers to Persons Resisting Extradition.-- (1) Generally.--Chapter 49 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Transfers to persons resisting extradition ``Whoever knowingly transfers from the United States anything of value to a person who is in a foreign place with the intent to assist that person in resisting extradition to the United States shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.''
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 49 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1075.
Transfers to persons resisting extradition.''.
Nothing in this Act, or in any amendment made by this Act, shall be construed to affect any provision of an extradition treaty between the United States and a foreign government.