This Act may be cited as the ``International Cooperation Against Terrorism Act of 2002''.
ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF PASSENGER MANIFESTS.
Section 44909(c) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Penalties.--In addition to any other penalties, any air carrier or foreign air carrier that does not electronically transmit data through the advanced passenger information system established under section 431 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1431) (``APIS'') shall be subject to the following penalties: ``(A) Within 60 days after the date of enactment of the International Cooperation Against Terrorism Act of 2002, a fine of $5,000 for every flight of that carrier that does not submit complete and accurate data in the electronic manifest for at least 85 percent of the passengers and crew of such flight.
Within 120 days after the date of enactment of the International Cooperation Against Terrorism Act of 2002, a fine of $7,000 for every flight of that carrier that does not submit complete and accurate data in the electronic manifest for 100 percent of the passengers and crew of such flight.
Within 210 days after the date of enactment of the International Cooperation Against Terrorism Act of 2002, the United States Customs Service shall revoke the landing rights of an air carrier or foreign air carrier that does not submit complete and accurate data in the electronic manifest for 100 percent of the passengers and crew of every flight of such carrier.''.
MANDATORY ADVANCED ELECTRONIC INFORMATION FOR AIR CARGO.
Section 431(b) of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1431(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Any manifest'' and inserting ``(1) In general.--Any manifest''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Cargo manifest.-- ``(A) Requirement.--In addition to any other requirement under this section, the pilot, operator, or owner (or the authorized agent of such owner or operator) of every aircraft required to make entry or obtain clearance under the customs laws of the United States shall electronically transmit the cargo manifest information described in subparagraph (B) in advance of such entry or clearance in such manner, time, and form as the Secretary shall prescribe.
The Secretary may exclude any class of aircraft from the requirements of this subparagraph if the Secretary determines that such requirements are not necessary.
Content.--The cargo manifest for each aircraft shall consist of the following information: ``(i) The port or place of arrival or departure.
The carrier code, prefix code, or both.
The flight, voyage, or trip number.
The date of scheduled arrival or date of scheduled departure.
The request for permit to proceed to the destination, if applicable.
The numbers and quantities from the air carrier's master bill of lading.
The first port of lading of the cargo.
A description, including the weight, of any cargo that is not in a sealed container.
The shipper's declared description, including the weight, of any cargo that is in a sealed container.
The shippers name and address from all bills of lading.
The consignee's name and address from all bills of lading.
Information regarding any discrepancies between the quantities listed on the bill of lading and the actual quantity on board.
Transfer or transit information for the cargo while it has been under the control of the air carrier.
Warehouse or other location of the cargo while it has been under the control of the air carrier.
Any additional information that the Secretary by regulation determines is reasonably necessary to ensure aviation transportation safety.
Certain verification not required.--Nothing in subparagraph (B)(xii), shall require an air carrier to verify boarded quantities of cargo in sealed containers.
Notice.--The Commissioner of Customs shall notify all air carriers of the requirements of this paragraph.
Enforcement.--In addition to any other penalties, any air carrier that does not comply with the requirements of this paragraph shall be subject to the following penalties: ``(i) Within 60 days after the date of enactment of the International Cooperation Against Terrorism Act of 2002, a fine of $5,000 for every flight of that carrier that does not submit complete and accurate data for at least 85 percent of the cargo of such flight.
Within 120 days after the date of enactment of the International Cooperation Against Terrorism Act of 2002, a fine of $7,000 for every flight of that carrier that does not submit complete and accurate data for 100 percent of the cargo of such flight.
Within 210 days after the date of enactment of the International Cooperation Against Terrorism Act of 2002, the United States Customs Service shall revoke the landing rights of the air carrier that does not submit complete and accurate data for 100 percent of the cargo of every flight of such carrier.
Definition.--In this paragraph, the term `air carrier' has the meaning given the terms `air carrier' and `foreign air carrier' in section 40102 of title 49, United States Code.''.
OVERSIGHT OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS CONNECTED TO TERRORIST ACTIVITIES.
Reporting Requirements.--The President, in consultation with the task force described in subsection (b)(1), is authorized to conclude agreements with foreign countries under which the governments of those countries agree to require each qualified charitable organization operating in any of those countries to report-- (1) the overall sources of the organization's funds, including amounts received from fundraising, amounts received from sales, and amounts received from the holding of events; (2) the names of the organization's officers and directors; (3) an itemization of the organization's expenses; and (4) a description of all lobbying and political activities of the organization.
Task Force.-- (1) In general.--The task force referred to in subsection (a) means an interagency task force consisting of 3 representatives from each of the Department of State, the Department of the Treasury, and the Department of Justice for the purpose of coordinating the activities of the United States Government with respect to the activities of charitable organizations abroad.
International cooperation.--The members of the task force shall cooperate with appropriate counterpart representatives of any foreign country with which the United States seeks to conclude, or to implement, an agreement under subsection (a).
Report.--The task force described in subsection (b) shall report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate on its progress not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act and every 6 months thereafter on its progress.
Each such report shall include a list of countries that are cooperating with the task force and a description of the degree of cooperation or noncooperation of the foreign countries with which the President has sought to conclude an agreement under subsection (a).
Qualified Charitable Organization Defined.--In this section, the term ``qualified charitable organization'' means a charitable organization that has been identified by the task force as an organization that sponsors, funds, receives funds from, or supports terrorist organizations.
Section 6(j) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 United States Code App.
2405(j)) is amended-- (1) by amending paragraph (1), to read as follows: ``(1) A validated license shall be required for the export of goods or technology to a country if the Secretary of State determines that-- ``(A) the government of such country-- ``(i) is not cooperating with the United States antiterrorism efforts, including failing to freeze the bank accounts of entities supporting terrorist activities, or failing to share intelligence information regarding terrorist organizations with the United States; or ``(ii) has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism; and ``(B) with respect to a country described in subparagraph (A), the export of such goods or technology could make a significant contribution to-- ``(i) the military potential of such country, including its military logistics capability, or could enhance the ability of such country to support acts of international terrorism; or ``(ii) the development of the country's ability to explore for, extract, refine, or transport petroleum or natural gas.
''; (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``Foreign Affairs'' and inserting ``International Relations and the Committee on Ways and Means''; (3) in paragraph (4), in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means, and the chairman of the Committee on International Relations'' after ``the Speaker''; (4) in paragraph (4)(A)-- (A) by inserting ``at least 45 days'' after ``(A)''; (B) in clause (ii), by striking ``and''; (C) in clause (iii), by striking ``or''; and (D) by adding at the end the following: ``(iv) that government is cooperating with United States antiterrorism efforts; and ``(v) that government has provided assurances that it will cooperate with future efforts to fight terrorism; or''; (5) in paragraph (4)(B)-- (A) in clause (i), by striking ``and''; (B) in clause (ii), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(iii) the government concerned has taken action to cooperate with antiterrorism efforts during the preceding 6-month period; and ``(iv) the government concerned has provided assurances that it will support efforts to fight terrorism in the future.
''; and (6) in paragraph (5)-- (A) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``and''; (B) in subparagraph (F), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(G) an analysis of the impact of the proposed export or transfer on the development of the foreign country's ability to explore for, extract, refine, or transport petroleum or natural gas and the effects on the surrounding countries' petroleum or natural gas resources and the ability to explore for these resources.''.
CONDITIONAL SANCTIONS REGARDING INVESTMENT.
Foreign Investment Controls.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a validated license shall be required for the financial investment by a United States person in a foreign country if the President determines that the government of such country is not cooperating with United States antiterrorism efforts, including freezing the bank accounts of entities supporting terrorist activities, and sharing intelligence information regarding terrorist organizations with the United States.
United states person defined.--In this section, the term ``United States person'' means-- (A) a United States citizen; (B) a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity organized under the laws of the United States; or (C) a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is organized under the laws of a foreign country and is controlled by entities described in subparagraph (B) or United States citizens, or both.
Prohibition on Licenses.--A license described in subsection (a) shall not be issued if the President determines that the proposed financial investment would make a significant contribution to-- (1) the military potential of the foreign country, including its military logistics capability; or (2) the development of the foreign country's ability to explore for, extract, refine, or transport petroleum or natural gas.
Publication.--Each determination of the President under subsection (a), shall be published in the Federal Register.
Notification.--The President shall notify the Committee on International Relations and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate at least 30 days before issuing any validated license required by subsection (a).
Content of Notification.--The President shall include in the notification required by subsection (d)-- (1) a detailed description of the investment to be offered for which a license to invest is sought; (2) the reasons why the foreign country or international organization to which the investment is proposed to be made needs the investment and a description of the manner in which such country or organization intends to use such investment; (3) an analysis of the impact of the proposed investment on the military capabilities of the foreign country or international organization to which such investment would be made; (4) an analysis of the manner in which the proposed investment would affect the relative military strengths of countries in the region to which the investment is being delivered and whether other countries in the region have comparable kinds and amounts of investments; (5) an analysis of the impact of the proposed investment on the development of the foreign country's ability to explore for, extract, refine, or transport by petroleum or natural gas and the effects on the surrounding countries' petroleum or natural gas resources and ability to explore for these resources; and (6) an analysis of the impact of the proposed investment on the United States relations with the countries in the region to which the investment is being delivered.
Rescission.--A determination made by the President under subsection (a) may not be rescinded unless the President submits to the chairman of the Committee on International Relations and to the chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, to the chairman of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, at least 45 days before the proposed rescission would take effect, a report certifying that-- (1) there has been a fundamental change in the policies of the government of the country concerned; (2) the government is cooperating with United States antiterrorism efforts; (3) the government has provided assurances that it will cooperate with future efforts to fight terrorism; or (4) the reasons why the proposed investment is in the national security interest of the United States.
The President shall, not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and not later than December 31 of each year thereafter, submit a report to the Committee on International Relations and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, and to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, evaluating the implementation of the provisions of the International Cooperation Against Terrorism Act of 2002 and the amendments made by such Act.