This Act may be cited as the ``Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellowship Act of 2001''.
Congress finds as follows: (1) The participation of young people in public life is thwarted by perceptions that the legislative process is corrupted by special interests which overwhelm ethical concerns in the consideration and formation of public policy, and by a feeling among young people that idealism is disrespected by elected officials.
Elie Wiesel's leadership against indifference, intolerance, and injustice encourages political activism by all members of society, and in particular provides inspiration to our youth.
Elie Wiesel is a fitting role model for the youth of America.
Elie Wiesel has dedicated his life to leadership for social justice and equality for all.
He is a survivor of the Holocaust and has worked tirelessly to gain acknowledgment of the atrocities suffered by the Jewish people.
Elie Wiesel has published over 40 books dealing with the moral responsibility of all people to fight hatred, racism, and genocide.
Elie Wiesel was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, the Congressional Gold Medal, and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in recognition of his many contributions to human rights.
A congressional fellowship can create opportunities for young leaders by enabling them to observe directly how public decisions are made.
A congressional fellowship can be designed to allow youth to focus on ethical decision-making in preparation for future leadership roles.
Such a congressional fellowship should be named the Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellowship after Elie Wiesel, because Elie Wiesel's service to society will complement and inspire the Fellowship's purpose of developing ethically informed youth leadership.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.
In General.--There is hereby established the Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellowship Program, under which each Member of the House of Representatives may hire for the month of July in any year one additional employee who meets the eligibility criteria described in subsection (b) to serve as the Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellow for the Member's office.
Criteria for Eligibility.-- (1) In general.--An individual is eligible to serve as an Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellow for the office of a Member of the House of Representatives if the individual meets such criteria as the Committee on House Administration (in conjunction with the Elie Wiesel Foundation) may establish.
Specific information and assurances.--Under the criteria established under paragraph (2), an individual shall not be eligible to serve as a Fellow for the office of a Member of the House of Representatives unless the individual provides the following: (A) A certification that the individual is a resident of the district the Member represents.
A certification that the individual attended secondary school during the academic year immediately preceding the period of the individual's service as the Fellow for the Member's office.
A recommendation certifying that the individual is of a high moral character.
An assurance that during the period of the individual's service as the Fellow for the Member's office, the individual will participate in leadership and ethics courses offered by the Elie Wiesel Foundation.
Compensation.-- (1) Allowance for fellows.--A Member of the House of Representatives shall pay the Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellow serving in the Member's office an allowance of $1,400, to be paid out of the applicable accounts of the House of Representatives.
Administrative expenses.--The Chief Administrative Officer of the House of Representatives shall make an annual payment out of the applicable accounts of the House of Representatives to the Elie Wiesel Foundation in an amount equal to the product of-- (A) the number of Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellows serving for Members of the House of Representatives during the year; and (B) $100.
NO EFFECT ON NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES OR MEMBER'S REPRESENTATIONAL ALLOWANCE.
The employment of an Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellow by a Member of the House of Representatives, and the payment of an allowance to such a Fellow by a Member, shall be in addition to all personnel and allowances otherwise made available to Members under other provisions of law, rule, or other authority.
ARRANGEMENTS FOR SUPERVISED HOUSING AND TRANSPORTATION.
The Chief Administrative Officer of the House of Representatives shall make arrangements for supervised housing for Elie Wiesel Youth Leadership Congressional Fellows at such facilities as the Chief Administrative Officer determines are available and appropriate (including the House Page Dorm, to the extent that space is available), and (upon request) for transportation for such Fellows to and from the District of Columbia.
The Committee on House Administration shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
In this Act, the term ``Member of the House of Representatives'' includes a Delegate or Resident Commissioner to the Congress.