This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans' Employment and Training Bill of Rights Act of 1999''.
VETERANS' EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Chapter 42 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Veterans' Employment and Training Bill of Rights ``(a) Entitlement to Priority of Services.--A covered person is entitled to priority of services under any qualified employment training program if the person otherwise meets the eligibility requirements for participation in such program.
Administration of Programs at State and Local Levels.--(1) An entity of a State or a political subdivision of the State that administers or delivers services under a qualified employment training program shall-- ``(A) provide information and effective referral assistance to covered persons regarding benefits and services that may be obtained through other entities or service providers; and ``(B) ensure that each covered person who applies to or who is assisted by such a program is informed of the employment- related rights and benefits to which the person is entitled under this section.
Each council, board, or advisory body of a State or a political subdivision of the State that is established in support of a qualified employment training program shall include adequate representation from the veterans community, particularly from veterans service organizations.
Annual Report.--By not later than December 31, 2000, and each December 31 thereafter, the Secretary of Labor, following review and comment by the Advisory Committee on Veterans Employment and Training, shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and Senate a report.
The report shall evaluate whether covered persons are receiving priority of services and are being fully served by qualified employment training programs, and whether the levels of service of such programs are in proportion to the incidence of representation of veterans in the labor market, including within groups targeted by such programs, if any.
Definitions.--As used in this section: ``(1) The term `covered person' means any of the following individuals: ``(A) A veteran who has a service-connected disability.
A veteran who served on active duty in the Armed Forces during a war, in a campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge has been authorized.
The spouse of any of the following persons: ``(i) Any person who died of a service- connected disability.
Any member of the Armed Forces serving on active duty who, at the time of application for assistance under this section, is listed, pursuant to section 556 of title 37 and regulations issued thereunder, by the Secretary concerned in one or more of the following categories and has been so listed for a total of more than 90 days: (I) missing in action, (II) captured in line of duty by a hostile force, or (III) forcibly detained or interned in line of duty by a foreign government or power.
Any person who has a total disability permanent in nature resulting from a service-connected disability.
A veteran who died while a disability so evaluated was in existence.
The term `qualified employment training program' means any work force preparation, development, or delivery program or service that is federally funded, in whole or in part, and includes the following: ``(A) Any such program or service that uses technology to assist individuals to access work force development programs (such as job and training opportunities, labor market information, career assessment tools, and related support services).
Any such program or service under the public employment service system, one-stop career centers, the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, a demonstration or other temporary program, and those programs implemented by States or local service providers based on Federal block grants.
Any such program or service that is a work force development program targeted to specific groups.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 42 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 4214 the following new item: ``4215.
Veterans' Employment and Training Bill of Rights.''.
EMPLOYMENT OF VETERANS WITH RESPECT TO FEDERAL CONTRACTS.
In General.--Section 4212(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a)(1) Any contract in the amount of $25,000 or more entered into by any department or agency of the United States for the procurement of personal property and nonpersonal services (including construction) for the United States, shall contain a provision requiring that the party contracting with the United States take affirmative action to employ and advance in employment qualified covered veterans.
This section applies to any subcontract entered into by a prime contractor in carrying out any such contract.
In addition to requiring affirmative action to employ such qualified covered veterans under such contracts and subcontracts and in order to promote the implementation of such requirement, the Secretary of Labor shall prescribe regulations requiring that-- ``(A) each such contractor undertake in each such contract to list all of its employment openings immediately with the appropriate local employment service office, other appropriate service delivery points, or America's Job Bank (or any additional or subsequent national computerized job bank established by the Department of Labor), except that the contractor may exclude openings for positions which are to be filled from within the contractor's organization and positions lasting three days or less; and ``(B) each such local office or other service delivery point shall give such qualified covered veterans priority in referral to such employment openings.
As used in this section: ``(A) The term `covered veteran' means any of the following veterans: ``(i) Disabled veterans.
Veterans who served on active duty in the Armed Forces during a war or in a campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge has been authorized.
Veterans who, while serving on active duty in the Armed Forces, participated in a United States military operation for which an Armed Forces service medal was awarded pursuant to Executive Order 12985 (61 Fed.
The term `qualified', with respect to an employment position, means having the ability to perform the essential tasks of the position with reasonable accommodation.''.
Conforming and Technical Amendments.--Section 4212 of such title is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (b) and redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (b) and (c), respectively; (2) in subsection (b), as so redesignated-- (A) by striking ``filed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section'' and inserting ``relating to this section filed pursuant to section 4216 of this title''; (B) by striking ``suitable''; and (C) by striking ``subsection (a)(2) of this section'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(2)(B)''; and (3)(A) in paragraph (1) of subsection (c), as so redesignated-- (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``subsection (a) of this section'' and inserting ``subsection (a)''; and (ii) by amending subparagraphs (A) and (B) to read as follows: ``(A) the number of employees in the work force of such contractor, by job category and hiring location, and the number of such employees, by job category and hiring location, who are qualified covered veterans; and ``(B) the total number of new employees hired by the contractor during the period covered by the report and the number of such employees who are qualified covered veterans.
''; and (B) in paragraph (2) of such subsection, by striking ``paragraph (1) of this subsection'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to contracts entered into on or after the date that is 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EMPLOYMENT WITHIN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
In General.--The second sentence of section 4214(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``, competent'' after ``effective''; and (2) by striking ``major'' and inserting ``uniquely qualified''.
Technical Amendments.--(1) Section 4214(b)(1) of such title is amended by striking ``readjustment'' and inserting ``recruitment''.
Section 4214(g) of such title is amended by striking ``qualified'' the first place it occurs and all that follows through ``era'' and inserting ``qualified covered veterans (as described in section 4212(a) of this title)''.
ENFORCEMENT OF VETERANS' EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS AND BENEFITS.
In General.--Chapter 42 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Enforcement of veterans' employment rights and benefits ``(a) Assistance of Secretary of Labor.--The Secretary of Labor (through the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans' Employment and Training) shall provide assistance to any person or entity with respect to the requirements of sections 4212 (relating to United States contracts) and 4215 (relating to federally funded work force programs and services) of this title.
In providing such assistance, the Secretary may request the assistance of existing Federal and State agencies engaged in similar or related activities and utilize the assistance of volunteers.
Complaint.--(1) An individual described in section 4212(a) or in section 4215(a) of this title may file a complaint with the Secretary of Labor if the individual believes that-- ``(A) the individual is entitled to rights or benefits under section 4212 or 4215; and ``(B) an entity with obligations under either of such sections has failed to comply or refuses to comply with the provisions of such sections.
Such complaint shall be in writing, be in such form as the Secretary of Labor may prescribe, include the name and address of the party against whom the complaint is filed, and contain a summary of the allegations that form the basis for the complaint.
A complaint may only be filed under paragraph (1) within 90 days after the date of a failure or refusal described in paragraph (1)(B).
Investigation of Complaint.--(1) The Secretary of Labor shall promptly investigate the complaint.
If the Secretary of Labor determines as a result of the investigation that the action alleged in such complaint occurred, the Secretary shall attempt to resolve the complaint by making reasonable efforts to ensure that the party named in the complaint complies with the provisions of section 4212 or 4215, as appropriate.
If, within 90 days after the date on which the complaint is filed, the efforts to resolve the complaint are unsuccessful, the Secretary of Labor shall notify the individual who submitted the complaint of-- ``(A) the results of the investigation; and ``(B) the individual's rights.
Action for Relief.--(1) An individual who receives from the Secretary of Labor a notification under subsection (c) relating to a complaint may request that the Secretary refer the complaint to the Attorney General of the United States.
If the Attorney General is reasonably satisfied that the person on whose behalf the complaint is referred is entitled to the rights or benefits sought, the Attorney General may appear on behalf of, and act as attorney for, the person on whose behalf the complaint is submitted and commence an action for relief for such person in any United States district court.
An individual may commence an action for relief with respect to a complaint if that individual-- ``(A) has chosen not to file a complaint under subsection (b); ``(B) has chosen not to request that the Secretary of Labor refer the complaint to the Attorney General under paragraph (1); or ``(C) has been refused representation by the Attorney General with respect to the complaint under such paragraph.
Remedies.--(1) In any action under this section, the court may award relief as follows: ``(A) The court may require the entity to comply with the provisions of section 4212 or 4215 of this title, as appropriate.
The court may require the entity to compensate the individual for any loss of wages or benefits suffered by reason of such entity's failure to comply with the such provisions.
The court may require the entity to pay the individual an amount equal to the amount referred to in clause (ii) as liquidated damages, if the court determines that the entity's failure to comply with the provisions of such section was willful.
Any compensation under subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (1) shall be in addition to, and shall not diminish, any of the other rights and benefits provided for in such section.
The United States and a State shall be subject to the same remedies, including prejudgment interest, as may be imposed upon any private entity under this section.
Fees.--In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of section 4212 or 4215 of this title by an individual under subsection (d)(2) who obtained private counsel for such action or proceeding, the court may award any such individual who prevails in such action or proceeding reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, and other litigation expenses.
Equity Powers.--The court may use its full equity powers, including temporary or permanent injunctions, temporary restraining orders, and contempt orders, to vindicate fully the rights or benefits of individuals pursuant to this section.
Standing.--An action under this section may be initiated only by an individual claiming rights or benefits under section 4212 or 4215 of this title, not by any other entity with obligations under such section.
Respondent.--In any such action, only an entity with obligations under section 4212 or 4215, as the case may be, shall be a necessary party respondent.
Inapplicability of State Statute of Limitations.--No State statute of limitations shall apply to any proceeding pursuant to this section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 42 of such title, as amended by section 2, is further amended by inserting after the item relating to section 4215 the following new item: ``4216.
Enforcement of veterans' employment rights and benefits.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to complaints filed on or after the date that is 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Secretary of Labor is authorized to allocate an additional 10 full-time equivalent positions from the Employment and Training Administration to the Veterans' Employment and Training Service to carry out chapter 42 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by this Act.