This Act may be cited as the ``Colonial New Mexico Commemorative Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) in 1598, almost a decade before the first permanent English settlement was established at Jamestown, Spanish colonists entered New Mexico, beginning more than 2 centuries of colonization that would indelibly mark the character of the American Southwest; (2) because of the flow of history, New Mexico has remained a unique area of the Spanish borderlands; (3) as a result of its remoteness, New Mexico changed more slowly than other settlements and has retained many significant remnants of colonial customs, language, and attitudes; and (4) the interaction of the American Indian and Hispanic colonial heritages resulted in customs, architecture, and many other manifestations that are unique to today's American culture.
Purpose.--In order to enhance the preservation, interpretation, and public understanding of various aspects of colonial New Mexico, the purpose of this Act is to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to formulate a program for the research, interpretation, and preservation of various aspects of colonial New Mexico history.
As used in this Act: (1) Committee.--The term ``Committee'' means the Colonial New Mexico Preservation Advisory Committee established by section 6.
Plan.--The term ``plan'' means the comprehensive management plan described in section 5.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Plan.-- (1) Preparation.--The Secretary shall prepare the comprehensive management plan in accordance with section 5.
Implementation.--In close consultation with the Office of Cultural Affairs of the State of New Mexico and the Committee, the Secretary shall-- (A) coordinate the activities of Federal, State, and local governments, and private businesses and organizations, to carry out the plan and the purpose of this Act; and (B) consistent with standards established by the Secretary for the preservation of historic properties and for educational programs, and consistent with the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et seq.
), prepare guidelines and standards for projects, as identified in the plan, that will further public understanding of colonial New Mexico history.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--From funds appropriated, donated, or otherwise made available to the Secretary, the Secretary shall award grants to tribal, governmental, and nongovernmental entities to conserve and protect structures, objects, and sites, and help support cultural events, that have outstanding significance in the commemoration of colonial New Mexico, except that the Federal share shall not exceed 50 percent of the cost of each project.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share may be in the form of cash or services, including donation of labor for project implementation.
Surveys and Archaeological Investigations.--The Secretary shall contract for surveys and archaeological and historical investigations of sites relating to colonial New Mexico, including the preparation of reports and maps, and the curation of artifacts.
Publications.--The Secretary shall publish study reports and educational materials.
Nominations to National Register of Historic Places.--The Secretary shall prepare thematic nominations to the National Register of Historic Places of colonial sites and resources in New Mexico.
Staff of Other Agencies.--On a reimbursable basis, the Secretary may procure the services of personnel detailed from the State of New Mexico or other Federal agencies.
Donations.--The Secretary may seek and accept donations of funds or services from public and private entities to carry out this Act.
In General.--Not later than 2 years after funds are made available for purposes of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Committee, the State of New Mexico, units of local government, and private groups, shall prepare a comprehensive management plan to provide direction for commemorative actions and projects.
Contents.--The plan shall-- (1) establish a process and procedures for undertaking research relating to colonial New Mexico and a program for regular publication of research materials and findings; (2) develop a survey program to further evaluate known resources and identify sites and features that require additional study; (3) identify a core system of interpretive sites and features that would provide a comprehensive overview of the colonial New Mexico story; (4) prepare interpretive materials to address the colonial New Mexico story and identify locations where this material will be available to the public; (5) evaluate and recommend high priority sites and resources that need protection and assistance; (6) with the assistance of site owners, prepare options for the protection and management of high priority colonial New Mexico resources; (7) evaluate and recommend highway routes, in existence on the date of the plan, that could be designated by the State of New Mexico as colonial New Mexico tour routes; and (8) evaluate the feasibility of and need for developing commemorative centers in New Mexico in accordance with section 7(a).
ESTABLISHMENT OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
In General.--There is established in the Department of the Interior the Colonial New Mexico Preservation Advisory Committee to advise the Secretary with respect to the administration of this Act.
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Committee shall be composed of 15 members who have knowledge of New Mexico colonial history and culture and who shall be appointed by the Secretary, of whom-- (A) three members shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by the Governor of New Mexico, of whom one member shall represent the Office of Cultural Affairs of the State of New Mexico; (B) one member shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by the All Indian Pueblo Council; (C) one member-- (i) shall be from the general public; and (ii) shall have knowledge of colonial history in New Mexico; (D) four members-- (i) shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by local governments in New Mexico; and (ii) shall represent Hispanic communities; (E) one member shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by the President of the University of New Mexico; (F) one member shall be appointed from recommendations submitted by the President of New Mexico State University; (G) one member shall be appointed from recommendations jointly submitted by the Navajo and Apache tribal governments; (H) one member shall have professional expertise in the colonial history of New Mexico; (I) one member shall have professional expertise in architectural history; and (J) one member shall be the Secretary or the Secretary's designee and shall serve in an ex-officio capacity.
Chairperson.-- (A) In general.--The Committee shall elect a chairperson from among its members.
Term.--The chairperson shall serve for a term of 2 years.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Committee shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Terms.-- (A) In general.--Each member of the Committee shall be appointed for a term of 5 years.
Members filling vacancies.--A member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed.
Extended service.--A member of the Committee may serve after the expiration of the member's term until a successor is appointed.
Compensation.--Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
Travel expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Committee, members of the Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Committee shall meet at least twice annually or at the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members of the Committee.
Quorum.--A simple majority of members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.
Hearings.--To carry out this section, the Committee may hold public hearings, take testimony, and record the views of the public regarding the plan and implementation of the plan.
Termination.--The Committee shall terminate 10 years after completion of the appointment of the first group of members.
In General.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may develop commemorative centers, operate educational programs, provide technical assistance, conduct cultural events, and prepare media materials, except that the Federal share of a project shall not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of development.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share may be in the form of cash or services.
Espanola Plaza Center.-- (1) In general.--In consultation with the Committee, the Secretary may pay to the city of Espanola, New Mexico, the Federal share of planning, developing, and operating a commemorative center as an element of the Spanish Commemorative Plaza.
Federal share.--The Federal share may not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the Espanola Plaza project.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share may be in the form of cash or services.
In accordance with the National Park Service document entitled ``Alternative Concepts for Commemorating Spanish Colonization'' and dated February 1991, the Secretary shall undertake a special resource study of the major prehistoric and historic sites in the Galisteo Basin relating to colonial New Mexico.
The study shall include evaluations of significance, site integrity, threats, and protection and management options.
Redesignation.--The Masau Trail, as designated by title II of Public Law 100-225 (16 United States Code 460uu-11 et sequentes), is redesignated as the Pueblo Trail.
Legal References.--Any reference in any record, map, or other document of the United States to the Masau Trail is deemed to be a reference to the Pueblo Trail.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) The title heading of title II of Public Law 100-225 (16 United States Code 460uu-11 et sequentes) is amended by striking ``MASAU'' and inserting ``PUEBLO''.
Public Law 100-225 (16 United States Code 460uu et sequentes) is amended by striking ``Masau'' each place it appears in sections 201, 204, and 510 and inserting ``Pueblo''.
In General.--The Secretary shall submit an annual report to Congress that lists with respect to this Act-- (1) actions taken by the Secretary; (2) entities to which any grants were made during the fiscal year and any recipients of technical assistance; and (3) actions taken to protect and interpret significant sites, structures, and objects relating to colonial New Mexico.
Cost Estimates.--The report shall include detailed cost estimates of projects that are proposed to be funded under this Act during the next fiscal year.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of the Interior $5,000,000 to carry out this Act, to remain available until expended.