This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1995''.
ADMINISTRATION OF FICO ASSESSMENTS BY FDIC.
Section 21(f)(2) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 United States Code 1441(f)(2)) is amended by striking ``the Financing Corporation, with the approval of the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'' and inserting ``the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, after consultation with the Financing Corporation,''.
AVAILABILITY OF RTC FUNDS FOR DEPOSIT INSURANCE PURPOSES.
Section 11(a) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1821(a)) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Availability of rtc funding.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall provide, out of funds appropriated to the Resolution Trust Corporation under section 21A(i)(3) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act and not needed by the Resolution Trust Corporation, to the Corporation, at the request of the Board of Directors, such amounts as the Board of Directors requests for any of the following purposes: ``(i) To cover the interest payments, issuance costs, and custodial fees on obligations issued by the Financing Corporation.
To make deposits in the Savings Association Insurance Fund of such amounts as may be needed to carry out the purposes of this Act.
To satisfy claims against the Federal Government arising from changes in the statutory treatment of supervisory goodwill (on the books of the Corporation as of the date of the enactment of Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989) pursuant to section 5(t) of the Home Owners' Loan Act.
Return to treasury.--If the aggregate amount of funds transferred to the Corporation under subparagraph (A) exceeds the amount necessary to carry out the purposes of such subparagraph, such excess amounts shall be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury.''.
LIMITED FDIC AUTHORITY TO TEMPORARILY TRANSFER FUNDS BETWEEN THE BIF AND SAIF.
Section 11(a)(4) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1821(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Transfer of funds.--Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the Corporation may transfer, for such period of time and under such conditions as the Corporation determines to be appropriate, an amount not to exceed the amount equal to .03 percent of the assessment base of any deposit insurance fund from such fund to another deposit insurance fund to the extent necessary to achieve or maintain the designated reserve ratio of the fund to which such assets are transferred.''.
TIME SPECIAL SAIF CAPITALIZATION ASSESSMENT.
Section 7(b) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1817(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Special 1-time assessment to recapitalize saif.-- ``(A) In general.--The Corporation may, in the discretion of the Board of Directors, impose a special assessment on each Savings Association Insurance Fund member in an amount not greater than 0.40 percent of the assessment base, as of January 1, 1995, on which assessments are imposed under the risk-based assessment system established pursuant to paragraph (1).
Deposit of assessment in saif.--The proceeds of any assessment imposed under subparagraph (A) shall be deposited in the Savings Association Insurance Fund.
Imposition over period of years.--The assessment authorized under subparagraph (A) may be imposed incrementally over such period of years as the Board of Directors may determine to be appropriate, except the larger percentage of any such incremental assessment shall be allocated to the first year of the effective period for such assessment.
Abatement for troubled institutions.--The Board of Directors may abate any portion of any assessment under this paragraph in the case of any undercapitalized institution or any institution which would become undercapitalized as a result of the imposition of such assessment.''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF DESIGNATED RESERVE RATIO AS A FLOOR RATHER THAN A TARGET.
Section 7(b)(2)(A)(iv) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1817(b)(2)(A)(iv)) is amended to read as follows: ``(iv) Establishment of designated reserve ratio.--The Board of Directors shall establish the designated reserve ratio for each insurance fund in accordance with the following: ``(I) The designated reserve ratio of any insurance fund shall be not less than 1.25 percent of the estimated insured deposits of members of such fund.
The ratio of any insurance fund shall be established at an amount which the Board of Directors determines will provide for an appropriate amount of reserves against losses which may reasonably be expected to be incurred by the fund without resulting in an excessive buildup in the fund.''.
Reduction in Assessment Rate if Designated Reserve Ratio Is Met.--Section 7(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1817(b)(2)(A)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(v) Clarification of authority to reduce assessments amounts.--The authority of the Board of Directors to set semiannual assessments to maintain the reserve ratio of any insurance fund at the designated reserve ratio includes the authority to reduce such assessments by any appropriate amount if the reserve ratio of such fund is equal to or greater than the minimum designated reserve ratio of such fund.''.
CLARIFICATION ON USE OF INSURANCE FUND ASSESSMENTS.
Section 7(b) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1817(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Use of insurance assessments.--Amounts received by the Corporation pursuant to assessments on insured depository institution under this subsection shall be used primarily for insurance fund purposes and shall not be unduly diverted to other uses.''.
CLARIFICATION THAT CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS INSURED BY THE SAIF ARE SUBJECT TO FICO ASSESSMENTS.
Section 21(f)(2) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 United States Code 1441(f)(2)) is amended by inserting after ``Savings Association Insurance Fund member'' the following: ``, including any Savings Association Insurance Fund member referred to in section 5(d)(2)(G) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and, in the case of any Bank Insurance Fund member which has deposits which are treated (under section 5(d)(3) of such Act) as deposits which are insured by the Savings Association Insurance Fund, the adjusted attributable deposit amount with respect to such member as determined under subparagraph (C) of section 5(e)(3) of such Act for purposes of subparagraph (B)(i) of such section,''.
REPEAL OF MINIMUM SAIF ASSESSMENT RULE.
Section 7(b)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1817(b)(2)) is amended by striking subparagraph (E).