State Options.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each State shall notify the Secretary regarding the State's election to receive the State's portion of the applicable funding described in subsection (b) according to one of the following options: (1) State block grant option.--The State may receive the funding pursuant to a State allotment described in section 2(a)(1).
Local block grant option.--The State may direct the Secretary to send the funding directly to local educational agencies in the State pursuant to a local allotment described in section 2(a)(2).
Federal statute option.--The State may receive the funding according to the provisions of law described in subsection (b).
Applicable Funding.--In this section, the term ``applicable funding'' means all funds that are appropriated for the Department of Education for fiscal year 2000 or any succeeding fiscal year to carry out programs or activities under the following provisions of law: (1) The Goals 2000: Educate America Act (20 United States Code 5801 et seq.
), other than titles I and X of such Act (20 United States Code 5811 et seq.
and 6061 et sequentes).
The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes), other than titles VIII, IX, and XIV of such Act (20 United States Code 7701 et sequentes, 7801 et sequentes, and 8801 et seq.).
The School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994 (20 United States Code 6101 et sequentes).
The Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act (20 United States Code 2301 et sequentes).
Allotments.-- (1) States.--From the total applicable funding available for a fiscal year, the Secretary may make allotments to each State selecting the option described in section 1(a)(1) in an amount that bears the same relation to such total applicable funding as the number of individuals in the State who are aged 5 through 17 bears to the total number of such individuals in all States.
Local educational agencies.--From the total applicable funding available for a fiscal year, the Secretary may make allotments to each local educational agency in a State selecting the option described in section 1(a)(2) in an amount that bears the same relation to such total applicable funding as the number of individuals in the school district served by the local educational agency who are aged 5 through 17 bears to the total number of such individuals in all school districts served by all local educational agencies in all States.
Enrollment determination.--The Secretary shall determine the number of children described in paragraphs (1) and (2)-- (A) for the academic year for which the determination is made, after the beginning of the academic year; and (B) on the basis of the most recent data available to the Secretary.
Distribution of Allotted Funds.-- (1) Reservations.-- (A) States.--Each State that receives funds allotted under subsection (a) may reserve not more than 1 percent of the funds for the cost of administration, evaluation, reporting, and other activities related to activities assisted under this Act.
Local educational agencies.--Each local educational agency that receives funds allotted under subsection (a) may reserve not more than 2 percent of the funds for the costs of administration, overhead costs, or indirect costs.
Awards.--In States selecting the State block grant option described in section 1(a)(1), all funds allotted under subsection (a)(1) that are not reserved under paragraph (1)(A) shall be made available, in accordance with paragraph (3), on behalf of each student who resides in the State and is enrolled in a public elementary school or secondary school, or in a private or home elementary school or secondary school, located in the State.
In States selecting the local block grant option described in section 1(a)(2), all funds allotted under subsection (a)(2) that are not reserved under paragraph (1)(B) shall be made available, in accordance with paragraph (3), on behalf of each student who resides in the school district served by a local educational agency and is enrolled in a public elementary school or secondary school, or in a private or home elementary school or secondary school, in the school district.
In States selecting the State block grant option or the local block grant option, the amount allotted on behalf of each student shall be adjusted in accordance with paragraph (5).
Recipients.--Funds awarded under paragraph (2)-- (A) in the case of a public school student, including a charter school student, shall be made available to the public school or charter school, respectively; and (B) in the case of a private school or home school student, shall be made available to the parent or legal guardian of the student.
Uses.-- (A) Public school students.--Each public school that receives assistance under this Act shall use the assistance for any qualified elementary and secondary education expenses.
Private school students.--Each parent or guardian of a private school student that receives assistance under this Act shall use the assistance to pay the costs of attendance at the private school.
Home school students.--Each parent or guardian of a home school student that receives assistance under this Act shall use the assistance for any qualified elementary and secondary education expenses.
Adjustments.--A State or local educational agency shall adjust the amount awarded for students under paragraph (2) to account for-- (A) high need students, such as students from poor families; or (B) different costs of living in urban and rural areas.
In General.--From the applicable funding that remains after making the allotments under paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 2(a) for a fiscal year, the Secretary may make awards according to the provisions of law described in section 1(b), to State and local recipients, in States selecting the option described in section 1(a)(3).
Percentage Reductions.--The Secretary, after making the allotments under paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 2(a) for a fiscal year, shall reduce the total amount of applicable funding available to carry out the provisions of law described in section 1(b) for the fiscal year, for any State selecting the option described in section 2(a)(3), by an equal percentage for each such provision.
In General.--Each entity receiving assistance under this Act shall-- (1) use the funds to supplement and not supplant State and local funds; and (2) involve parents and members of the public in planning for the use of funds provided under this Act, such as through a representative advisory committee.
Reports.-- (1) In general.--Each local educational agency receiving an allotment under this Act shall prepare and submit to the State, and each State receiving an allotment under this Act shall prepare and submit to Congress, a report regarding the distribution and use of the allotted funds, and how the use of the funds effects student achievement.
Availability.--Each State and local educational agency submitting a report under paragraph (1) shall make copies of the report available to parents and other members of the public.
Special rule.--Each State or local educational agency receiving an allotment under this Act that has developed or established challenging content or student performance standards shall include in the report submitted under paragraph (1) information regarding student achievement with respect to the standards.
In this title: (1) Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Qualified elementary and secondary education expenses.-- (A) In general.--The term ``qualified elementary and secondary education expenses'' means-- (i) expenses for tuition, fees, academic tutoring, special needs services, books, supplies, computer equipment (including related software and services), and other equipment which are incurred in connection with the enrollment or attendance of a student at a school; or (ii) expenses for room and board, uniforms, transportation, and supplementary items and services (including extended day programs) which are required or provided by a school in connection with such enrollment or attendance.
Special rule for homeschooling.--Such term shall include expenses described in subparagraph (A)(i) in connection with education provided by homeschooling if the requirements of any applicable State or local law are met with respect to such education.
School.--The term ``school'' means any school that provides kindergarten education, elementary education or secondary education, as determined under State law.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin Islands, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau.