HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTION LIMITATION ON CONTRIBUTIONS FROM PERSONS OTHER THAN LOCAL INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTS.
In General.--Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i)(1) A candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not, with respect to a reporting period for an election, accept contributions-- (A) from persons other than individual residents of the congressional district involved in excess of 40 percent of the total of contributions accepted; or (B) from persons other than individual residents of the State in which the congressional district involved is located in excess of 10 percent of the total of contributions accepted.''.
REDUCTION IN LIMITATION AMOUNT APPLICABLE TO CONTRIBUTIONS BY A MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE TO A HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATE.
Section 315(a)(2)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting after ``$5,000'' the following: ``, except that in the case of an election for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress, the limitation shall be $1,000.''.
BAN ON SOFT MONEY.
In General.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``limitations and reporting requirements for amounts paid for mixed political activities ``Sec.
Any payment by the national committee of a political party or a State committee of a political party for a mixed political activity-- ``(1) shall be subject to limitation and reporting under this Act as if such payment were an expenditure; and ``(2) may be paid only from an account that is subject to the requirements of this Act.
As used in this section, the term `mixed political activity' means, with respect to a payment by the national committee of a political party or a State committee of a political party, an activity, such as a voter registration program, a get-out-the-vote drive, or general political advertising, that is both (1) for the purpose of influencing an election for Federal office, and (2) for any purpose unrelated to influencing an election for Federal office.''.
Repeal of Building Fund Exception to the Definition of the Term ``Contribution''.--Section 301(8)(B) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(8)(B)) is amended-- (1) by striking out clause (viii); and (2) by redesignating clauses (ix) through (xiv) as clauses (viii) through (xiii), respectively.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OFFICIAL MAIL ALLOWANCE FORMULA REDUCTION.
Section 311(e)(2)(B)(i) of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1991 (2 United States Code 59e(e)(2)(B)(i)) is amended by striking out ``3'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1.5''.
PROHIBITION OF MAILING OF NEWSLETTERS UNDER THE CONGRESSIONAL FRANK.
Intent of Congress.--Section 3210(a) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) It is the intent of Congress that a Member of or Member-elect to Congress (other than a Senator or a Senator-elect) may not mail a congressional newsletter as franked mail.''.
Exclusion from List of Frankable Mail.--Section 3210(a)(3) of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B) by inserting ``subject to paragraph (8),'' before ``the usual and customary''; and (2) in subparagraphs (I) and (J) by striking out ``newsletter or other''.
Exclusion Relating to Mass Mailings.--Section 3210(a)(6)(E) of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in clause (ii) by striking out ``or'' after the semicolon; (2) in clause (iii) by striking out the period and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding after clause (iii) the following new clause: ``(iv) of congressional newsletters, to the extent intended by Congress to be nonmailable as franked mail under subsection (a)(8).''.
Exclusion Relating to Permissible Forms of Franked Mail.-- Section 3210(c) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``subsection (a)(4) and (5) of this section.''
and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraph (4), (5), or (8) of subsection (a).''.
LENGTHENED NONMAILING PERIOD FOR MASS MAILING BY MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
Section 3210(a)(6)(A) of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by inserting after ``60 days'' the following: (180 days in the case of a Member of, or Member- elect to, the House of Representatives)''; and (2) in clause (ii)(II), by striking out ``60 days'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``180 days''.
AMENDMENTS TO COMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1934.
Section 315 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 315) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)-- (A) by striking ``forty-five'' and inserting ``30''; (B) by striking ``sixty'' and inserting ``45''; and (C) by striking ``lowest unit charge of the station for the same class and amount of time for the same period'' and insert ``lowest charge of the station for the same amount of time for the same period''; (2) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e), respectively; (3) by inserting immediately after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), a licensee shall not preempt the use, during any period specified in subsection (b)(1), of a broadcasting station by a legally qualified candidate for public office who has purchased and paid for such use pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b)(1).
If a program to be broadcast by a broadcasting station is preempted because of circumstances beyond the control of the broadcasting station, any candidate advertising spot scheduled to be broadcast during that program may also be preempted.
''; and (4) in subsection (d) (as redesignated by paragraph (2) of this section)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(3) a station's lowest charge for purposes of paragraph (1)-- ``(A) with respect to a primary or primary runoff election, is determined for the interval beginning 60 days before such election and ending on the date of that election; and ``(B) with respect to a general or special election, is determined for the interval beginning 90 days before such election and ending on the date of that election.''.
DENIAL OF DEDUCTION FOR LOBBYING EXPENSES.
Disallowance of Deduction.--Section 162(e) (relating to appearances, etc., with respect to legislation) is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Denial of Deduction for Certain Lobbying and Political Expenditures.-- ``(1) In general.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any amount paid or incurred-- ``(A) in connection with influencing legislation, ``(B) for participation in, or intervention in, any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for public office, or ``(C) in connection with any attempt to influence the general public, or segments thereof, with respect to elections.
Application to dues.-- ``(A) In general.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for the portion of dues or other similar amounts (paid by the taxpayer with respect to an organization) which is allocable to the expenditures described in paragraph (1).
Allocation.-- ``(i) In general.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), expenditures described in paragraph (1) shall be treated as paid out of dues or other similar amounts.
Carryover of lobbying expenditures in excess of dues.--For purposes of this paragraph, if expenditures described in paragraph (1) exceed the dues or other similar amounts for any calendar year, such excess shall be treated as expenditures described in paragraph (1) which are paid or incurred by the organization during the following calendar year.
Influencing legislation.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `influencing legislation' means-- ``(i) any attempt to influence the general public, or segments thereof, with respect to legislation, and ``(ii) any attempt to influence any legislation through communication with any member or employee of the legislative body, or with any government official or employee who may participate in the formulation of the legislation.
Exception for certain technical advice.--The term `influencing legislation' shall not include the providing of technical advice or assistance to a governmental body or to a committee or other subdivision thereof in response to a specific written request by such governmental entity to the taxpayer which specifies the nature of the advice or assistance requested.
Legislation.--The term `legislation' has the meaning given such term by section 4911(e)(2).
Exception for certain taxpayers.--In the case of any taxpayer engaged in the trade or business of conducting activities described in paragraph (1), paragraph (1) shall not apply to expenditures of the taxpayer in conducting such activities on behalf of another person (but shall apply to payments by such other person to the taxpayer for conducting such activities).
Cross reference.-- ``For reporting requirements related to this subsection, see section 6050O.''
Reporting Requirements.-- (1) In general.--Subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 (relating to information concerning transactions with other persons) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
RETURNS RELATING TO LOBBYING EXPENDITURES OF CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS.
Requirement of Reporting.--Each organization referred to in section 162(e)(2) shall make a return, according to the forms or regulations prescribed by the Secretary, setting forth the names and addresses of persons paying dues to the organization, the amount of the dues paid by such person, and the portion of such dues which is nondeductible under section 162(e)(2).
Statements To Be Furnished to Persons With Respect to Whom Information Is Furnished.--Any organization required to make a return under subsection (a) shall furnish to each person whose name is required to be set forth in such return a written statement showing-- ``(1) the name and address of the organization, and ``(2) the dues paid by the person during the calendar year and the portion of such dues which is nondeductible under section 162(e)(2).
The written statement required under the preceding sentence shall be furnished (either in person or in a statement mailing by first-class mail which includes adequate notice that the statement is enclosed) to the persons on or before January 31 of the year following the calendar year for which the return under subsection (a) was made and shall be in such form as the Secretary may prescribe by regulations.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the reporting requirements of this section with respect to any organization or class of organizations if the Secretary determines that such reporting is not necessary to carry out the purposes of section 162(e).
Dues.--For purposes of this section, the term `dues' includes other similar amounts.''
Penalties.-- (A) Returns.--Subparagraph (A) of section 6724(d)(1) (defining information return) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (xi), by striking the period at the end of the clause (xii) relating to section 4101(d) and inserting a comma, by redesignating the clause (xii) relating to section 338(h)(10) as clause (xiii), by striking the period at the end of clause (xiii) (as so redesignated) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(xiv) section 6050O(a) (relating to information on nondeductible lobbying expenditures).''
Payee statements.--Paragraph (2) of section 6724(d) (defining payee statement) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (R), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (S) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(T) section 6050O(b) (relating to returns on nondeductible lobbying expenditures).''
Excessive underreporting.--Section 6721 (relating to failure to file correct information returns) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Penalty in Case of Excessive Underreporting on Nondeductible Dues.--If the aggregate amount of nondeductible dues which is reported on the return required to be filed under section 6050O(a) for any calendar year is less than 75 percent of the aggregate amount required to be so reported-- ``(1) subsections (b), (c), and (d) shall not apply, and ``(2) the penalty imposed under subsection (a) shall be equal to the product of-- ``(A) the amount required to be reported which was not so reported, and ``(B) the highest rate of tax imposed by section 11 for taxable years beginning in such calendar year.''
Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Returns relating to lobbying expenditures of certain organizations.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after December 31, 1993.
PROHIBITION OF TRAVEL BY MEMBERS, OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AT LOBBYIST EXPENSE.
In General.--A Member, officer, or employee of the House of Representatives may not perform any travel at the expense of a person who is required to register under section 308 of the Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act (2 United States Code 267).
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``Member of the House of Representatives'' means a Representative in, or a Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress.
SENSE OF CONGRESS RELATING TO LIMITATION OF TERMS OF REPRESENTATIVES AND SENATORS.
It is the sense of Congress that the Constitution should be amended so that no person may serve more than 4 consecutive terms as Representative or two consecutive terms as Senator.
SENSE OF CONGRESS RELATING TO APPLICATION OF GENERALLY APPLICABLE LAWS TO THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of Congress that Congress is not exempt from the laws that it enacts and should govern itself according to the laws that apply to the private sector and the other branches of the Federal Government.