This Act may be cited as the ``Natural Gas and Other Petroleum Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of 2001''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``deepwater'' means water depths greater than 200 meters but less than 1,500 meters; (2) the term ``Fund'' means the Ultra-Deepwater and Unconventional Gas Research Fund established under section 10; (3) the term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given that term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001); (4) the term ``Research Organization'' means the Research Organization created pursuant to section 6(a); (5) the term ``ultra-deepwater'' means water depths greater than 1,500 meters; and (6) the term ``unconventional'' means located in heretofore inaccessible or uneconomic formations on land.
The Secretary shall establish a program of research, development, and demonstration of ultra-deepwater natural gas and other petroleum exploration and production technologies, in areas currently available for Outer Continental Shelf leasing.
The program shall be carried out by the Research Organization as provided in this Act.
NATIONAL ENERGY TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY.
The National Energy Technology Laboratory and the United States Geological Survey, when appropriate, shall carry out programs of long- term research into new natural gas and other petroleum exploration and production technologies and environmental mitigation technologies for production from unconventional and ultra-deepwater resources, including methane hydrates.
Such Laboratory shall also conduct a program of research, development, and demonstration of new technologies for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from unconventional and ultra- deepwater natural gas or other petroleum exploration and production activities, including sub-sea floor carbon sequestration technologies.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall, within 3 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, establish an Advisory Committee consisting of 7 members, each having extensive operational knowledge of and experience in the natural gas and other petroleum exploration and production industry who are not Federal Government employees or contractors.
A minimum of 4 members shall have extensive knowledge of ultra-deepwater natural gas or other petroleum exploration and production technologies, a minimum of 2 members shall have extensive knowledge of unconventional natural gas or other petroleum exploration and production technologies, and at least 1 member shall have extensive knowledge of greenhouse gas emission reduction technologies, including carbon sequestration.
Function.--The Advisory Committee shall advise the Secretary on the selection of an organization to create the Research Organization and on the implementation of this Act.
Compensation.--Members of the Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation but shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Administrative Costs.--The costs of activities carried out by the Secretary and the Advisory Committee under this Act shall be paid or reimbursed from the Fund.
Duration of Advisory Committee.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to the Advisory Committee.
Selection of Research Organization.--The Secretary, within 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, shall solicit proposals from eligible entities for the creation of the Research Organization, and within 3 months after such solicitation, shall select an entity to create the Research Organization.
Eligible Entities.--Entities eligible to create the Research Organization shall-- (1) have been in existence as of the date of the enactment of this Act; (2) be entities exempt from tax under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and (3) be experienced in planning and managing programs in natural gas or other petroleum exploration and production research, development, and demonstration.
Proposals.--A proposal from an entity seeking to create the Research Organization shall include a detailed description of the proposed membership and structure of the Research Organization.
Functions.--The Research Organization shall-- (1) award grants on a competitive basis to qualified-- (A) research institutions; (B) institutions of higher education; (C) companies; and (D) consortia formed among institutions and companies described in subparagraphs (A) through (C) for the purpose of conducting research, development, and demonstration of unconventional and ultra-deepwater natural gas or other petroleum exploration and production technologies; and (2) review activities under those grants to ensure that they comply with the requirements of this Act and serve the purposes for which the grant was made.
Types of Grants.-- (1) Unconventional.--The Research Organization shall award grants for research, development, and demonstration of technologies to maximize the value of the Government's natural gas and other petroleum resources in unconventional reservoirs, and to develop technologies to increase the supply of natural gas and other petroleum resources by lowering the cost and improving the efficiency of exploration and production of unconventional reservoirs, while improving safety and minimizing environmental impacts.
Ultra-deepwater.--The Research Organization shall award grants for research, development, and demonstration of natural gas or other petroleum exploration and production technologies to-- (A) maximize the value of the Federal Government's natural gas and other petroleum resources in the ultra- deepwater areas; (B) increase the supply of natural gas and other petroleum resources by lowering the cost and improving the efficiency of exploration and production of ultra- deepwater reservoirs; and (C) improve safety and minimize the environmental impacts of ultra-deepwater developments.
Ultra-deepwater architecture.--The Research Organization shall award a grant to one or more consortia described in section 6(d)(1)(D) for the purpose of developing and demonstrating the next generation architecture for ultra- deepwater production of natural gas and other petroleum in furtherance of the purposes stated in paragraph (2)(A) through (C).
Conditions for Grants.--Grants provided under this section shall contain the following conditions: (1) If the grant recipient consists of more than one entity, the recipient shall provide a signed contract agreed to by all participating members clearly defining all rights to intellectual property for existing technology and for future inventions conceived and developed using funds provided under the grant, in a manner that is consistent with applicable laws.
There shall be a repayment schedule for Federal dollars provided for demonstration projects under the grant in the event of a successful commercialization of the demonstrated technology.
Such repayment schedule shall provide that the payments are made to the Secretary with the express intent that these payments not impede the adoption of the demonstrated technology in the marketplace.
In the event that such impedance occurs due to market forces or other factors, the Research Organization shall renegotiate the grant agreement so that the acceptance of the technology in the marketplace is enabled.
Applications for grants for demonstration projects shall clearly state the intended commercial applications of the technology demonstrated.
The total amount of funds made available under a grant provided under subsection (a)(3) shall not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the activities for which the grant is provided.
The total amount of funds made available under a grant provided under subsection (a)(1) or (2) shall not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the activities covered by the grant, except that the Research Organization may elect to provide grants covering a higher percentage, not to exceed 90 percent, of total project costs in the case of grants made solely to independent producers.
An appropriate amount of funds provided under a grant shall be used for the broad dissemination of technologies developed under the grant to interested institutions of higher education, industry, and appropriate Federal and State technology entities to ensure the greatest possible benefits for the public and use of government resources.
Demonstrations of ultra-deepwater technologies for which funds are provided under a grant may be conducted in ultra-deepwater or deepwater locations.
Allocation of Funds.--Funds available for grants under this Act shall be allocated as follows: (1) 15 percent shall be for grants under subsection (a)(1).
15 percent shall be for grants under subsection (a)(2).
60 percent shall be for grants under subsection (a)(3).
10 percent shall be for carrying out section 4.
Transmittal to Secretary.--The Research Organization shall transmit to the Secretary an annual plan proposing projects and funding of activities under each paragraph of section 7(a).
Review.--The Secretary shall have 1 month to review the annual plan, and shall approve the plan, if it is consistent with this Act.
If the Secretary approves the plan, the Secretary shall provide funding as proposed in the plan.
Disapproval.--If the Secretary does not approve the plan, the Secretary shall notify the Research Organization of the reasons for disapproval and shall withhold funding until a new plan is submitted which the Secretary approves.
Within 1 month after notifying the Research Organization of a disapproval, the Secretary shall notify the appropriate congressional committees of the disapproval.
The Secretary shall retain an independent, commercial auditor to determine the extent to which the funds authorized by this Act have been expended in a manner consistent with the purposes of this Act.
The auditor shall transmit a report annually to the Secretary, who shall transmit the report to the appropriate congressional committees, along with a plan to remedy any deficiencies cited in the report.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be known as the ``Ultra-Deepwater and Unconventional Gas Research Fund'' which shall be available for obligation to the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts for allocation under section 7(c).
Funding Sources.-- (1) Loans from treasury.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $900,000,000 for the period encompassing fiscal years 2002 through 2009.
Such amounts shall be deposited by the Secretary in the Fund, and shall be considered loans from the Treasury.
Income received by the United States in connection with any ultra-deepwater oil and gas leases shall be deposited in the Treasury and considered as repayment for the loans under this paragraph.
Additional appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary such sums as may be necessary for the fiscal years 2002 through 2009, to be deposited in the Fund.
Oil and gas lease income.--To the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts, not more than 7.5 percent of the income of the United States from Federal oil and gas leases may be deposited in the Fund for fiscal years 2002 through 2009.
No funds are authorized to be appropriated for carrying out this Act after fiscal year 2009.
The Research Organization shall be terminated when it has expended all funds made available pursuant to this Act.