This Act may be cited as the ``Justice for United States Prisoners of War Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) During World War II, members of the United States Armed Forces held as prisoners of war by Japan were forced to provide labor for Japanese privately owned corporations in functions unrelated to the prosecution of the war.
International law, including international conventions relating to the protection of prisoners of war, was violated when these Japanese corporations-- (A) failed to pay wages to captured United States servicemembers for their labor; (B) allowed and promoted torture and mistreatment of captured United States servicemembers; and (C) withheld food and medical treatment from captured United States servicemembers.
In the Treaty of Peace with Japan, signed at San Francisco September 8, 1951 (3 UST 3169), the Government of Japan admitted liability for illegal conduct toward the Allied Powers and, in particular, liability for illegal and inhumane conduct toward members of the armed forces of the Allied Powers held as prisoners of war.
Despite this admission of liability, Article 14(b) of the Treaty has been construed to waive all private claims by nationals of the United States, including private claims by members of the United States Armed Forces held as prisoners of war by Japan during World War II.
Under Article 26 of the Treaty, the government of Japan agreed that if Japan entered into a war claims settlement agreement with a country that is not a party to the Treaty that provides more favorable terms to that country than the terms Japan extended to the parties to the Treaty, then Japan would extend those more favorable terms to each of the parties to the Treaty, including to the United States.
Since the entry into force of the Treaty in 1952, the Government of Japan has entered into war claims settlement agreements with countries that are not party to the Treaty that provide more favorable terms than those extended to the parties to the Treaty, such as terms that allow claims by nationals of those countries against Japanese nationals to be pursued without limitation, restriction, or waiver or any type.
In accordance with Article 26 of the Treaty, Japan is obligated to extend those same favorable terms to the United States, including to nationals of the United States, who as members of the United States Armed Forces, were held as prisoners of war by Japan during World War II and who were forced to provide labor without compensation and under inhumane conditions.
The people of the United States owe a deep and eternal debt to the heroic United States servicemembers held as prisoners of war by Japan for the sacrifices those servicemembers made on behalf of the United States in the days after the ignominious aggression of Japan against the United States at Pearl Harbor, Bataan, and Corregidor.
The pursuit of justice by those servicemembers through lawsuits filed in the United States, where otherwise supported by Federal, State, or international law, is consistent with the interests of the United States and should not be preempted by any other provision of law or by the Treaty.
Despite repeated requests for disclosure by United States servicemembers, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and Congress, the United States Government has withheld from those servicemembers and their physicians Japanese records that were turned over to the United States and that relate to chemical and biological experiments conducted on United States servicemembers held as prisoners of war by Japan during World War II.
SUITS AGAINST JAPANESE NATIONALS.
In General.--In an action brought in a Federal court against a Japanese defendant by a member of the United States Armed Forces who was held as a prisoner of war by Japan during World War II that seeks compensation for mistreatment or failure to pay wages in connection with labor performed by such a member to the benefit of the Japanese defendant during World War II, the court-- (1) shall apply the applicable statute of limitations of the State in which the Federal court hearing the case is located; (2) shall not construe Article 14(b) of the Treaty as constituting a waiver by the United States of claims by nationals of the United States, including claims by members of the United States Armed Forces, so as to preclude the pending action.
Sunset.--Paragraph (1) of subsection (a) shall cease to apply at the end of the 10-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.
APPLICABILITY OF RIGHTS UNDER ARTICLE 26 OF THE TREATY OF PEACE WITH JAPAN.
It is the policy of the United States Government to ensure that all terms under any war claims settlement agreement between Japan and any other country that are more favorable than those terms extended to the United States under the Treaty, will be extended to the United States in accordance with Article 26 of the Treaty with respect to claims by nationals of the United States who, as members of the United States Armed Forces, were held as prisoners of war by Japan during World War II and who were forced to provide labor without compensation and under inhumane conditions.
AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION RELATING TO CERTAIN CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL TESTS CONDUCTED BY JAPAN DURING WORLD WAR II.
Availability of Information to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs may request from, and the head of the department or agency so requested shall provide to the Secretary, information relating to chemical or biological tests conducted by Japan on members of the United States Armed Forces held as prisoners of war by Japan during World War II, including any information provided to the United States Government by Japan.
Availability of Information to Interested Members of the Armed Forces.--Any information received by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs under subsection (a), with respect to an individual member of the United States Armed Forces held as a prisoner of war by Japan during World War II, may be made available to that individual to the extent otherwise provided by law.
In this Act: (1) Japanese defendant.-- (A) In general.--The term ``Japanese defendant'' means a Japanese national, an entity organized or incorporated under Japanese law, an affiliate of an entity organized or incorporated under Japanese law that is organized or incorporated under the laws of any State, and any predecessor of that entity or affiliate.
Limitation.--The term does not include the Government of Japan.
State.--The term ``State'' means the several States, the District of Columbia, and any commonwealth, territory or possession of the United States.
Treaty.--The term ``Treaty'' mean the Treaty of Peace with Japan, signed at San Francisco on September 8, 1951 (3 UST 3169).