This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Mandates Relief Act of 1993''.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) Federal agency.--The term ``Federal agency'' has the meaning given the term ``executive agency'' in section 6501(3) of title 5, United States Code.
Federal mandate.--The term ``Federal mandate'' means a Federal requirement covered by this Act.
Local government.--The term ``local government'' means-- (A) a county, city, town, village, or other general purpose political subdivision of a State; (B) a school district; and (C) a unit of local government established under State law for a particular public purpose.
Mandate schedule.--The term ``mandate schedule'' means a schedule prepared by a Federal agency of the costs of complying with each Federal mandate administered by the agency as required by section 5.
SUFFICIENT FEDERAL FUNDING REQUIREMENT.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no State or local government shall be obligated to take any action required by Federal law, unless all expenses associated with such obligation are fully funded by the Federal Government pursuant to the provisions of this Act.
A State or local government shall be excused from complying with a Federal mandate, unless-- (1) it receives an appropriation of Federal funds to pay for the costs of complying with the Federal mandate-- (A) in the amount specified in the pertinent mandate schedule described in section 5; and (B) in the amount of any additional costs specified in section 6; and (2) the pertinent mandate schedule (including the annual update) has been published as required by this Act.
Agency Schedules.-- (1) In general.--Each Federal agency that has authority to administer a Federal mandate shall publish a schedule that lists the costs of complying with each such mandate.
Content.--Each schedule shall include-- (A) the annual cost of complying with each Federal mandate for which payments would be made within one fiscal year; and (B) the total cost of complying with each Federal mandate that necessitates a State or local government to undertake a capital expenditure for which payments would be made over more than 1 fiscal year.
Publication.--Schedules shall be published through notice and comment rulemaking, and shall be updated annually.
For each fiscal year, schedules shall be published by March 1 of the calendar year in which the fiscal year begins.
Statutory Mandate.-- (1) In general.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, conference report, or amendment that establishes a statutory mandate schedule.
Point of order.--In the Senate, this subsection may be waived or suspended only by an affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members of the Senate, duly chosen and sworn.
PAYMENTS OF ADDITIONAL COSTS.
In General.--If the costs to a State or local government of complying with a Federal mandate exceed the amounts appropriated to it according to the applicable mandate schedule, the State or local government shall be reimbursed for the amount of such additional costs.
Such additional costs shall be well-documented and not the result of waste or mismanagement.
Payment.--A payment under this section shall be made within 30 days of presentation of proof by a State or local government of additional costs to the pertinent administering agency.
REFUND OF EXCESSIVE APPROPRIATIONS.
To the extent any payment received by a State or local government pursuant to this Act exceeds the actual cost of complying with a Federal mandate, the State or local government shall refund the amount of excess to the United States Treasury.
In General.--Each bill or joint resolution considered on the floor of the House of Representatives or the Senate shall be accompanied by a report that estimates the costs to State and local governments that any Federal mandate in such bill or joint resolution would impose.
Estimates.--The estimates required by subsection (a) shall include-- (1) the costs imposed upon any 1 State or local government, as may be appropriate, for each particular Federal mandate in the bill or joint resolution; (2) the total amount of costs imposed by each particular Federal mandate; and (3) the total amount of such costs imposed by all Federal mandates within the entire bill or joint resolution, for the fiscal year in which the bill or joint resolution would take effect, and for each of the next 4 fiscal years thereafter.
Point of Order.-- (1) Congressional estimate.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or joint resolution that does not comply with the requirements of subsection (b).
Point of order.--In the Senate, this subsection may be waived or suspended only by an affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members of the Senate, duly chosen and sworn.
This Act shall apply to Federal mandates imposed by Federal laws enacted or reauthorized by law after the date of enactment of this Act.