This Act may be cited as the ``Coal Industry Retiree Health Equity Act''.
REDUCTION IN CONTRIBUTIONS OF ELIGIBLE SMALL ASSIGNED OPERATORS TO COAL MINERS COMBINED BENEFIT FUND.
In General.--Part II of subchapter B of chapter 99 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to financing of Combined Benefit Fund) is amended by inserting after section 9704 the following new section: ``SEC.
REDUCTIONS IN ANNUAL PREMIUMS OF ELIGIBLE SMALL ASSIGNED OPERATORS.
General Rule.--The annual premium of an assigned operator under section 9704(a) shall, in the case of an eligible small assigned operator, be reduced as provided in subsection (b).
Reductions for Eligible Small Assigned Operators.-- ``(1) In general.--If this subsection applies to an eligible small assigned operator for any plan year of the Combined Fund, the annual premium under section 9704(a) for such operator for such plan year shall not exceed 5 percent of the operator's average annual taxable income for purposes of chapter 1 for the 5-taxable year period ending with the operator's most recent taxable year ending before the beginning of the plan year.
Credit for overpayments.--To the extent that an eligible small assigned operator has paid annual premiums in excess of such premiums required by paragraph (1) for plan years beginning before the date of the enactment of this section, any annual premiums owed by such operator on or after October 1, 1996 (after the application of paragraph (1)) shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount of such excess.
Years to Which Section Applies.-- ``(1) In general.--This section shall apply to any plan year of the Combined Fund which begins after January 31, 1993 and before October 1, 2003.
Coordination.--This section shall not apply to any eligible small assigned operator for any plan year for which no annual premium is imposed on such operator.
Eligible Small Assigned Operators.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `eligible small assigned operator' means any assigned operator-- ``(A) the average annual gross income of which for purposes of chapter 1 for the 5-taxable year period ending with the operator's most recent taxable year ending before October 1, 1993, did not exceed $25,000,000, and ``(B) which is not engaged in the production of coal for the plan year for which the determination is being made.
For purposes of this subparagraph, production by a related person shall be treated as production by the assigned operator.
Production of coal.--For purposes of paragraph (1), an assigned operator or related person shall be treated as engaged in the production of coal if it has employed employees in-- ``(A) the extraction of coal, or ``(B) the preparation, processing, or changing of coal for sale.
Aggregation Rules.--In determining gross income or taxable income for purposes of this section, an assigned operator and any related persons shall be treated as 1 person.
Overall Limitation.-- ``(1) In general.--In no event shall the total reductions in annual premiums payable to the Combined Fund under this section for any plan year exceed $5,000,000.
Calculation of reductions.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the total reductions in annual premiums for any plan year shall not include any reductions under this section in premiums payable by an eligible small assigned operator who, prior to the date of the enactment of this section, has not paid at least 50 percent of the premiums assessed such assigned operator for the period October 1, 1993, through September 30, 1996.''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for part II of subchapter B of chapter 99 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 9704 the following new item: ``Sec.
Reductions in annual premiums of eligible small assigned operators.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to plan years beginning after January 31, 1993.
In General.--In the case of an eligible small assigned operator (as defined in section 9704A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 2), no penalty shall be imposed under section 9707 of such Code on any failure of such operator to pay any installment of a premium due under section 9704 of such Code before January 1, 1997, if the operator pays such installment before such date.
For purposes of this subsection, the amount of the installment shall be determined after application of the amendments made by section 2.
Compliance.--An operator shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of subsection (a) with respect to any installment if-- (1) the failure to pay the installment before January 1, 1997, was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, and (2) the failure is corrected within 90 days of the later of-- (A) notice of the failure, or (B) a final administrative or judicial determination of the amount of the installment which is not reviewable or appealable.
SUSPENSION OF CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CERTAIN ASSIGNED OPERATORS TO THE COMBINED FUND.
In General.--Section 9704 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to liability of assigned operators) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) One-Time Suspension of Contributions for Certain Assigned Operators.-- ``(1) In general.--Effective on and after the date of the enactment of the Coal Industry Retiree Health Equity Act, whenever the net assets in the Combined Fund (as reported in the monthly UMWA Combined Fund Financial Statements) first exceed 10 percent of the benefits and administrative costs paid by the Combined Fund during the preceding plan year, no further monthly premium payments shall be made by assigned operators which are not 1988 agreement operators for the succeeding 24- month period.
In the case of assigned operators which sought protection under title 11 of the United States Code before October 24, 1992, the preceding sentence shall be applied without regard to section 9706(b)(1)(A).
Termination of suspension.--The period of suspension under paragraph (1) shall terminate whenever such net assets no longer exceed 10 percent of such costs, and assigned operators which are not 1988 agreement operators shall resume making monthly premium payments with the next monthly installment due after such termination.
Report.--Not later than the end of the first 12-month period of the 24-month period described in paragraph (1), the Comptroller General of the United States shall report to Congress on the current operations of the Combined Fund for such 12-month period and the background history of the Combined Fund.''
Conforming Amendment.--Section 9704(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``Each'' and inserting ``Except as provided in subsection (j), each''.
AMOUNT OF PER BENEFICIARY PREMIUM.
Paragraph (2) of section 9704(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to per beneficiary premium) is amended-- (1) by striking subparagraph (A) and inserting the following new subparagraph: ``(A) $2,116.67, plus'', and (2) by striking ``the amount determined under subparagraph (A)'' in subparagraph (B) and inserting ``$2,116.67''.
In General.--Section 9704(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(h) Information.--The'' and inserting: ``(h) Information.-- ``(1) Information to secretary.--The'', and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Information to contributors.-- ``(A) In general.--The trustees of the Combined Fund shall, within 30 days of a written request, make available to any assigned operator information relating to the employment history of assigned beneficiaries.
Fees.--The trustees may charge reasonable fees (not in excess of actual expenses) for providing documents under this paragraph.''
Additional Amendment.--Clause (ii) of section 9703(b)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``(without regard to any reduction under section 9704(e)(3)(B)(ii))'' after ``for the plan year''.
TREATMENT OF WITHDRAWAL LIABILITY.
Withdrawal Liability.--Subsection (g) of section 9711 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to continued obligations of individual employer plans) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Certain 1988 agreement operators.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in the case of 1988 agreement operators which either have contingent liability for, or which were assessed by and did pay contractual withdrawal liability to, the 1950 UMWA Benefit Plan, the 1974 UMWA Benefit Plan or the Combined Fund; the following shall apply as of the date of the enactment of the Coal Industry Retiree Health Equity Act: ``(A) The Combined Fund shall immediately cease assessing, collecting, or attempting to collect contractual withdrawal liability under Article XX, Section (i) or (j), or both, of the 1988 agreement, and promptly shall segregate from its other assets a sum equal to the contractual withdrawal liability previously paid by any such 1988 agreement operator.
Each such 1988 agreement operator and any related persons are hereafter exempted from the requirements of subsections (a) and (b).
The 1992 UMWA Benefit Plan hereafter shall provide health benefits coverage to all beneficiaries who would have been eligible to receive health benefits under such 1988 agreement operator's individual employer plans, but for this paragraph.
The 1992 UMWA Benefit Plan shall assess no premiums against any such 1988 agreement operator under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 9712(d)(1) and, instead, shall assess such premiums against the Combined Fund, which shall promptly pay such premiums until the sum segregated with respect to such 1988 Agreement operator from the Combined Fund's other assets pursuant to this paragraph has been exhausted.
The segregated sum shall continue to earn interest at the rate prescribed under section 6621 until such sum is exhausted, at which time the 1992 UMWA Benefit Plan shall commence assessing premiums against such 1988 agreement operator.''
Conforming Amendment.--Subsections (a) and (b)(2) of section 9711 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are each amended by striking the period at the end of the second sentence thereof and inserting ``, except as provided in subsection (g)(3).''