TITLE I--DISPOSAL OF LANDS IN OKLAHOMA SECTION 101.
SALE OF BLACK KETTLE AND RITA BLANCA NATIONAL GRASSLANDS AND PROPERTY SURROUNDING OPTIMA LAKE AND RECREATION AREA.
General Directive.--Not later than September 30, 1996, and in accordance with this Act-- (1) the Secretary of Agriculture shall offer for sale to the public at fair market value all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the surface estate of those portions of the Cibola National Forest, other than the property subject to section 102, which are more particularly described as-- (A) the Black Kettle National Grasslands, located in the State of Oklahoma; and (B) the Rita Blanca National Grasslands, located in the State of Oklahoma; and (2) the Secretary of the Army, acting through the Chief of Engineers, shall offer for sale to the public at fair market value all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the real property acquired by the United States for the project for flood control, Optima Lake, North Canadian River Basin, Oklahoma, authorized by the Flood Control Act of 1936 (49 United States Statutes at Large 1570).
Right of First Refusal.--Prior to offering lands for sale to the public under subsection (a), the Secretary shall afford the individuals from whom the lands were acquired by the United States or their descendants the opportunity to acquire the lands at fair market value.
Waiver.--The sale and transfer of lands under this Act shall not be subject to the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 471).
TRANSFERS OF PROPERTY FOR CERTAIN PUBLIC PURPOSES.
Skipout Lake, Dead Indian Lake, and Spring Creek Lake.--Not later than September 30, 1996, and upon request of the State of Oklahoma, the Secretary of Agriculture shall transfer, without consideration, to the Department of Tourism and Recreation of the State of Oklahoma those lands located in Roger Mills County, Oklahoma, known as Skipout Lake, Dead Indian Lake, and Spring Creek Lake, more particularly described as follows: (1) Skipout lake.--West Half and Northeast Quarter of Section 5, Township 13 North, Range 25 West, Indian Meridian, Roger Mills County, Oklahoma.
Dead indian lake.--East Half of Section 26 and the East Half of Northwest Quarter of Section 26, Township 15 North, Range 24 West, Indian Meridian, Roger Mills County, Oklahoma.
Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 23, Township 15 North, Range 24 West, Indian Meridian, Roger Mills County, Oklahoma.
Spring creek lake.--East Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 15, Township 15 North, Range 25 West, Indian Meridian, Roger Mills County, Oklahoma.
West Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 14, Township 15 North, Range 25 West, Indian Meridian, Roger Mills County, Oklahoma.
Optima Lake, North Canadian River Basin, Oklahoma.-- (1) Project deauthorization.--The project for flood control, Optima Lake, North Canadian River Basin, Oklahoma, authorized by the Flood Control Act of 1936 (49 United States Statutes at Large 1570), is not authorized after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Transfer of property.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall transfer to the State of Oklahoma, without consideration, all right, title, and interest of the United States to that portion of the real property described in subparagraph (C), including all works, structures, and other improvements to the real property.
Terms and conditions.--The deed of conveyance for the transfer of real property and improvements under subparagraph (A) shall include such terms and conditions as may be necessary to ensure that-- (i) the State of Oklahoma will hold the United States harmless from all claims arising from or through the operation of the real property and improvements; and (ii) the State of Oklahoma will prohibit in perpetuity the construction of any residential or commercial structure in the flood plain created by the dam located on the real property and if the State does not prohibit such construction all or any portion of the real property will in its then existing condition, at the option of the United States, revert to the United States.
The real property referred to in subparagraph (A) consists of lands associated with the earthen dam, and the recreation area adjacent to the dam, as generally depicted on the map of the Corps of Engineers, Tulsa District, entitled ``Optima Lake Public Hunting Area'', dated 1993.
TITLE II--WASHITA BATTLEFIELD NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Washita Battlefield National Historic Site Act of 1995.''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the Battle of the Washita, November 27, 1868, was one of the largest engagements between Plains tribes and the United States Army on the Southern Great Plains.
The site is a registered National Historic Landmark; (2) Lt.
Colonel George A. Custer, leading the 7th United States Calvary, attacked the sleeping Cheyenne village of peace chief Black Kettle.
Custer's attack resulted in more than 150 Indian casualties, many of them women and children; (3) the Battle of the Washita symbolizes the struggle of the Southern Great Plains tribes to maintain their traditional lifeways and not to submit to reservation confinement; and (4) the Washita battle site possesses a high degree of integrity and the cultural landscape is essentially intact.
The Cheyenne village site has not been altered substantially except by periodic flooding of the Washita River.
Purposes.--The purposes of this title are to-- (1) recognize the importance of the Battle of the Washita as a nationally significant element of frontier military history and as a symbol of the struggles of the Southern Great Plains tribes to maintain control of their traditional use areas; and (2) establish the site of the Battle of the Washita as a national historic site and provide opportunities for American Indian groups including the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe to be involved in the formulation of plans and educational programs for the national historic site.
In General.--In order to provide for the preservation and interpretation of the Battle of the Washita, there is hereby established the Washita Battlefield National Historic Site in the State of Oklahoma (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``national historic site'').
Boundary.-- (1) In general.--The national historic site shall consist of-- (A) approximately 326 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Washita Battlefield National Historic Site'', numbered 20,000A and dated 12/95; and (B) the private lands subject to conservation easements referred to in section 205(b).
Map.--The map referred to in paragraph (1) shall be on file in the offices of the Director of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, and other appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
The Secretary of the Interior (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Secretary'') may, from time to time, make minor revisions in the boundary of the national historic site in accordance with section 7(c) of the Land and Water Conservation Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-4 and following).
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall manage the national historic site in accordance with this title and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1, 2-4), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461-467).
Management Purposes.--The Secretary shall manage the national historic site for the following purposes, among others: (1) To protect and preserve the national historic site, including the topographic features important to the battle site, artifacts and other physical remains of the battle, and the visual scene as closely as possible as it was at the time of the battle.
To interpret the cultural and natural resources of the historic site, providing for public understanding and appreciation of the area in such manner as to perpetuate these qualities and values for future generations.
Consultation and Training.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall consult regularly with the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe on the formulation of the management plan provisions referred to in section 206(5) of this title and on preparation of educational programs provided to the public.
The Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe, its subordinate boards, committees, enterprises, and traditional leaders to further the purposes of this title.
Park Boundaries.--Within the boundaries of the national historic site, the Secretary is authorized to acquire lands and interest in lands by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange, except that-- (1) no lands or interest in lands within the historic site may be acquired without the consent of the owner thereof, and (2) lands and interests in lands owned by the State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof may be acquired only by donation.
Conservation Easements.--The Congress finds that the State of Oklahoma, acting through the Oklahoma Historical Society, will work with local land owners to acquire and hold in perpetuity conservation easements in the vicinity of the national historic site as deemed necessary for the visual and interpretive integrity of the site.
The intent of the easements will be to keep occupancy of the land in private ownership and use of the land in general agriculture.
Within five years after the date funds are made available for purposes of this title, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall prepare a general management plan for the national historic site.
The plan shall address, but not be limited to, each of the following: (1) A resource protection program.
A visitor use plan including programs and facilities that will be provided for public use, including the location and cost of public facilities.
A research and curation plan.
A highway signing program.
Involvement by the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe in the formulation of educational programs for the national historic site.
Involvement by the State of Oklahoma and other local and national entities willing to share in the responsibilities of developing and supporting the national historic site.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this title.