This Act may be cited as the ``National Drug Policy Act of 1993''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on National Drug Policy''.
Study.--The Commission shall conduct a study of the unlawful production, distribution, and use of controlled substances, including-- (1) an investigation into the various causes of the unlawful use in the United States of controlled substances and the relative significance of the various causes; (2) an evaluation of the efficacy of existing Federal laws regarding the unlawful production, distribution, and use of controlled substances, including the efficacy of Federal minimum sentences for violations of the laws regarding the unlawful sale and use of controlled substances; (3) an analysis of the costs, benefits, risks, and advantages of the present national policy regarding controlled substances and of potential modifications of that policy, including an analysis of what proportion of the funds dedicated to combating the unlawful sale and use of controlled substances should be devoted to-- (A) interdicting controlled substances entering the United States unlawfully; (B) enforcing Federal laws relating the unlawful production, distribution, and use of controlled substances; (C) education and other forms of preventing the unlawful use of controlled substances; or (D) rehabilitating individuals who use controlled substances unlawfully; and (4) an analysis of methods of rehabilitation, including an evaluation of the efficacy of current methods and suggestions for new methods.
Report.--Within 18 months after the date on which funds first become available to carry out this Act, the Commission-- (1) shall submit to the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate a comprehensive report on the study conducted under subsection (a), and (2) shall make the report available to the public upon request.
The report shall include the Commission's conclusions and recommendations which at least a majority of the Commission have agreed upon and the Commission's proposals for legislation and administrative action necessary to carry out the Commission's recommendations.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 13 members appointed as follows from among qualified individuals: (1) By the president.--Five members appointed by the President of the United States, not more than 3 of whom may be members of the same political party.
By leaders of the senate.--Two members each appointed by the majority leader of the Senate and the minority leader of the Senate, not more than 2 of whom shall be members of the same political party.
By leaders of the house.--Two members each appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the minority leader of the House of Representatives, not more than 2 of whom shall be members of the same political party.
Appointments to the Commission shall be made not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Qualifications.--For purposes of subsection (a), individuals representing the professions that deal with those who produce, distribute, and use controlled substances unlawfully are qualified to be appointed to the Commission and individuals who hold an elected Federal office are not qualified for appointment to the Commission.
Each appointing authority named in subsection (a) should consider appointing individuals who are-- (1) law enforcement officials; (2) physicians; (3) social workers; (4) judges and attorneys; (5) Drug Enforcement Agency staff; (6) drug rehabilitation counselors; (7) religious leaders; (8) community leaders from inner-city communities; (9) educators; or (10) individuals with academic expertise in issues surrounding the unlawful production, distribution, and use of controlled substances.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission resulting from the death or resignation of a member shall not affect the powers of the Commission.
If a vacancy occurs on the Commission, a new member shall be appointed in the same manner as the original member was appointed.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of pay for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule in effect under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission, except as provided in paragraph (3).
Travel expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of the duties of the Commission, members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including a per diem allowance in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Government service are allowed travel expenses under sections 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; Vice Chairperson.--At the time of appointment, the President shall designate 1 of the members of the Commission as the chairperson and 1 of the members of the Commission as the vice chairperson.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members of the Commission but not less often than once a month.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Staff.-- (1) Appointment and pay.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of personnel as it considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of pay for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule in effect under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary or intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at a rate of pay not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of pay for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule in effect under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--At the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that agency to the Commission to carry out this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.-- (1) Authority.--To carry out this Act, the Commission may hold the hearings, sit and act at the times and places, take the testimony, and receive the evidence that the Commission considers appropriate.
Open meetings.--The Commission shall be considered an agency for the purposes of section 552b of title 5, United States Code, relating to the requirement that meetings of Federal agencies be open to the public.
Transcripts.--Transcripts of a hearing held under paragraph (1) shall be published and shall be made available, upon request, to the public within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing.
Powers of Members and Agents.--If authorized by the Commission, any member or agent of the Commission may take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Information.-- (1) Authority and procedure for obtaining information.-- Notwithstanding section 552a of title 5 or any other restriction on the disclosure of information, the Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
At the request of the chairperson of the Commission, the head of the agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Use and disclosure of information.--The Commission shall be subject to the same restrictions regarding the use or disclosure of any information obtained from any Federal agency under this subsection as are applicable to the use or disclosure of the information by the Federal agency from which it is obtained.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Administrative Support Services.--At the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out this Act.
Expenditures and Contracts.--The Commission may make expenditures and enter into contracts for the procurement of the supplies, services, and property the Commission considers appropriate to carry out this Act.
The aggregate amount of such expenditures and contracts may be made only to the extent or in the amounts provided in appropriations Acts.
The Commission shall terminate 60 days after submitting the report required by section 3(b).
For purposes of this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Commission on National Drug Policy established by section 2.
Controlled substance.--The term ``controlled substance'' means a controlled substance as defined by section 102(6) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 802(6)).
Distribute.--The term ``distribute'' means distribute as defined by section 102(11) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 802(11)).
Federal agency.--The term ``Federal agency'' means an executive agency as defined by section 105 of title 5, United States Code.
Production.--The term ``production'' means production as defined by section 102(22) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 802(22)).