This Act may be cited as the ``Preparing Excellent Teachers Act of 2007''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The shortage of qualified teachers in the United States has reached critical levels.
Education experts agree that looming teacher retirement and shortages of effective teachers in low-performing schools create a great demand for quality teachers.
Nearly 50 percent of new teachers leave in the first 5 years.
These numbers have a direct impact on the quality of the education of the children of the United States.
Inexperienced teachers are less effective than teachers with several years of experience.
Successful teacher preparation programs, providing ongoing support, can make novice teachers effective more rapidly.
The majority of new teachers lack such support, and so leave the profession before becoming effective.
Teacher candidates must see expert practices modeled and must then practice them with ongoing mentoring support.
Teacher preparation often fails to provide the opportunity to learn under the direct supervision of expert teachers working in schools that effectively serve high-need students.
Student teaching is too often conducted in classrooms that do not model effective practice, or in classrooms that do not serve high- need students, and the lessons learned do not generalize to effective teaching in high-need schools.
It is critical to develop programs that increase the probability recruits will succeed and stay in the high-need classrooms where they are needed.
Because many teacher candidates choose to teach where they grew up or went to college, it is important to have strong programs in hard-to- staff urban and rural locations.
Teacher residency programs effectively build teacher supply, since they recruit and prepare candidates in the districts that sponsor them.
Teacher residency programs have demonstrated the capacity to recruit, prepare, retain, and provide effective support for teachers in high-need schools.
GRANTS FOR TEACHER RESIDENCY PROGRAMS.
In General.--Part C of title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subpart 6--Teacher Residency Programs ``SEC.
GRANTS FOR TEACHER RESIDENCY PROGRAMS.
In General.--From amounts made available to carry out this section, the Secretary shall make grants to high-need local educational agencies to assist such agencies to establish and support teacher residency programs.
Such agencies are encouraged to work with non- profit community-based organizations that have experience in teacher residency programs.
Teacher Residency Programs.-- ``(1) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `teacher residency program' means a school-based teacher preparation program in which a prospective teacher-- ``(A) teaches alongside a teacher of record (who is designated as the mentor teacher) for at least 1 academic year; ``(B) receives coursework in the teaching of the content area in which the teacher will become certified to teach; ``(C) receives instruction in planning, content, pedagogy, student learning, and assessment, management of the classroom environment, and professional responsibilities, including interaction with families and colleagues and use of assessment data to modify and improve instruction; ``(D) attains full State certification to teach prior to completion of the program; and ``(E) receives a midpoint review.
Design.--To receive assistance under this section, a teacher residency program shall be designed to meet the following characteristics of successful programs: ``(A) Teacher residency programs integrate pedagogy and classroom practice by partnering with institutions of higher education to ensure residents engage in rigorous master's level coursework while undertaking a guided teaching apprenticeship.
Lessons learned from the residency program will be used to inform teacher training at the institution of higher education.
Residents teach alongside an experienced mentor teacher.
Experienced mentor teachers complement the residency program so that classroom clinical practice is tightly aligned with coursework.
Experienced mentor teachers may receive additional compensation for participating in the program.
Experienced mentor teachers shall have extra responsibilities as teacher leaders of the teacher residency program, as mentors for residents, and as teacher coaches during the induction of novice teachers.
These responsibilities include establishing, within the program, a learning community in which all individuals are expected to continually improve their capacity to advance student learning.
The director of the teacher residency program shall establish and publish clear criteria for selection of experienced mentor teachers based on measures of teacher effectiveness and the appropriate subject area knowledge.
Evaluation of teacher effectiveness shall be based on observation of domains including each of the following: ``(i) Planning and preparation, including demonstrated knowledge of content, pedagogy, and assessment, including the use of formative assessment to improve student learning.
Appropriate instruction that engages students with different learning styles.
Collaboration with colleagues to improve instruction.
Appropriate and fair analysis of gains in student learning.
When feasible, this shall include valid and reliable objective measure of the influence of teachers on the rate of student academic progress.
Teacher residency programs group teacher candidates in cohorts to facilitate professional collaboration among residents.
Teacher residency programs admissions goals and priorities are developed in concert with the hiring objectives of the local educational agency, which commits to hire graduates from the residency program.
Residents learn to teach in the same district in which they will work, learning the instructional initiatives and curriculum of the district.
Teacher residency programs support residents once they are hired as teachers of record.
Residencies continue to provide professional development and networking opportunities to support residents through their first years of teaching.
Experienced mentor teacher defined.--In this section, the term `experienced mentor teacher' means a teacher who-- ``(A) has at least five years teaching experience teaching in a school in the high-need local educational agency that is the recipient of a grant under this section; and ``(B) has a masters degree in education or teaching.
Persons Eligible To Participate.--To be eligible to participate in a teacher residency program under this section, a mid- career professional or recent college graduate shall become enrolled simultaneously in a masters degree program in education or teaching in a university or college that-- ``(1) has entered into a written agreement relating to such program with the high-need local educational agency that is the recipient of a grant under this section; and ``(2) is accredited by the Council of Higher Education Accreditation and the accrediting agency in the State in which the high-need local educational agency is located, if any.
Participants To Receive Practical Experience.--A participant in a teacher residency program under this section shall, under the supervision of an experienced mentor teacher, complete not fewer than ten months teaching a class containing not more than 30 students in a school chosen by the high-need local educational agency that is the recipient of a grant under this section.
Participant To Agree To Be Placed in a School.--A participant in a teacher residency program under this section shall agree in writing to be placed, after successfully completing the program, as a teacher in a school chosen by the high-need local educational agency.
Such placement shall be for a period of at least 5 academic years beginning with the academic year that begins after the participant successfully completes the program.
The school chosen for the placement shall be in a high-need, underserved area.
A participant who fails to complete the period of the placement (or the first 5 academic years of the placement, if the period is more than 5 academic years) is required to pay back the cost of the training.
Amount, Number, and Distribution of Grants.-- ``(1) Amount.--A grant under this section shall be for a period of three years, and shall include $2,500,000 for the first year, $1,500,000 for the second year, and $1,000,000 for the third year.
Number.--The Secretary may not make more than ten such grants each fiscal year, beginning with fiscal year 2008.
Distribution.--A high-need local educational agency may receive not more than one grant in each fiscal year.
Application.--To receive a grant under this section, a high- need local educational agency shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may prescribe.
Selection.--The Secretary shall award grants under this section on a competitive basis.
Evaluation.--Of the amounts appropriated to carry out this section, the Secretary shall reserve up to 5 percent for an evaluation of the effectiveness of the program established under this section, in relation to the effectiveness of other programs that prepare teachers for employment with high-need schools and high-need local educational agencies, including, where feasible, value-added measures of learning gains of students taught by graduates of each teacher residency Program, to be conducted by the Institute of Education Sciences, the National Science Foundation, or the National Academy of Sciences, at the direction of the Secretary.
Not later than 5 years after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall make the results of the evaluation public.
Matching Funds.--A high-need local educational agency that receives a grant under this section shall provide matching funds in an amount equal to 50 percent of grant funds provided to the agency under this section to carry out the activities supported by the grant, which may be provided by community partners, institutions of higher education, or others.
High-Need Local Educational Agency Defined.--In this section, the term `high-need local educational agency' means a local educational agency-- ``(1) that is among the highest 20 percent of local educational agencies in the State in terms of percentage of students from families with incomes below the poverty line (as defined in section 9101(33) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801(33))); ``(2) that is among the lowest 20 percent of local educational agencies in the State on assessments required under part A of title I, or, where feasible, the lowest 20 percent of local educational agencies in the State in terms of measures of teaching effectiveness; and ``(3) for which there is a high percentage of classes taught by teachers not teaching in the academic subjects or grade levels that the teachers were prepared to teach.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2012 to carry out this section.
Amounts appropriated are authorized to remain available until expended, and may be used by the Secretary to make additional grants, in accordance with this section, in a fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2013.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents for that Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 2368 the following: ``subpart 6--teacher residency programs ``Sec.
Grants for teacher residency programs.