This Act may be cited as the ``Petrified Forest National Park Expansion Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the Petrified Forest National Park was established-- (A) to preserve and interpret the globally significant paleontological resources of the Park that are generally regarded as the most important record of the Triassic period in natural history; and (B) to manage those resources to retain significant cultural, natural, and scenic values; (2) significant paleontological, archaeological, and scenic resources directly related to the resource values of the Park are located in land areas adjacent to the boundaries of the Park; (3) those resources not included within the boundaries of the Park-- (A) are vulnerable to theft and desecration; and (B) are disappearing at an alarming rate; (4) the general management plan for the Park includes a recommendation to expand the boundaries of the Park and incorporate additional globally significant paleontological deposits in areas adjacent to the Park-- (A) to further protect nationally significant archaeological sites; and (B) to protect the scenic integrity of the landscape and viewshed of the Park; and (5) a boundary adjustment at the Park will alleviate major threats to those nationally significant resources.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to acquire 1 or more parcels of land-- (1) to expand the boundaries of the Park; and (2) to protect the rare paleontological and archaeological resources of the Park.
In this Act: (1) Map.--The term ``map'' means the map entitled ``Proposed Boundary Adjustments, Petrified Forest National Park'', numbered ____, and dated ________.
Park.--The term ``Park'' means the Petrified Forest National Park in the State.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Arizona.
In General.--The boundary of the Park is revised to include approximately ______ acres, as generally depicted on the map.
Availability of Map.--The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
ACQUISITION OF ADDITIONAL LAND.
Private Land.--The Secretary may acquire from a willing seller, by purchase, exchange, or by donation, any private land or interests in private land within the revised boundary of the Park.
State Land.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may, with the consent of the State and in accordance with State law, acquire from the State any State land or interests in State land within the revised boundary of the Park by purchase or exchange.
Plan.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, in coordination with the State, develop a plan for acquisition of State land or interests in State land identified for inclusion within the revised boundary of the Park.
In General.--Subject to applicable laws, all land and interests in land acquired under this Act shall be administered by the Secretary as part of the Park.
Transfer of Jurisdiction.--The Secretary shall transfer to the National Park Service administrative jurisdiction over any land under the jurisdiction of the Secretary that-- (1) is depicted on the map as being within the boundaries of the Park; and (2) is not under the administrative jurisdiction of the National Park Service on the date of enactment of this Act.
Grazing.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall permit the continuation of grazing on land transferred to the Secretary under this Act, subject to applicable laws (including regulations) and Executive orders.
Termination of leases or permits.--Nothing in this subsection prohibits the Secretary from accepting the voluntary termination of a grazing permit or grazing lease within the Park.
Amendment to General Management Plan.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall amend the general management plan for the Park to address the use and management of any additional land acquired under this Act.