AGREEMENT TO ESTABLISH BINATIONAL COMMISSION.
The President is authorized and encouraged to conclude an agreement with Mexico to establish a binational commission to be known as the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission.
It should be the duty of the Commission-- (1) to conduct a comprehensive needs assessment in the United States-Mexico border area for the purposes of identifying, evaluating, preventing, and resolving health problems that affect the general population of the area; (2) to implement the actions recommended by the needs assessment by-- (A) assisting in the coordination of the efforts of public and private persons to prevent and resolve such health problems, (B) assisting in the coordination of the efforts of public and private persons to educate such population concerning such health problems, and (C) developing and implementing programs to prevent and resolve such health problems and to educate such population concerning such health problems where a program is necessary to meet a need that is not being met by the efforts of other public or private persons; and (3) to formulate recommendations to the Governments of the United States and Mexico concerning a fair and reasonable method by which the government of one country would reimburse a public or private person in the other country for the cost of a health care service that the person furnishes to a citizen or resident alien of the first country who is unable, through insurance or otherwise, to pay for the service.
In addition to the duties described in section 2, the Commission should be authorized to perform the following additional functions as the Commission determines to be appropriate: (1) To conduct or sponsor investigations, research, or studies designed to identify, study, and monitor health problems that affect the general population in the United States-Mexico border area.
To provide financial, technical, or administrative assistance to public or private persons who act to prevent, resolve, or educate such population concerning such health problems.
Number and Appointment of United States Section.--The United States section of the Commission should be composed of 13 members.
The section should consist of the following members: (1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services or such individual's delegate.
The commissioners of health from the States of Texas, New Mexico, California, and Arizona or such individuals' delegates.
2 individuals from each of the States of Texas, New Mexico, California, and Arizona who are nominated by the chief executive officer of one of such States and are appointed by the President from among individuals-- (A) who have a demonstrated interest in health issues of the United States-Mexico border area; and (B) whose name appears on a list of 6 nominees submitted to the President by the chief executive officer of the State where the nominees resides.
Commissioner.--The Commissioner of the United States section of the Commission should be the Secretary of Health and Human Services or such individual's delegate to the Commission.
The Commissioner should be the leader of the section.
The Commission should establish no fewer than 2 regional border offices in locations selected by the Commission.
Not later than February 1 of each year that occurs more than 1 year after the date of the establishment of the Commission, the Commission should submit an annual report to both the United States Government and the Government of Mexico regarding all activities of the Commission during the preceding calendar year.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission authorized in section 1.
Health problem.--The term ``health problem'' means a disease or medical ailment or an environmental condition that poses the risk of disease or medical ailment.
The term includes diseases, ailments, or risks of disease or ailment caused by or related to environmental factors, control of animals and rabies, control of insect and rodent vectors, disposal of solid and hazardous waste, and control and monitoring of air and water quality.
Resident alien.--The term ``resident alien'', when used in reference to a country, means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence to the country or otherwise permanently residing in the country under color of law (including residence as an asylee, refugee, or parolee).
United states-mexico border area.--The term ``United States-Mexico border area'' means the area located in the United States and Mexico within 100 kilometers of the border between the United States and Mexico.