This Act may be cited as the ``Good Neighbor Environmental Assistance Act of 1993''.
The purpose of this Act is to protect the economy, public health, environment, and water quality of the United States-Mexico border area that is endangered and is being polluted by raw or partially treated sewage, effluent, and other pollutants.
As used in this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Border state.--The term ``border State'' means each of the following States: (A) Arizona.
Commission.--The term ``United States Commissioner'' means the United States Commissioner of the International Boundary and Water Commission.
Construction.--The term ``construction'' has the meaning provided the term under section 212(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1292(1)).
Treatment works.--The term ``treatment works'' has the meaning provided the term under section 212(2) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1292(2)).
In General.--On the approval by the Administrator of the necessary plans and specifications, the Administrator is authorized-- (1) to transfer funds to-- (A) the Secretary of State, who shall transfer the funds to the United States Commissioner for use by the head of the American Section of the Commission; or (B) the head of any other Federal agency; and (2) to make a grant to-- (A) an appropriate entity designated by the President; or (B) a border State designated by the President, to carry out the construction of an eligible project described in subsection (b).
Eligible Project.--An eligible project described in this subsection is a project for the construction of-- (1) a wastewater treatment works to protect public health, the environment, and water quality from pollution resulting from inadequacies or breakdowns in wastewater treatment works and water system from Mexican wastewater affecting United States waters or water/sewage systems; or (2) a treatment works to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
Requirement for a Grant for a Construction Project in Mexico.-- The Administrator may make a grant for an eligible project described in subsection (b) in Mexico only if, after providing public notice and opportunity for comment, the Administrator determines that the then existing treatment works located in Mexico, in conjunction with any other then existing treatment works or treatment works scheduled to be constructed, are not sufficient (or will not be sufficient) to protect residents of border States from water pollution originating in Mexico.
Operation and Maintenance.--To carry out the purpose referred to in section 2, the United States Commissioner, the head of a Federal agency that receives a transfer of funds pursuant to subsection (a), or the recipient of a grant referred to in subsection (a) is authorized to maintain an eligible project constructed pursuant to this section.
Approval of Plans.-- (1) Plans and specifications.--Each eligible project that is funded by a transfer or a grant made pursuant to subsection (a)(1) shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications developed by the head of the American Section of the Commission in consultation with the head of another Federal agency of the appropriate official of an entity or border State designated by the President under subsection (a), in consultation with the appropriate official of the affected border State.
Such plans shall include construction cost estimates.
Approval by the administrator.--As a condition of carrying out the construction of an eligible project referred in paragraph (1), the head of the Federal agency or appropriate official of an entity or border State shall submit the plans and specifications referred to in paragraph (1) to the Administrator for approval.
Standards for construction.--The Administrator may approve a plan referred to in paragraph (2) if the Administrator determines that the eligible project that is the subject of the plan meets the standards that would apply to the treatment works or other project if the treatment works or other project were constructed under appropriate standards under the law of the United States and Mexico and under applicable treaties and international agreements.
Federal Share.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Federal share of construction of an eligible project that is the subject of a transfer or grant under subsection (a) shall be 100 percent of the cost of the eligible project.
Costs paid by the government of mexico.--If the Secretary of State or another appropriate official of the Federal Government enters into an agreement with the Government of Mexico that provides for cost-sharing for an eligible project that is the subject of assistance provided pursuant to this section, the Federal share of the cost of the project shall be the amount specified in the agreement.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Environmental Protection Agency to carry out this Act such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1994, and for each fiscal year thereafter.