Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Act for Responsible Employment'' or the ``CARE Act''.
Reference.--Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 201 et sequentes).
Section 13(c) (29 United States Code 213(c)) is amended-- (1) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows: ``(1) The provisions of section 12 relating to child labor shall not apply to any employee employed in agriculture outside of school hours for the school district where such employee is living while such employee is so employed, if such employee is employed by such employee's parent or legal guardian, on a farm owned or operated by such parent or legal guardian.
''; and (2) by striking paragraphs (2) and (4).
Finding.--The last sentence of section 2(a) (29 United States Code 202(a)) is amended by inserting after ``households'' the following: ``and the employment of employees in youth peddling''.
Oppressive Child Labor.--Section 3(l) (29 United States Code 203(l)) is amended in the last sentence by striking ``manufacturing and mining'' and inserting ``manufacturing, mining, and youth peddling''.
Definition.--Section 3 (29 United States Code 203) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(y) `Youth peddling' means selling goods or services by employees under the age of 16 to customers at their residences, places of business, or public places such as street corners or public transportation stations.
The term `youth peddling' does not include-- ``(1) the activities of individuals who, as volunteers, sell goods or services on behalf of not-for-profit organizations; or ``(2) certain categories of employment, such as seasonal employment, which the Secretary may by regulation exclude from such term.''.
Prohibition of Youth Peddling.--Section 12(c) (29 United States Code 212(c)) is amended by inserting after ``oppressive child labor in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce'' the following: ``, in youth peddling,''.
CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR CHILD LABOR VIOLATIONS.
Civil Money Penalties.--Section 16(e) (29 United States Code 216(e)) is amended in the first sentence-- (1) by striking ``$10,000'' and inserting ``$15,000''; (2) by inserting after ``subject to a civil penalty of'' the following: ``not less than $500 and''.
Criminal Penalties.--Section 16(a) (29 United States Code 216(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Any person who violates the provisions of section 15(a)(4), concerning oppressive child labor, shall on conviction be subject to a fine of not more than $15,000, or to imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both, in the case of a willful or repeat violation that results in or contributes to a fatality of a minor employee or a permanent disability of a minor employee, or a violation which is concurrent with a criminal violation of any other provision of this Act or of any other Federal or State law.''.
GOODS TAINTED BY OPPRESSIVE CHILD LABOR.
Section 12(a) (29 United States Code 212(a)) is amended by inserting after ``notice of any such violation'' the following ``or any other such shipment or delivery for shipment that the Secretary determines may be allowed to be shipped or delivered for shipment in interstate commerce''.
Section 4 (29 United States Code 204) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) The Secretary shall encourage and establish closer working relationships with non-governmental organizations and with State and local government agencies having responsibility for administering and enforcing labor and safety and health laws.
Upon the request of the Secretary, and to the extent permissible under applicable law, State and local government agencies with information regarding injuries and deaths of employees shall submit such information to the Secretary for use as appropriate in the enforcement of section 12 and in the promulgation and interpretation of the regulations and orders authorized by section 3(l).
The Secretary may reimburse such State and local government agencies for such services.''.
REGULATIONS AND MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Labor shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
Memorandum of Understanding.--The Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of Agriculture shall, not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, enter into a memorandum or understanding to coordinate the development and enforcement of standards to minimize child labor.