This Act may be cited as the ``Growth Opportunity Act of 2007''.
GRANTS FOR STATES TO ESTABLISH REVOLVING LOAN FUNDS TO PROVIDE LOANS TO SMALL MANUFACTURERS.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Center.--The term ``Center'' means a Regional Center for the Transfer of Manufacturing Technology described in section 25 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k).
Manufacturing extension partnership program.--The term ``Manufacturing Extension Partnership program'' means the program under sections 25 and 26 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k and 278l).
Revolving loan fund.--The term ``revolving loan fund'' means a revolving loan fund described in subsection (d).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
Small manufacturer.--The term ``small manufacturer'' means a manufacturer with less than $50,000,000 in annual sales.
Grants Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to States to establish revolving loan funds.
Maximum amount.--The Secretary may not award a grant under this section in an amount that exceeds $10,000,000.
Multiple grant awards.--A State may not receive more than 1 grant under this section in any fiscal year.
Criteria for the Awarding of Grants.-- (1) Matching funds.--The Secretary may not make a grant to a State under this section unless the State agrees to provide contributions in an amount equal to not less than 25 percent of the Federal funds provided under the grant.
Administrative costs.--A State receiving a grant under this section may only use such amount of the grant for the costs of administering the revolving loan fund as the Secretary shall provide in regulations.
Preference.--In awarding grants each year, the Secretary shall give preference to States that have not previously been awarded a grant under this section.
Application.-- (A) In general.--Each State seeking a grant under this section shall submit to the Secretary an application therefor in such form and in such manner as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Content.--Each application submitted under subparagraph (A) shall contain the following: (i) Evidence that the applicant can establish and administer a revolving loan fund.
The applicant's need for a grant under this section.
The impact that receipt of a grant under this section would have on the applicant.
Revolving Loan Funds.-- (1) In general.--A State receiving a grant under this section shall establish, maintain, and administer a revolving loan fund in accordance with this subsection.
Deposits.--A revolving loan fund shall consist of the following: (A) Amounts from grants awarded under this section.
All amounts held or received by the State incident to the provision of loans described in subsection (e), including all collections of principal and interest.
Expenditures.--Amounts in the revolving loan fund shall be available for the provision and administration of loans in accordance with subsection (e).
Administration.--A State may enter into an agreement with a Center to administer a revolving loan fund.
Loans.-- (1) In general.--A State receiving a grant under this section shall use the amount in the revolving loan fund to make the following loans: (A) Stage-1 loans.--A stage-1 loan means a loan made to a small manufacturer in an amount not to exceed $50,000, for new product development to conduct the following: (i) Patent research.
Stage-2 loans.--A stage-2 loan means a loan made to a small manufacturer in an amount not to exceed $100,000 to develop a prototype of and test a new product.
Loan terms and conditions.--The following shall apply with respect to loans provided under paragraph (1): (A) Duration.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), loans shall be for a period not to exceed 10 years.
Prepayment.--A recipient of a loan may prepay such loan before the end of the duration of such loan without penalty.
Interest rate.--Loans shall bear interest at a rate of 3.5 percent annually.
Accrual of interest.--Loans shall accrue interest during the entire duration of the loan.
Payment of interest.--A State may not require a recipient of a loan to make interest payments on such loan during the first 3 years of such loan.
Collateral.--No collateral or personal guaranty shall be required for receipt of a loan.
Secured interest in intellectual property.-- Each loan shall be secured by an interest in any intellectual property developed by the recipient of such loan through the use of amounts from such loan.
Development of business plans and budgets.-- Each recipient of a loan shall develop, in cooperation with a Center, a business plan and a budget for the use of loan amounts.
Preference for loan applicants that participate in the manufacturing extension partnership program.--In selecting small manufacturers to receive a loan, a recipient of a grant under this section shall give preference to small manufacturers that are participants in the Manufacturing Extension Partnership program.
Location of product development.--Each recipient of a loan shall commit to developing and manufacturing the product for which a loan is sought in the State that provides the loan for the duration of the loan if such product is developed during such duration.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out the provisions of this section, $52,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2014, of which-- (1) $50,000,000 shall be for providing grants under this section; and (2) $2,000,000 shall be for the costs of administering grants awarded under this section.