LAKE PONTCHARTRAIN BASIN RESTORATION PROGRAM.
Section 121 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1273) is amended-- (1) in subsection (d), by inserting ``to pay not more than 75 percent of the costs'' after ``make grants''; and (2) in subsection (f)(1), in the first sentence, by striking ``2011'' and inserting ``2012 and the amount appropriated for fiscal year 2009 for each of fiscal years 2013 through 2017''.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY HEADQUARTERS.
Redesignation.--The Environmental Protection Agency Headquarters located at 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue N.W.
in Washington, D.C., known as the Ariel Rios Building, shall be known and redesignated as the ``William Jefferson Clinton Federal Building''.
References.--Any reference in a law, map, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United States to the Environmental Protection Agency Headquarters referred to in subsection (a) shall be deemed to be a reference to the ``William Jefferson Clinton Federal Building''.
BUSH AND GEORGE W. BUSH UNITED STATES COURTHOUSE AND GEORGE MAHON FEDERAL BUILDING.
Redesignation.--The Federal building and United States Courthouse located at 200 East Wall Street in Midland, Texas, known as the George Mahon Federal Building, shall be known and redesignated as the ``George H.W.
Bush and George W. Bush United States Courthouse and George Mahon Federal Building''.
References.--Any reference in a law, map, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United States to the Federal building and United States Courthouse referred to in subsection (a) shall be deemed to be a reference to the ``George H.W.
Bush and George W. Bush United States Courthouse and George Mahon Federal Building''.
THOMAS P. O'NEILL, JR. FEDERAL BUILDING.
Designation.--The Federal building currently known as Federal Office Building 8, located at 200 C Street Southwest in the District of Columbia, shall be known and designated as the ``Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr. Federal Building''.
References.--Any reference in a law, map, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United States to the Federal building referred to in subsection (a) shall be deemed to be a reference to the ``Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr. Federal Building''.
COMPLIANCE WITH LACEY ACT.
The Lacey Act Amendments of 1981 (16 United States Code 3371 et sequentes) and section 42 of title 18, United States Code, shall not apply with respect to any water transfer by the North Texas Municipal Water District and the Greater Texoma Utility Authority using only closed conveyance systems from the Lake Texoma raw water intake structure to treatment facilities at which all zebra mussels are extirpated and removed from the water transferred.
CONVEYANCE OF MCKINNEY LAKE NATIONAL FISH HATCHERY.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of North Carolina.
Conveyance.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall convey to the State, without reimbursement, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the property described in subsection (c), for use by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission as a component of the fish and wildlife management program of the State.
Description of Property.--The property referred to in subsection (b) is comprised of the property known as the ``McKinney Lake National Fish Hatchery'', which-- (1) is located at 220 McKinney Lake Road, Hoffman (between Southern Pines and Rockingham), in Richmond County, North Carolina; (2) is a warmwater facility consisting of approximately 422 acres; and (3) includes all improvements and related personal property under the jurisdiction of the Secretary that are located on the property (including buildings, structures, and equipment).
Use by State.-- (1) Use.--The property conveyed to the State under this section shall be used by the State for purposes relating to fishery and wildlife resources management.
Reversion.-- (A) In general.--If the property conveyed to the State under this section is used for any purpose other than the purpose described in paragraph (1), all right, title, and interest in and to the property shall revert to the United States.
Condition of property.--If the property described in subparagraph (A) reverts to the United States under this paragraph, the State shall ensure that the property is in substantially the same or better condition as the condition of the property as of the date of the conveyance of the property under this section.
Exception.--This paragraph shall not apply with respect to use of the property under subsection (e).
Use by Secretary.--The Secretary shall require, as a condition and term of the conveyance of property under this section, that the State shall, upon the request of the Secretary, allow the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to use the property in cooperation with the Commission for propagation of any critically important aquatic resources held in public trust to address specific restoration or recovery needs of such resource.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.