There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission on Youth Crime and School Violence'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall make recommendations on how to deter youth crime and protect children from violence in schools.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 8 members appointed from among persons who are not officers or employees of any government, as follows: (1) 2 members appointed by the President.
2 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
2 members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
1 member appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
1 member appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Term of Office.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Special rule.--A member who is appointed to the Commission and who becomes an officer or employee of a government may not continue as a member.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members.
For purposes of such election, the provisional Chairperson shall be designated by the President.
Pay and Travel Expenses.-- (1) Rate of pay.--Each Commission member shall each be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the members are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Each Commission member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Director.--The Commission shall appoint a Director without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code.
The Director shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Director, with the approval of the Commission, may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel.
Inapplicability of certain civil service laws.--The Director may make such appointments subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and any personnel so appointed shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--On request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Administrative Support Services.--On the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Interim Report.--Within 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the Speaker, the Minority Leader, and Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives, and the Majority Leader, Minority Leader, and Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate, an interim report on the activities of the Commission under this Act.
Final Report.--Not later than Dec. 31, 2002, the Commission shall transmit to the officials specified in subsection (a) a final report.
The final report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for legislation, administrative action, and such other action as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate 15 days after submitting its final report pursuant to section 6(b).