This Act may be cited as the ``Older Industrial Region Rail and Port Access and Modernization Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the growth of commerce in northern New England is hampered by a decaying rail infrastructure; (2) during the 5-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, international trade shipping is projected to increase by more than 20 percent; (3) in the shipping industry, there is a widespread international trend for shippers to use only ports with double- stack rail access; (4) aging rail lines and constricted passage in older industrial States are-- (A) limiting the movement of cargo and individuals throughout that area; and (B) restricting access to deepwater ports; and (5) improving rail lines and double-stack freight rail passage to allow rail connections to and through other States and provinces will enable the economy of the older industrial region to grow and prosper by bringing new industry into the region that will result in growth in high wage jobs.
In this Act: (1) Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Older Industrial Rail Modernization and Port Access Fund established by section 4(g).
Older industrial region.--The term ``older industrial region'' means the northeastern area of the United States.
Older industrial state.--The term ``older industrial State'' means-- (A) Vermont; (B) Maine; and (C) New Hampshire.
Rail project.--The term ``rail project'' means a project for the acquisition, rehabilitation, or improvement of railroad facilities or equipment, as described in section 511 of the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976 (45 United States Code 831).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
In General.-- (1) Grants.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary shall make a grant under this section to each older industrial State that submits an application to the Secretary that demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, a need for assistance under this section in carrying out 1 or more transportation projects described in subsection (b), (c), (d), or (e) that are necessary to improve rail transport in that State.
Grant agreement.--The Secretary shall enter into a grant agreement with each older industrial State that receives a grant under this section.
At a minimum, the agreement shall specify that the grant recipient will meet the applicable requirements of this section, including the cost-sharing requirement under subsection (f)(2).
Grants for Port Access.--The Secretary shall make grants under this section for the purposes of connecting all railroads to ports and ensuring that double-stack rail cars can travel freely throughout older industrial States.
Grants for Bridge and Tunnel Obstruction Repair and Replacement.--The Secretary shall make grants under this section for the purpose of enlarging tunnels and embankments, removing, repairing, or replacing bridges or other obstructions that inhibit the free movement of freight or passenger rail cars and the use of double-stack rail cars.
Grants for Repair of Railroad Beds.--The Secretary shall make grants under this section for the purposes of repairing, upgrading, and purchasing railbeds and tracks, including improving safety of all railroad tracks.
Grants for Development of Intermodal Facilities.--The Secretary shall make grants under this section for the purposes of constructing, operating, and maintaining train maintenance facilities and facilities for the transfer of goods and individuals between other transportation modes, including-- (1) intermodal truck-train transfer facilities; (2) passenger rail stations; and (3) bulk fuel transfer facilities.
Funding Limitations on Expenditures of Funds.-- (1) Funding.--The grants made under this section shall be made with funds transferred from the Fund.
Cost-sharing.-- (A) In general.--A grant made under this section shall be used to pay the Federal share of the cost of a project conducted under a grant agreement.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of a project referred to in subparagraph (A) shall be 80 percent of the cost of the project.
Allocation among states.-- (A) In general.--For each of fiscal years 1998 through 2001, the Secretary shall, in making grants under this section, allocate available amounts in the Fund among older industrial States in accordance with a formula established by the Secretary in accordance with subparagraph (B).
Allocation formula.--In making grants under this section, for each of the fiscal years specified in subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall allocate an equal amount of the amounts available from the Fund to each of the older industrial States that submits 1 or more grant applications that meet the requirements of this section.
Older Industrial Rail Modernization and Port Access Fund.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund, to be known as the ``Older Industrial Rail Modernization and Port Access Fund''.
The Fund shall consist of-- (A) such amounts as are appropriated to the Fund; and (B) any interest earned on investment of amounts in the Fund under paragraph (2).
Investment of fund.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the Fund as is not, in the judgment of the Secretary, required to meet then current withdrawals.
Those investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.
For that purpose, those obligations may be acquired-- (i) on original issue at the issue price, or (ii) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Sale of obligation.--Any obligation acquired by the Fund (except special obligations issued exclusively to the Fund) may be sold by the Secretary of the Treasury at the market price.
The special obligations may be redeemed at par plus accrued interest.
Credits to fund.--The interest on, and the proceeds from, the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Fund.
Transfers from fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, on the request of the Secretary of Transportation, transfer from the Fund to the Secretary of Transportation, any amounts that the Secretary of Transportation determines to be necessary to carry out the grant program under this section.
Administrative expenses.--Not more than 1 percent of the amounts in the Fund may be used by the Secretary of Transportation to cover administrative expenses for carrying out the grant program under this section.
Applicability of Title 23.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, funds made available to an older industrial State under this section shall be available for obligation in the manner provided for funds apportioned under chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund to carry out this section $65,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2001.
Availability of funds.--The amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall remain available for obligation until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the amounts are appropriated.
RAILROAD LOAN AND ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to provide assistance for rail projects in older industrial States.
Issuance of Obligations.--The Secretary shall issue to the Secretary of the Treasury notes or other obligations pursuant to section 512 of the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976 (45 United States Code 832), in such amounts, and at such times, as may be necessary, during the period that the guaranteed obligation is outstanding, to-- (1) pay any amounts required pursuant to the guarantee of the principal amount of an obligation under section 511 of that Act (45 United States Code 831) for any eligible rail project described in subsection (c); and (2) meet the applicable requirements of this section and sections 511 and 513 of that Act (45 United States Code 832 and 833).
Eligibility.--A rail project that is eligible for assistance under this section is a rail project-- (1) for a railroad that is located in an older industrial State; and (2) that promotes the mobility of goods and individuals.
Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the aggregate unpaid principal amounts of obligations that may be guaranteed by the Secretary under this section may not exceed $50,000,000 during any of fiscal years 1998 through 2001.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Transportation, to be used by the Secretary to make guarantees under this section, $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2001.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to Congress and the Governor of each older industrial State a report concerning the rehabilitation of the rail infrastructure of older industrial States.