Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Cost of Higher Education Review Act of 1997''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) According to a report issued by the General Accounting Office, tuition at 4-year public colleges and universities increased 234 percent from school year 1980-1981 through school year 1994-1995, while median household income rose 82 percent and the cost of consumer goods as measured by the Consumer Price Index rose 74 percent over the same time period.
A 1995 survey of college freshmen found that concern about college affordability was the highest it has been in the last 30 years.
Paying for a college education now ranks as one of the most costly investments for American families.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE COST OF HIGHER EDUCATION.
There is established a Commission to be known as the ``National Commission on the Cost of Higher Education'' (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 7 members as follows: (1) Two individuals shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House.
One individual shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House.
Two individuals shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
One individual shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
One individual shall be appointed by the Secretary of Education.
Additional Qualifications.--Each of the individuals appointed under subsection (a) shall be an individual with expertise and experience in higher education finance (including the financing of State institutions of higher education), Federal financial aid programs, education economics research, public or private higher education administration, or management of business efficiency and cost reduction programs.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairperson.
In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson will assume the duties of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Appointments.--All appointments under subsection (a) shall be made within 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
In the event that an officer authorized to make an appointment under subsection (a) has not made such appointment within such 30 days, the appointment may be made for such officer as follows: (1) the Chairman of the Committee on Education and the Workforce may act under such subsection for the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (2) the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee on Education and the Workforce may act under such subsection for the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives; (3) the Chairman of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources may act under such subsection for the Majority Leader of the Senate; and (4) the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources may act under such subsection for the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Voting.--Each member of the Commission shall be entitled to one vote, which shall be equal to the vote of every other member of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy on the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Prohibition of Additional Pay.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Members appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem, in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the government service to the extent funds are available for such expenses.
Initial Meeting.--The initial meeting of the Commission shall occur within 40 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Specific Findings and Recommendations.--The Commission shall study and make findings and specific recommendations regarding the following: (1) The increase in tuition compared with other commodities and services.
Innovative methods of reducing or stabilizing tuition.
Trends in college and university administrative costs, including administrative staffing, ratio of administrative staff to instructors, ratio of administrative staff to students, remuneration of administrative staff, and remuneration of college and university presidents or chancellors.
Trends in (A) faculty workload and remuneration (including the use of adjunct faculty), (B) faculty-to-student ratios, (C) number of hours spent in the classroom by faculty, and (D) tenure practices, and the impact of such trends on tuition.
Trends in (A) the construction and renovation of academic and other collegitate facilities, and (B) the modernization of facilities to access and utilize new technologies, and the impact of such trends on tuition.
The extent to which institutional financial aid and tuition discounting have affected tuition increases, including the demographics of students receiving such aid, the extent to which such aid is provided to students with limited need in order to attract such students to particular institutions or major fields of study, and the extent to which Federal financial aid, including loan aid, has been used to offset such increases.
The extent to which Federal, State, and local laws, regulations, or other mandates contribute to increasing tuition, and recommendations on reducing those mandates.
The establishment of a mechanism for a more timely and widespread distribution of data on tuition trends and other costs of operating colleges and universities.
The extent to which student financial aid programs have contributed to increased tuition.
Other related topics determined to be appropriate by the Commission.
Final Report.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Commission shall submit to the President and to the Congress, not later than 120 days after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, a report which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, including the Commission's recommendations for administrative and legislative action that the Commission considers advisable.
Majority vote required for recommendations.--Any recommendation described in paragraph (1) shall be made by the Commission to the President and to the Congress only if such recommendation is adopted by a majority vote of the members of the Commission who are present and voting.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, as the Commission may find advisable.
Rules and Regulations.--The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to establish the Commission's procedures and to govern the manner of the Commission's operations, organization, and personnel.
Assistance From Federal Agencies.-- (1) Information.--The Commission may request from the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality such information as the Commission may require for the purpose of this Act.
Each such agency or instrumentality shall, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the exceptions set forth in section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Freedom of Information Act), furnish such information to the Commission, upon request made by the Chairperson of the Commission.
Facilities and services, personnel detail authorized.-- Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality shall, to the extent possible and subject to the discretion of such head-- (A) make any of the facilities and services of such agency or instrumentality available to the Commission; and (B) detail any of the personnel of such agency or instrumentality to the Commission, on a nonreimbursable basis, to assist the Commission in carrying out the Commission's duties under this Act.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Contracting.--The Commission, to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, may enter into contracts with State agencies, private firms, institutions, and individuals for the purpose of conducting research or surveys necessary to enable the Commission to discharge the Commission's duties under this Act.
Staff.--Subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Commission, and to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, the Chairperson of the Commission shall have the power to appoint, terminate, and fix the compensation (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, or of any other provision, or of any other provision of law, relating to the number, classification, and General Schedule rates) of an Executive Director, and of such additional staff as the Chairperson deems advisable to assist the Commission, at rates not to exceed a rate equal to the maximum rate for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5332 of such title.
There are authorized to be appropriated to pay any expenses of the Commission such sums as may be necessary not to exceed $650,000.
Any sums appropriated for such purposes are authorized to remain available until expended, or until one year after the termination of the Commission pursuant to section 7, whichever occurs first.
The Commission shall cease to exist on the date that is 60 days after the date on which the Commission is required to submit its final report in accordance with section 4(b).