This Act may be cited as the ``Child and Family Services and Law Enforcement Partnership Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Homicide is the leading cause of death for young black males and females and is the second leading cause of juvenile injury deaths for all youth age 15-24.
Homicide rates for children and youth have more than doubled since 1950.
Teenagers are more than twice as likely as adults to be victims of violent crime, such as rape, robbery or assault.
Physical fighting severe enough to require medical treatment for at least one participant occurs among high school students in patterns similar to those of homicide.
The incidence rates are higher for males than females, higher for minorities than for nonminorities, and more frequent between acquaintances than among strangers.
There is a need to supplement existing mental health services with a wide and varied range of preventive programs designed to reach those at greatest risk for development of behavioral or social problems.
The reach of professional mental health manpower can be expanded through consultative techniques and by the recruitment, selection and training of various nontraditional helping resources.
Community-based police, by their visibility at the neighborhood level and their engagement in benign activities, can provide role models and resources to promote the well-being of children and families, as well as to identify and refer those at risk for behavioral problems.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) identify children and families at high-risk for developing behavioral or emotional problems resulting from exposure to community violence and provide mental health services to such children and families, including crisis intervention for child witnesses and victims of violence; (2) facilitate interaction between child and family service organizations, law enforcement agencies, local educational agencies, and other community members for the purpose of building coalitions for the prevention of community violence; (3) augment law enforcement services and community policing efforts through the provision of training and support by child and family service organizations, and supplement child and family services through the training of law enforcement officers in child, family and cultural issues; and (4) provide role models for high-risk children and youth and promote conflict resolution training for children and youth in local educational agencies.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Child and family service organization.--The term ``child and family service organization'' means a public or private nonprofit entity (such as child guidance centers, child psychiatry or child psychology departments of hospitals or university medical centers, or community mental health centers providing child and family services) that provides mental health services to children and families and that meets the mental health center guidelines under section 1913(c) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300x-2(c)), with respect to the level of professional care and services provided to children and families.
Community-based policing.--The term ``community-based policing'' means a commitment and an effort (within the confines of budget restrictions) made by a law enforcement agency to establish or expand cooperative efforts between the police and a community in order to increase police presence in the community, including-- (A) developing innovative neighborhood-oriented policing programs and community-based crime-prevention programs; (B) developing policies that reorient police from reacting to crime to preventing crime; and (C) creating decentralized police substations throughout the community to encourage interaction and cooperation between the public and law enforcement personnel on a local level, including the permanent assignment of officers to a specific neighborhood or substation.
Law enforcement agency.--The term ``law enforcement agency'' means an entity that serves a specified community and has the routine responsibility of policing the activities of such community.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
In General.-- (1) Establishment grants.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General, may award grants to partnerships determined to be eligible under section 6 for the establishment of child and family services and law enforcement partnership programs.
Priority.--In awarding grants described in paragraph(1), the Secretary shall give priority to a partnership that includes a law enforcement agency engaged in community-based policing.
Grant Amount.-- (1) In general.--A grant awarded under this section shall be for an amount that is not less than $150,000 per year.
Such grant shall be of a sufficient size to adequately support all anticipated activities.
Additional amounts.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may award additional grant amounts for the purpose of enabling a partnership to provide mentoring or conflict resolution services.
Special rules.-- (i) Priority for mentoring services.--In awarding additional grant funds for the provision of mentoring services under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall give priority to partnerships that demonstrate commitments from a broad spectrum of community groups to participate in mentoring programs.
Conflict resolution services.--In awarding additional grant funds for the provision of conflict resolution services under subparagraph (A), the Secretary may not award grant funds to a partnership unless such partnership demonstrates a commitment from the local educational agency to provide conflict resolution programs in the schools in participation with such partnership.
Federal Share.-- (1) In general.--The Federal share of a grant made under this section may not exceed-- (A) with respect to the first fiscal year, 80 percent of the total costs of the projects described in the application submitted under section 6 for such fiscal year; (B) with respect to the second fiscal year, 70 percent of the total costs of the projects described in the application submitted under section 6 for such fiscal year; and (C) with respect to the third fiscal year, 60 percent of the total costs of the projects described in the application submitted under section 6 for such fiscal year.
In-kind contributions.--The Secretary shall accept the value of in-kind contributions made by the grant recipient as a part or all of the non-Federal share of grants.
Grant Duration.--A grant awarded under this Act shall be for a period of not less than 3 years.
In General.--To be eligible for a grant under this section an entity shall-- (1) be a partnership consisting of, at least, a child and family service organization and a law enforcement agency; and (2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application in such form at such time and in accordance with such procedures as the Secretary shall establish.
Assurances.--Each application submitted under subsection (a) shall provide the following assurances: (1) There is a partnership established between, at least, a child and family service organization and a law enforcement agency.
The management, at the highest level, of the child and family service organization and law enforcement agency of the partnership agrees to the establishment of such partnership, and agrees that such organization and such agency of such partnership will cooperate in carrying out the program.
In developing the program, the applicant partnership has coordinated with other segments of the community to ensure that the partnership efforts complement existing community anti-violence efforts.
Programs established from funds received under grants awarded under this Act will do the following: (A) Be collaborative in nature, with respect to organizing and providing the necessary services to children and families.
Provide response to crisis situations 24 hours a day.
Be able to provide adequate resources for training of law enforcement officers and for support of professional consultation services for children and families, including professionals licensed to provide child and family evaluations and treatment.
Be able to respond to community needs in a manner reflecting sensitivity to the cultural diversity of that community.
The partnership will provide the following program components: (A) 24-hour consultation service that includes a team of child guidance professionals and specially trained law enforcement officers to respond to incidents where a child has either witnessed or been a victim of violence.
Services by child guidance professionals may include in-home assessments, expedited referrals for treatment, consultations with parents and teachers, and on-the-spot crisis intervention.
Training to law enforcement officers that includes instruction by child and family service organizations in the basic principles of human behavior, child psychology, and family systems.
All training will be interactive and jointly taught by law enforcement officers and child guidance professionals, in order to make use of real-life examples drawn from officers' experience in the field.
Such training will include the following minimum course curriculum: (i) Ongoing training for recruits, in which experienced law enforcement officers may participate as is feasible for the department.
Intensive workshops for law enforcement officers involved in field training.
A program for supervisory law enforcement officers that provides an opportunity for such officers to observe child and family clinical work in a variety of settings.
Weekly case conferences by the team of child guidance professionals and law enforcement officers described in subparagraph (A).
Community activities for children and families that are designed jointly by the law enforcement and child and family services partnership, including conflict resolution training programs for children and youth, after-school activity and neighborhood recreation programs, and parent support groups co-led by child guidance and law enforcement professionals.
The partnership will provide local matching funds in accordance with the Federal share requirements under section 5(c).
Additional Assurances for Mentoring and Conflict Resolution Services.-- (1) In general.--Each application submitted under subsection (a) for additional funding for the provision of mentoring or conflict resolution services under section 5(b)(2) shall provide assurances described in paragraph (2) or (3), whichever is applicable.
Mentoring.--With respect to the provision of mentoring services, an applicant partnership shall provide assurances that such partnership will: (A) Provide formal mentoring programs that will include mentors such as police officers, mental health professionals, businessmen, or other community members provided through a partnership with corporations, universities, labor organizations, non-profit entities (such as professional societies) or government agencies.
Provide ongoing support services to mentors through the partnership's child and family services organization, in collaboration with law enforcement officers who receive training as described in subsection (b)(5)(B).
Such services will include the following minimum components: (i) Provision of framework to help mentors understand the issues they may encounter in working with youth from deprived environments.
Ongoing support groups that meet at a regularly scheduled time to provide mentors an opportunity to discuss the problems such mentors may encounter in working with children.
Collaborate, when possible, with elementary and secondary schools, universities, corporations, labor organizations, or government agencies with respect to matters relating to the partnership's mentoring program.
Recruit mentors who are representative of the cultural mix of the community such mentors serve.
Conflict resolution.--With respect to the provision of conflict resolution services, an applicant partnership shall provide the following assurances: (A) The child and family services organization and the law enforcement agency partnership, in collaboration with the local educational agency (hereafter referred to in this subparagraph as the ``LEA'') will assist the LEA in the development and implementation of conflict resolution programs.
The assistance provided to the LEA in the preceding sentence shall be tailored to the needs and resources of the local school district, and may include providing assistance to an ongoing conflict resolution program run by such LEA, developing curricula for such a program in cooperation with the LEA, and providing such a program to an LEA.
Evaluation.-- (1) In general.--Applicants shall include in their application the design of an evaluation of program effectiveness in providing services under this Act, including a provision for an adequate control group, such as a nearby community of similar composition and level of violence.
Collaborations.--To facilitate the evaluation process, the Secretary shall encourage partnership grantees to form collaborative relationships with universities for the purpose of evaluating program effectiveness under paragraph (1).
Partnership grantees shall contract with outside organizations for such evaluation.
Limitation.--Not more than 15 percent of grants awarded under section 5 may be set aside for the evaluation described in paragraph (1).
Coordination.--The Secretary shall coordinate the evaluation described in paragraph (1) of all partnership grantees and ensure that such grantees collect comparable data for such evaluation.
TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
The Secretary shall provide training and technical assistance to partnership grantees.
Interim.--Not later than December 31, 1996, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress an interim progress report on the evaluation conducted under section 6(d).
Final.--Not later than December 31, 1998, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a review and summary of the result of the evaluation conducted under section 6(d).
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1999.