FEDERAL REAL PROPERTY DISPOSAL PILOT PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 5 of subtitle I of title 40, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER VII--EXPEDITED DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY ``Sec.
Pilot program ``(a) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget (in this subchapter referred to as the `Director') shall conduct a pilot program, to be known as the `Federal Real Property Disposal Pilot Program', under which real property that is not meeting Federal Government needs may be disposed of in accordance with this subchapter.
For purposes of this subchapter, the Director shall identify criteria for determining whether real property is not meeting Federal Government needs.
For the fiscal years 2010 through 2019, the Director shall dispose of real property generating proceeds of not less $19,000,000,000 under the Federal Real Property Disposal Pilot Program.
The Director shall not include for purposes of the Federal Real Property Pilot Program any parcel of real property, building, or other structure located on such real property that is to be closed or realigned under the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (10 United States Code 2687 note).
The Federal Real Property Disposal Pilot Program shall terminate on September 30, 2019.
Selection of real properties ``Agencies will recommend candidate disposition properties to the Director for participation in the pilot program.
The Director, with the concurrence of the head of the executive agency concerned and consistent with the criteria established in section 621, may then select such candidate properties for participation in the pilot program and notify the recommending agency accordingly.
Expedited disposal requirements ``(a) For purposes of the pilot program, an `expedited disposal of a real property' is a sale of real property for cash that is conducted pursuant to the requirements of section 545 of this title.
Real property sold under the pilot program must be sold at not less than the fair market value as determined by the Director in consultation with the head of the executive agency.
Costs associated with disposal may not exceed the fair market value of the property unless the Director approves incurring such costs.
A real property may be sold under the pilot program only if the property will generate monetary proceeds to the Federal Government, as provided in subsection (b).
A disposal of real property under the pilot program may not include any exchange, trade, transfer, acquisition of like-kind property, or other non-cash transaction as part of the disposal.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as terminating or in any way limiting authorities that are otherwise available to agencies under other provisions of law to dispose of Federal real property, except as provided in subsection (e).
Any expedited disposal of a real property conducted under this section shall not be subject to-- ``(1) subchapter IV of this chapter; ``(2) sections 550 and 553 of title 40, United States Code; ``(3) section 501 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11411); ``(4) any other provision of law authorizing the no-cost conveyance of real property owned by the Federal Government; or ``(5) any congressional notification requirement other than that in section 545 of this title.
Special rules for deposit and use of proceeds from expedited disposals ``(a) Agencies that conduct expedited disposals of real properties under this subchapter shall be reimbursed from the proceeds for the administrative expenses associated with the disposal of such properties.
Such amounts will be credited as offsetting collections to the account that incurred such expenses, to remain available until expended without further appropriations.
After payment of such administrative costs, the balance of the proceeds shall be distributed as follows: ``(1) Eighty percent shall be deposited into the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
Twenty percent shall be deposited into the account of the agency that owned the real property and initiated the disposal action.
Such funds shall be available without further appropriation, to remain available for the period of the pilot program, for activities related to Federal real property capital improvements and disposal activities.
Upon termination of the pilot program, any unobligated amounts shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 5 of subtitle I of title 40, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 611 the following: ``subchapter vii--expedited disposal of real property ``Sec.
Selection of real properties.
Special rules for deposit and use of proceeds from expedited disposals.