TEMPORARY 4.3-CENT REDUCTION IN CERTAIN FUEL TAX RATES.
In General.--Section 4081 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to imposition of tax on gasoline and diesel fuel) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Temporary 4.3-Cent Reduction in Certain Fuel Tax Rates.-- ``(1) In general.--During the temporary rate reduction period, each rate of tax referred to in paragraph (2) shall be reduced by 4.3 cents per gallon.
Rate of tax.--The rates of tax referred to in this paragraph are-- ``(A) each rate of tax under subsection (a)(2)(A) (relating to gasoline and diesel fuel), ``(B) each rate of tax under paragraph (1) or (2) of section 4041(a) (relating to diesel fuel and special fuels), and ``(C) the rate of tax under section 4041(m)(1)(A)(i) (relating to certain methanol or ethanol fuels).
Comparable treatment for compressed natural gas.--No tax shall be imposed by section 4041(a)(3) on any sale or use during the temporary rate reduction period.
Comparable treatment under certain refund rules.--In the case of fuel on which tax is imposed during the temporary rate reduction period, each of the rates specified in sections 6421(f)(3)(B)(ii), 6427(b)(2)(A), and 6427(l)(3)(B)(ii) shall be reduced by 4.3 cents per gallon.
Coordination with highway trust fund deposits.--In the case of fuel on which tax is imposed during the temporary rate reduction period, each of the rates specified in subparagraphs (A)(i) and (C)(i) of section 9503(f)(3) shall be reduced by 4.3 cents per gallon.
Temporary rate reduction period.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `temporary rate reduction period' means the period after the date of the enactment of this subsection and before January 1, 1997.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--If-- (1) before the date of the enactment of this Act, tax has been imposed under section 4081 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on any liquid, and (2) on such date such liquid is held by a dealer and has not been used and is intended for sale, there shall be credited or refunded (without interest) to the person who paid such tax (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``taxpayer'') an amount equal to the excess of the tax paid by the taxpayer over the amount of such tax which would be imposed on such liquid had the taxable event occurred on such date.
Time For Filing Claims.--No credit or refund shall be allowed or made under this section unless-- (1) claim therefor is filed with the Secretary of the Treasury before the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, based on a request submitted to the taxpayer before the date which is 3 months after such date of enactment, by the dealer who held the liquid on such date of enactment, and (2) the taxpayer has repaid or agreed to repay the amount so claimed to such dealer or has obtained the written consent of such dealer to the allowance of the credit or the making of the refund.
Exception For Fuel Held In Retail Stocks.--No credit or refund shall be allowed under this section with respect to any liquid in retail stocks held at the place where intended to be sold at retail.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms ``dealer'' and ``held by a dealer'' have the respective meanings given to such terms by section 6412 of such Code.
Certain Rules To Apply.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (b) and (c) of section 6412 of such Code shall apply for purposes of this section.
Imposition of Tax.--In the case of gasoline or diesel fuel on which tax was imposed under section 4081 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 before January 1, 1997, and which is held on such date by any person, there is hereby imposed a floor stocks tax of 4.3 cents per gallon.
Liability for Tax and Method of Payment.-- (1) Liability for tax.--A person holding gasoline or diesel fuel on January 1, 1997, to which the tax imposed by subsection (a) applies shall be liable for such tax.
Method of payment.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Time for payment.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid on or before June 30, 1997.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) Held by a person.--Gasoline and diesel fuel shall be considered as ``held by a person'' if title thereto has passed to such person (whether or not delivery to the person has been made).
Gasoline and diesel fuel.--The terms ``gasoline'' and diesel fuel have the respective meanings given such terms by section 4082 of such Code.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate.
Exception for Exempt Uses.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall not apply to gasoline or diesel fuel held by any person exclusively for any use to the extent a credit or refund of the tax imposed by section 4081 of such Code is allowable for such use.
Exception for Fuel Held in Vehicle Tank.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) on gasoline or diesel fuel held in the tank of a motor vehicle or motorboat.
Exception for Certain Amounts of Fuel.-- (1) In general.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a)-- (A) on gasoline held on January 1, 1997, by any person if the aggregate amount of gasoline held by such person on such date does not exceed 4,000 gallons, and (B) on diesel fuel held on such date by any person if the aggregate amount of diesel fuel held by such person on such date does not exceed 2,000 gallons.
The preceding sentence shall apply only if such person submits to the Secretary (at the time and in the manner required by the Secretary) such information as the Secretary shall require for purposes of this paragraph.
Exempt fuel.--For purposes of paragraph (1), there shall not be taken into account fuel held by any person which is exempt from the tax imposed by subsection (a) by reason of subsection (d) or (e).
Controlled groups.--For purposes of this subsection-- (A) Corporations.-- (i) In general.--All persons treated as a controlled group shall be treated as 1 person.
Controlled group.--The term ``controlled group'' has the meaning given to such term by subsection (a) of section 1563 of such Code; except that for such purposes the phrase ``more than 50 percent'' shall be substituted for the phrase ``at least 80 percent'' each place it appears in such subsection.
Nonincorporated persons under common control.-- Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, principles similar to the principles of subparagraph (A) shall apply to a group of persons under common control where 1 or more of such persons is not a corporation.
Other Law Applicable.--All provisions of law, including penalties, applicable with respect to the taxes imposed by section 4081 of such Code shall, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this subsection, apply with respect to the floor stock taxes imposed by subsection (a) to the same extent as if such taxes were imposed by such section 4081.
REPEAL OF BENEFITS FOR ALCOHOL FUELS.
Repeal of Alcohol Fuels Credit.-- (1) In general.--Section 40 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to alcohol used as fuel) is hereby repealed.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as paragraphs (3) through (7), respectively.
Section 87 of such Code is hereby repealed.
Subsection (c) of section 196 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively.
Subsection (n) of section 6501 of such Code is amended by striking ``40(f)''.
The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 40.
The table of sections for part II of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 87.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act (b) Repeal of Reduced Fuel Tax Rates.-- (1) Gasoline and diesel fuel.--Section 4081 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (c) and by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively.
Aviation fuel.--Section 4091 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (c).
Special motor fuels.-- (A) Section 4041 of such Code is amended by striking subsections (k) and (m).
Subsection (b) of section 4041 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (2).
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 6427 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (f).
Subsection (i) of section 6427 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3).
(i) Subsection (e) of section 9502 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (2).
Subsection (f) of section 9502 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (2) and by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).-- (D) Subsection (f) of section 9503 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3).
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.