LEGAL ASSISTANCE FOR FINANCIALLY NEEDY VETERANS IN CONNECTION WITH COURT OF VETERANS APPEALS PROCEEDINGS.
In General.--Subchapter III of chapter 72 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Legal assistance for financially needy veterans in proceedings before Court ``(a)(1) The Court of Veterans Appeals may provide funds in order to provide financial assistance by grant or contract to legal assistance entities for purposes of programs described in subsection (b).
The Court shall seek to provide funds for such purpose through a nonprofit organization selected by it.
If the Court determines that there exists no nonprofit organization that would be an appropriate recipient of funds under this section for the purposes referred to in paragraph (1) and that it is consistent with the mission of the Court, the Court shall provide financial assistance, by grant or contract, directly to legal assistance entities for purposes of permitting such entities to carry out programs described in subsection (b).
(1) A program referred to in subsection (a) is any program under which a legal assistance entity uses financial assistance under this section to provide assistance or carry out activities (including assistance, services, or activities referred to in paragraph (3)) in order to ensure that individuals described in paragraph (2) receive, without charge, legal assistance in connection with decisions to which section 7252(a) of this title may apply or with other proceedings before the Court.
An individual referred to in paragraph (1) is any veteran or other person who-- ``(A) is or seeks to be a party to an action before the Court; and ``(B) cannot, as determined by the Court or the entity concerned, afford the costs of legal advice and representation in connection with that action.
Assistance, services, and activities under a program described in this subsection may include the following for individuals described in paragraph (2) in connection with proceedings before the Court: ``(A) Financial assistance to defray the expenses of legal advice or representation (other than payment of attorney fees) by attorneys, clinical law programs of law schools, and veterans service organizations.
Case screening and referral services for purposes of referring cases to pro bono attorneys and such programs and organizations.
Education and training of attorneys and other legal personnel who may appear before the Court by attorneys and such programs and organizations.
Encouragement and facilitation of the pro bono representation by attorneys and such programs and organizations.
A legal assistance entity that receives financial assistance described in subsection (a) to carry out a program under this subsection shall make such contributions (including in-kind contributions) to the program as the nonprofit organization or the Court, as the case may be, shall specify when providing the assistance.
A legal assistance entity that receives financial assistance under subsection (a) to carry out a program described in this subsection may not require or request the payment of a charge or fee in connection with the program by or on behalf of any individual described in paragraph (2).
(1) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Court $750,000 for fiscal year 1998 and the same amount for each succeeding fiscal year through fiscal year 2001, increased by 3 percent per year, to carry out this section.
Funds appropriated under this subsection may be used only for the purposes of subsection (a).
Such funds may be provided in advance or by way of reimbursement, to cover some or all of the administrative costs of the organization or entity receiving the funds in providing financial assistance to carry out programs described in subsection (b).
Funds shall be provided under this subsection pursuant to a written agreement entered into by the Court and the organization or entity receiving the funds from the Court.
A nonprofit organization may-- ``(1) accept funds, in advance or by way of reimbursement, from the Court under subsection (a) in order to provide the financial assistance referred to in that subsection; ``(2) provide financial assistance by grant or contract to legal assistance entities under this section for purposes of permitting such entities to carry out programs described in subsection (b); ``(3) administer any such grant or contract; and ``(4) accept funds, in advance or by way of reimbursement, from the Court under subsection (c) in order to cover the administrative costs referred to in that subsection.
(1) Not later than February 1 of each year, the Court shall submit to the Congress a report on the funds and financial assistance provided under this section during the preceding fiscal year.
Based on the information provided the Court by entities receiving such funds and assistance, each report shall-- ``(A) set forth the amount, if any, of funds provided to nonprofit organizations under paragraph (2) of subsection (a) during the fiscal year covered by the report; ``(B) set forth the amount, if any, of financial assistance provided to legal assistance entities pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection (a) or under paragraph (2) of that subsection during that fiscal year; ``(C) set forth the amount, if any, of funds provided to nonprofit organizations under subsection (c) during that fiscal year; and ``(D) describe the programs carried out under this section during that fiscal year.
The Court may require that any nonprofit organization and any legal assistance entity to which funds or financial assistance are provided under this section provide the Court with such information on the programs carried out under this section as the Court determines necessary to prepare a report under this subsection.
For the purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `nonprofit organization' means any not-for- profit organization that is involved with the provision of legal assistance to persons unable to afford such assistance.
The term `legal assistance entity' means a not-for- profit organization or veterans service organization capable of providing legal assistance to persons with respect to matters before the Court.
The term `veterans service organization' means an organization referred to in section 5902(a)(1) of this title, including an organization approved by the Secretary under that section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7286 the following new item: ``7287.
Legal assistance for financially needy veterans in proceedings before Court.