BAN ON DISCLOSURE OF MEDICAL QUALITY ASSURANCE INFORMATION.
Subsection (a) of section 5705 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2)(A) Except as provided in subsection (b), no part of any medical quality assurance record or document described in subsection (a)(1) may be subject to discovery or admitted into evidence in any judicial or administrative proceeding.
An individual who reviews or creates medical quality assurance records or documents for the Department or who participates in any proceeding that reviews or creates such records or documents may not be permitted or required to testify in any judicial or administrative proceeding with respect to such records or documents or with respect to any finding, recommendation, evaluation, opinion, or action taken by such person in connection with such records or documents except as provided in this section.''.
Clarification of Coverage.--Subsection (b)(1) of section 5705 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``or document'' in the matter above subparagraph (A) and inserting in lieu thereof ``, document, or testimony''.
Disclosure for Professional Use.--Such subsection is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(E) In an administrative or judicial proceeding commenced by a criminal or civil law enforcement agency or instrumentality referred to in subparagraph (C), but only concerning the subject of such proceeding.
To a governmental board or agency or to a professional health care society or organization, if such record or document is needed by the board, agency, society, or organization to issue a professional license or credential to or to monitor the compliance with professional standards of any health care provider who is or was an employee of the Department.
To a hospital, medical center, or other institution that provides health care services, if such record or document is needed by the institution to assess the professional qualifications of any health care provider who is or was an employee of the Department and who has applied for or been granted authority or employment to provide health care services in or on behalf of such institution.
To an administrative or judicial proceeding commenced by a present or former Department health care provider concerning the termination, suspension or limitation of the clinical privileges of such health care provider, or concerning any adverse action involving such health care provider, but only to the extent that such records or documents relate to the clinical conduct or performance of the individual who has commenced the action.''.
Removal of Identities.--Subsection (b)(2) of such section is amended by striking out ``if disclosure'' and all that follows through ``personal privacy'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subparagraphs (1)(A) and (1)(B) of this subsection''.
Paragraph (3) of section 5705(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(3) A person or entity having possession of, or access to, information, records, or documents, or testimony relating thereto, that is subject to the provisions of this section may not disclose such information, records, or documents, or any testimony relating thereto, in any manner or for any purpose except for a purpose as provided in this subsection.
No person or entity to whom a record or document has been disclosed under this subsection shall make further disclosure of such record or document except for a purpose provided in this subsection.''.
Subsection (b) of section 5705 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(7) Medical quality assurance records and documents described in subsection (a) which are subject to section 552a of title 5 may not be disclosed in accordance with that section except to the extent that such disclosure is also authorized under this section.
Medical quality assurance records or documents described in subsection (a) which are also subject to section 552a of title 5-- ``(A) shall not be subject to the access provisions of such section 552a to the extent that such access would reveal the identities of participants in the quality assurance process which generated the records or documents; and ``(B) are not subject to the amendment provisions of such section 552a.
Medical quality assurance records and documents described in subsection (a) may not be made available to any person under section 552 of title 5.''.
Subsection (d)(2) of section 5705 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``specified in'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``accomplished in accordance with''.