SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Sustaining Access to Vital Emergency Medical Services Act of 2000''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Rural emergency medical service training and equipment assistance program.
Tax credit for volunteer emergency medical service providers.
Study and report on the costs of rural ambulance services.
Elimination of reduction in inflation adjustments for ambulance services.
RURAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE TRAINING AND EQUIPMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
Part E of title XII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300d-51 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
RURAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE TRAINING AND EQUIPMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
Grants.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration (referred to in this section as the `Secretary') shall award grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to provide for improved emergency medical services in rural areas.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, an entity shall-- ``(1) be-- ``(A) a State emergency medical services office; ``(B) a State department of Transportation; ``(C) a State emergency medical services association; ``(D) a State office of rural health; or ``(E) any other entity determined appropriate by the Secretary; and ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, that includes-- ``(A) a description of the activities to be carried out under the grant; and ``(B) an assurance that the applicant will comply with the matching requirement of subsection (d).
Use of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--An entity shall use amounts received under a grant made under subsection (a), either directly or through grants to emergency medical service squads that are located in, or that serve residents of, non-metropolitan statistical areas, to-- ``(A) hire or recruit emergency medical service personnel; ``(B) recruit or retain volunteer emergency medical service personnel; ``(C) train emergency medical service personnel in emergency response, injury prevention, safety awareness, and other topics relevant to the delivery of emergency medical services; ``(D) fund specific training to meet State certification requirements; ``(E) develop new ways to educate emergency health care providers through the use of technology-enhanced educational methods (such as distance learning); ``(F) acquire emergency medical services vehicles, including ambulances; ``(G) acquire emergency medical services equipment, including cardiac defibrillators; ``(H) acquire personal protective equipment for emergency medical services personnel as required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration; and ``(I) educate the public concerning cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), first aid, injury prevention, safety awareness, illness prevention, and other related emergency preparedness topics.
Preference.--In awarding grants under this section the Secretary shall give preference to entities that intend to use amounts provided under the grant to fund activities described in any of subparagraphs (A) through (E) of paragraph (1).
Matching Requirement.--The Director may not make a grant under this section to an entity unless the entity agrees that the entity will make available (directly or through contributions from other public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward the activities to be carried out under the grant in an amount equal to 5 percent of the amount received under the grant.
Emergency Medical Services.--In this section, the term `emergency medical services'-- ``(1) means resources used by a qualified public or private nonprofit entity, or by any other entity recognized as qualified by the State involved, to deliver medical care outside of a medical facility under emergency conditions that occur-- ``(A) as a result of the condition of the patient; or ``(B) as a result of a natural disaster or similar situation; and ``(2) includes services delivered by an emergency medical services provider (either compensated or volunteer) or other provider recognized by the State involved that is licensed or certified by the State as an emergency medical technician, a para- medic, a registered nurse, a physician assistant, or a physician that provides services similar to services provided by such an emergency medical services provider.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2006.
Administrative costs.--The Director may use not more than 10 percent of the amount appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year for the administrative expenses of carrying out this section.''.
TAX CREDIT FOR VOLUNTEER EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE PROVIDERS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
VOLUNTEER EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE PROVIDER CREDIT.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an eligible volunteer emergency medical service provider, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to $500.
Eligible Volunteer Emergency Medical Service Provider.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `eligible volunteer emergency medical service provider' means an individual who-- ``(A) is an emergency medical service provider or other provider (within the meaning of section 1253(e)(2) of the Public Health Service Act) providing emergency medical services in connection with an emergency medical service squad, ``(B) volunteers with respect to such services, and ``(C) is listed as active on the official staff roster of such squad for the taxable year.
Emergency medical services.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `emergency medical services' means-- ``(A) emergency medical services (as defined in section 1253(e)(1) of such Act), and ``(B) any other services provided in relation to such emergency medical services, such as administrative and operational duties and community education and training programs.
Volunteer.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `volunteer' means to provide services without compensation, other than reimbursement or payment of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the emergency medical service provider's duty.''.
Verification.--The Secretary may require additional information to be provided, in such form and such manner as the Secretary deems necessary, to verify the eligibility for the credit under this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Volunteer emergency services provider credit.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.
STUDY AND REPORT ON THE COSTS OF RURAL AMBULANCE SERVICES.
Study.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Rural Health Policy and with the assistance of the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration, shall conduct a study of the means by which rural areas with low population densities can be identified for the purpose of designating areas in which the cost of providing ambulance services would be expected to be higher than similar services provided in more heavily populated areas because of low usage.
Such study shall also include-- (1) an examination of the cost differences between independent volunteer ambulance providers and hospital-based ambulance providers serving rural areas; and (2) an identification and analysis of the factors that contribute to the additional costs of providing ambulance services in areas designated under the previous sentence.
Report.--Not later than June 30, 2001, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the study conducted under this section, together with a proposed regulation based on that study which adjusts the fee schedule under section 1834(l) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395m(l)) with respect to payment rates for ambulance services provided in low density rural areas to take into account the increased cost of providing such services in such areas.
Implementation of Regulation.--The regulation submitted under clause (ii) shall take effect not later than January 1, 2002.
ELIMINATION OF REDUCTION IN INFLATION ADJUSTMENTS FOR AMBULANCE SERVICES.
Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 1834(l)(3) (42 United States Code 1395m(l)(3)(A)) are each amended by striking ``reduced in the case of 2001 and 2002 by 1.0 percentage points'' and inserting ``increased in the case of 2001 by 1.0 percentage point''.