This Act may be cited as the ``Quality Classrooms Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to support local educational agencies by awarding grants for-- (1) the implementation of specific measures, as selected by local educational agencies from a local accountability menu, that have been proven to increase the quality of education; and (2) the conduct of other activities that local educational agencies demonstrate will provide enhanced individual instruction for the students served by the agencies.
In this Act: (1) Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the same meaning given that term under section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Local Accountability Menu Grants.-- (1) Program authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants to local educational agencies to be used for the activities described in paragraph (3).
Application.-- (A) In general.--A local educational agency desiring a grant under this subsection shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted under subparagraph (A) shall include-- (i) a description of the local educational agency's plan of activities for which grant funds under this subsection are sought; (ii) a detailed budget of anticipated grant fund expenditures; (iii) a detailed description of the methodology that the local educational agency will use to evaluate the effectiveness of grants received by such agency under this subsection; and (iv) such assurances as the Secretary determines to be essential to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Act.
Authorized activities.--Grant funds awarded under this subsection may be used for one or more of the following measures, collectively established as the local accountability menu: (A) Reduction of student-teacher ratios through the hiring of new classroom teachers.
School construction assistance for the purpose of relieving overcrowded classrooms and reducing the use of portable classrooms.
Hiring of additional experienced teachers who specialize in teaching core subjects such as reading, math, and science, and who will provide increased individualized instruction to students served by the local educational agency.
Alternative programs for the education and discipline of chronically violent and disruptive students.
Assistance to facilitate the local educational agency's establishment of a year-round school schedule that will allow the agency to increase pay for veteran teachers and reduce the agency's need to hire additional teachers or construct new facilities.
Administrative cap.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this subsection shall not use more than 3 percent of the funds received for administrative expenses.
Innovation Grants.-- (1) Program authorized.--The Secretary shall reserve 10 percent of the amount made available to carry out this Act in each fiscal year to award grants, on a competitive basis, to local educational agencies for the local educational agencies to carry out the activities described in paragraph (3).
Application.-- (A) In general.--A local educational agency desiring a grant under this subsection shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted under subparagraph (A) shall include-- (i) a description of the local educational agency's plan of activities for which grant funds under this subsection are sought; (ii) a detailed budget of anticipated grant fund expenditures; (iii) a detailed description of the methodology that the local educational agency will use to evaluate the effectiveness of grants received by such agency under this subsection; and (iv) such assurances as the Secretary determines to be essential to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Act.
Authorized activities.--Each local educational agency receiving a grant under this subsection shall use the amounts received under the grant for one or more activities that the local educational agency sufficiently demonstrates, as determined by the Secretary, will provide enhanced individual instruction for students served by the agency, but that are not part of the local accountability menu described in subsection (a)(3).
Limitation.--No funds awarded under this subsection shall be used for tuition payments for students at private schools or for public school choice programs.
Administrative cap.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this subsection shall not use more than 3 percent of the funds received for administrative expenses.
Administrative Cap.--The Secretary shall expend not more than 0.25 percent of the funds made available to carry out this Act on administrative costs.
Funding to Indian Tribes.--From the amount made available to carry out this Act for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve 0.75 percent to awards grants to Indian tribes to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Formula.--From the amount made available to carry out this Act for any fiscal year, and remaining after the reservations under subsections (a) and (b) and under section 4(b)(1), the Secretary shall distribute such remaining amounts among the local education agencies as follows: (1) 80 percent of such amount shall be allocated among such eligible, local educational agencies in proportion to the number of children, aged 5 to 17, who reside in the school district served by such local educational agency from families with incomes below the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)) applicable to a family of the size involved for the most recent fiscal year for which satisfactory data are available as compared to the number of such children who reside in the school districts served by all eligible, local educational agencies for the fiscal year involved.
20 percent of such amount shall be allocated among such eligible local educational agencies in proportion to the relative enrollments of children, aged 5 to 17, in public and private nonprofit elementary and secondary schools within the boundaries of such agencies.
Limitation on Carryover.--Not more than 20 percent of the funds allocated to a local educational agency for any fiscal year under this Act may remain available for obligation by such agency for 1 additional fiscal year.
If the Secretary determines that the local educational agency has used funds in violation of the provisions of this Act or the regulations promulgated by the Secretary pursuant to section 8, the Secretary may impose an appropriate sanction that may include reimbursement or ineligibility for additional funds for a period of years, depending upon the severity of the misuse of funds.
Report to the Secretary.--At such time as the Secretary deems appropriate, and not less than once each year thereafter, each recipient of a grant under this Act shall submit to the Secretary a report that includes, for the year to which the report relates-- (1) a description of how the funds made available under this Act were expended in correlation with the plan and budget submitted under sections 4(a)(2) and 4(b)(2), as applicable; and (2) an evaluation of the effectiveness of the grant received under this Act, as required by sections 4(a)(2)(B) and 4(b)(2)(B), as applicable.
Documents and Information.--Each recipient of a grant under this Act shall provide the Secretary with all documents and information that the Secretary reasonably determines to be necessary to conduct an evaluation of the effectiveness of programs funded under this Act.
The Secretary shall issue such regulations and guidelines as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall provide specific notification concerning the availability of grants authorized by this Act to each local educational agency.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to modify or affect any Federal or State law prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race, religion, color, ethnicity, national origin, gender, age, or disability, or to modify or affect any right to enforcement of this Act that may exist under other Federal laws, except as expressly provided by this Act.
Funds made available under this Act shall be used to supplement, not supplant, any other Federal, State, or local funds that would otherwise be available to carry out the activities assisted under this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $50,000,000,000 for the 10-fiscal year period beginning on October 1, 2002.