PROGRAMS REGARDING EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP AND PARTICIPATION.
Establishment of Program.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a program to facilitate the establishment of State programs to foster increased employee ownership and greater employee participation in business decisionmaking throughout the United States.
Purpose of Program.--The Secretary shall establish the program under subsection (a) to encourage State programs which focus on the following: (1) Activities involving education and outreach to inform individuals about the possibilities and benefits of employee ownership, gainsharing, and participation in business decisionmaking, including financial education.
Activities involving technical assistance to assist employee efforts to become business owners.
Training activities for employees and employers with respect to methods of employee participation in business decisionmaking.
Activities involving training other organizations to apply for funding under this section.
Program Details.--In focusing on activities referred to in subsection (b), the Secretary may include in the program provisions that would-- (1) in the case of activities under subsection (b)(1)-- (A) target key groups such as retiring business owners, unions, managers, trade associations, and community organizations; (B) encourage cooperation in organizing workshops and conferences; and (C) provide for the preparation and distribution of materials concerning employee ownership and participation; (2) in the case of activities under subsection (b)(2)-- (A) provide for the performance of prefeasibility assessments; (B) provide assistance in the funding of objective third party feasibility studies; and (C) provide a data bank to help employees find legal, financial, and technical advice in connection with company ownership; (3) in the case of activities under subsection (b)(3)-- (A) provide for courses on employee participation; and (B) provide for the development and fostering of networks of employee-owned companies to spread the use of successful participation techniques; and (4) in the case of activities under subsection (b)(4)-- (A) provide for visits to existing programs qualified under this Act by staff from new programs receiving funding under this Act; and (B) provide materials to be used by organizations qualified under this Act.
Regulations.--Regulations issued by the Secretary pursuant to this Act shall include provisions assuring that any program within the several States established for the purposes of this Act be-- (1) proactive in encouraging actions and activities that will promote and encourage employee ownership of companies and participation in decisionmaking in such companies; and (2) comprehensive in emphasizing both employee ownership of companies and employee participation in company decisionmaking so as to boost productivity and broaden capital ownership.
Grants.--Any program established pursuant to subsection (a) shall provide for grants to the program within the several States in accordance with section 4.
OFFICE OF EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP AND PARTICIPATION.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish, within the Department of Labor, the Office of Employee Ownership and Participation (hereafter referred to as the ``Office'') to promote employee ownership, gainsharing, and employee participation in company decisionmaking.
Functions.--The functions of the Office are to-- (1) support programs within the several States approved by the Secretary as being in compliance with the program established pursuant to section 1; and (2) facilitate the formation of new programs within the several States for the purpose of accomplishing the goals of this Act.
Duties.--In carrying out its functions under subsection (b), the Office shall-- (1) in the case of activities under subsection (b)(1), support those programs within the several States that are designed to achieve the goals and purposes set forth in this Act and to provide such support by-- (A) making matching Federal grants under section 4; and (B) acting as a clearinghouse on techniques employed by the programs within the several States and disseminating information to such programs, or funding such information gathering and dissemination programs by groups outside the Office; and (2) in the case of activities under subsection (b)(2), facilitate the formation of new programs by encouraging the establishment of such programs in each of the 50 States, including the holding or funding of an annual conference to bring together representatives from States with existing programs and representatives from States without such existing programs.
ORGANIZATION OF THE OFFICE.
Director.--There shall be at the head of the Office a Director of Employee Ownership and Participation (hereafter referred to as the ``Director'') who shall be appointed by the Secretary.
Employees.--In carrying out the functions of the Office, the Director may select, appoint, employ, and fix the compensation of such employees as shall be necessary to carry out the functions of the Office.
In General.--For the purpose of making grants authorized under the program established pursuant to section 1, the Office is authorized to make grants for use in connection with programs within the several States for any of the following activities: (1) Education and outreach.
Technical studies, including prefeasibility and feasibility studies.
Activities facilitating cooperation among employee ownership firms.
Training for newly formed organizations to be provided by existing organizations qualified under this Act, except that such funding shall not exceed 10 percent of the total grants under this Act.
Matching.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), grants under this section shall be made by the Office on a matching basis, $1 of Federal money for every 50 cents of non- Federal money.
Grants for certain training.--Grants for activities described in subsection (a)(5) shall not require non-Federal matching contributions.
Applications.--The Office shall prescribe the form and information necessary for applications for grants under this section.
Amounts and Conditions.--The Office shall determine the amounts and the conditions for grants made under this section.
Grants on Behalf of Other Entities.-- (1) State applications.--Each of the several States may sponsor and submit applications on behalf of units of State or local governments, State-supported institutions of higher education, and nonprofit organization programs meeting the requirements of this Act, but in no case shall the aggregate amounts of these grants made to any unit of State or local government, State-supported institutions of higher education, or nonprofit organization programs exceed the amount set forth in subsection (g).
Applications by entities.--In any case in which a State fails to establish a program pursuant to this Act during any fiscal year, the Secretary shall allow in the subsequent fiscal year entities described in paragraph (1) to make applications for grants on their own initiative.
States may submit applications to the program in subsequent years but may not screen applications by such entities before submission to the program.
Annual Report.--Each grant recipient shall submit an annual report to the Office setting forth how all moneys from grants pursuant to this Act were expended during the 12-month period preceding the date of the submission of the report.
Limitations.--Grants to each of the recipients shall be limited for each fiscal year as follows: (1) Fiscal year 1995, not to exceed, in the aggregate $200,000.
Fiscal year 1996, not to exceed, in the aggregate $220,000.
Fiscal year 1997, not to exceed, in the aggregate $242,000.
Fiscal year 1998, not to exceed, in the aggregate $266,200.
Fiscal year 1999, not to exceed, in the aggregate $292,000.
In General.--For the purpose of making grants pursuant to section 4, there are authorized to be appropriated the following: (1) For fiscal year 1995, $2,500,000.
For fiscal year 1996, $4,250,000.
For fiscal year 1997, $6,000,000.
For fiscal year 1998, $7,750,000.
For fiscal year 1999, $9,500,000.
Administrative Expenses.--For the purpose of funding the Office, there is authorized to be appropriated for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1999 an amount not in excess of the lesser of-- (1) $250,000, or (2) 7.5 percent of the maximum amount available under subsection (a).
Not later than the expiration of the 36-month period following the date of enactment of this Act, the Director shall report to the Congress on the progress of employee ownership and participation in businesses in the United States.
The report shall include a critical cost and benefit analysis of program activities.