This Act may be cited as the ``Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System Act of 1996''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) there are insufficient water supplies of reasonable quality available to the members of the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System located in Fall River County, South Dakota, and the water supplies that are available are of poor quality and do not meet the minimum health and safety standards, thereby posing a threat to public health and safety; (2) past cycles of severe drought in the southeastern area of Fall River county have left local residents without a satisfactory water supply and during 1990, many home owners and ranchers were forced to haul water to sustain their water needs; (3) most members of the Fall River Water Users District are forced to either haul bottled water for human consumption or use distillers due to the poor quality of water supplies available; (4) the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System has been recognized by the State of South Dakota; and (5) the best available, reliable, and safe rural and municipal water supply to serve the needs of the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System members consists of a Madison Aquifer well, 3 separate water storage reservoirs, 3 pumping stations, and approximately 200 miles of pipeline.
Purposes.--The Congress declares that the purposes of sections 1 through 13 are to-- (1) ensure a safe and adequate municipal, rural, and industrial water supply for the members of the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System in Fall River County, South Dakota; (2) assist the citizens of the Fall River Water Users District to develop safe and adequate municipal, rural, and industrial water supplies; and (3) promote the implementation of water conservation programs by the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System.
As used in this Act (unless the context clearly requires otherwise): (1) Engineering report.--The term ``engineering report'' means the study entitled ``Supplemental Preliminary Engineering Report for Fall River Water Users District'' in August 1995.
Project construction budget.--The term ``project construction budget'' means the description of the total amount of funds that are needed for the construction of the water supply system, as contained in the feasibility study.
Pumping and incidental operational requirements.--The term ``pumping and incidental operational requirements'' means all power requirements that are incidental to the operation of intake facilities, pumping stations, water treatment facilities, cooling facilities, reservoirs, and pipelines up to the point of delivery of water by the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System to each entity that distributes water at retail to individual users.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Water supply system.--The term ``water supply system'' means the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System that is established and operated substantially in accordance with the feasibility study.
FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System, a nonprofit corporation, for the planning and construction of the water supply system.
Service Area.--The water supply system shall provide for safe and adequate municipal, rural, and industrial water supplies, mitigation of wetlands areas; and water conservation within the boundaries of the Fall River Water Users District, described as follows: bounded on the north by the Angostura Reservoir, the Cheyenne River, and the Fall River/Custer County line, bounded on the east by the Fall River/Shannon County line, bounded on the south by the South Dakota/Nebraska State line, and bounded on the west by the previously established Igloo-Provo Water Project District.
Amount of Grants.--Grants made available under subsection (a) to the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System shall not exceed the amount authorized under section 10.
Limitation on Availability of Construction Funds.--The Secretary shall not obligate funds for the construction of the water supply system until-- (1) the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) have been met; (2) a final engineering report has been prepared and submitted to the Congress for a period of not less than 90 days before the commencement of construction of the system; and (3) a water conservation program has been developed and implemented.
Purpose.--The water conservation program required under this section shall be designed to ensure that users of water from the water supply system will use the best practicable technology and management techniques to conserve water use.
Description.--The water conservation programs shall include-- (1) low consumption performance standards for all newly installed plumbing fixtures; (2) leak detection and repair programs; (3) rate structures that do not include declining block rate schedules for municipal households and special water users (as defined in the feasibility study); (4) public education programs; and (5) coordinated operation between the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System and any preexisting water supply facilities within its service area.
Review and Revision.--The programs described in subsection (b) shall contain provisions for periodic review and revision, in cooperation with the Secretary.
MITIGATION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE LOSSES.
Mitigation of fish and wildlife losses incurred as a result of the construction and operation of the Fall River Water Users District Rural Water System shall be on an acre-for-acre basis, based on ecological equivalency, concurrent with project construction, as provided in the feasibility study.
USE OF PICK-SLOAN POWER.
In General.--From power designated for future irrigation and drainage pumping for the Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin Program, the Western Area Power Administration shall make available the capacity and energy required to meet the pumping and incidental operational requirements of the water supply system during the period beginning May 1, and ending October 31, of each year.
Conditions.--The capacity and energy described in subsection (a) shall be made available on the following conditions: (1) The water supply system shall be operated on a not-for- profit basis.
The water supply system shall contract to purchase its entire electric service requirements, including the capacity and energy made available under subsection (a), from a qualified preference power supplier that itself purchases power from the Western Area Power Administration.
The rate schedule applicable to the capacity and energy made available under subsection (a) shall be the firm power rate schedule of the Pick-Sloan Eastern Division of the Western Area Power Administration in effect when the power is delivered by the Administration.
It shall be agreed by contract among-- (A) the Western Area Power Administration; (B) the power supplier with which the water supply system contracts under paragraph (2); (C) the power supplier of the entity described in subparagraph (B); and (D) the Fall River Water Users District, that in the case of the capacity and energy made available under subsection (a), the benefit of the rate schedule described in paragraph (3) shall be passed through to the water supply system, except that the power supplier of the water supply system shall not be precluded from including, in the charges of the supplier to the water system for the electric service, the other usual and customary charges of the supplier.
NO LIMITATION ON WATER PROJECTS IN STATE.
This Act shall not limit the authorization for water projects in South Dakota and under law in effect on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Nothing in this Act-- (1) invalidates or preempts State water law or an interstate compact governing water; (2) alters the rights of any State to any appropriated share of the waters of any body of surface or ground water, whether determined by past or future interstate compacts or by past or future legislative or final judicial allocations; (3) preempts or modifies any Federal or State law, or interstate compact, dealing with water quality or disposal; or (4) confers on any non-Federal entity the ability to exercise any Federal right to the waters of any stream or to any ground water resource.
The Secretary is authorized to provide funds equal to 80 percent of-- (1) the amount allocated in the total project construction budget for the planning and construction of the water supply system under section 4; and (2) such sums as are necessary to defray increases in development costs reflected in appropriate engineering cost indices after August 1, 1995.
The non-Federal share of the costs allocated to the water supply system shall be 20 percent of-- (1) the amount allocated in the total project construction budget for the planning and construction of the water supply system under section 4; and (2) such sums as are necessary to defray increases in development costs reflected in appropriate engineering cost indices after August 1, 1995.
BUREAU OF RECLAMATION AUTHORIZATION.
Authorization.--The Secretary is authorized to allow the Bureau of Reclamation to provide construction oversight to the water supply system for those areas of the water supply system that are described in section 4(b).
Project Oversight Administration.--The amount of funds used by the Bureau of Reclamation for planning and construction of the water supply system may not exceed an amount equal to 3 percent of the amount provided in the total project construction budget for the portion of the projects to be constructed in Fall River County, South Dakota.
There are authorized to be appropriated $3,600,000 for the planning and construction of the water system under section 4, plus such sums as are necessary to defray increases in development costs reflected in appropriate engineering cost indices after August 1, 1995.