This Act may be cited as the ``Adoption Awareness Act of 1999''.
GRANTS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES TOWARD PROMOTING ADOPTION COUNSELING.
Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254b et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
CERTAIN SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN.
Adoption Counseling.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall make grants to national adoption organizations for the purpose of developing and implementing programs to train the staff of eligible health centers in providing adoption counseling to pregnant women and infertile married couples.
With respect to such a grant-- ``(A) a national adoption organization may expend the grant to carry out the programs directly or through grants to or contracts with other adoption organizations; ``(B) the purposes for which the national adoption organization expends the grant may include the development of a training curriculum; and ``(C) a condition for the receipt of the grant is that, with respect to an eligible health center for which such training is to be provided, the national adoption organization agree to make reasonable efforts-- ``(i) to provide such training at the center or at a site that is near the center; and ``(ii) to provide the training through individuals who are experienced in providing adoption counseling in the geographic area in which the center is located.
Adoption organizations; eligible health centers; other definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(A) The term `adoption organization' means an organization-- ``(i) whose primary purpose is the promotion of adoption; ``(ii) that is knowledgeable on the process for adopting a child and on providing adoption counseling to pregnant women; and ``(iii) that is a nonprofit private entity.
The term `eligible health centers' means public and nonprofit private entities that provide health-related services to pregnant women.
The term `married couples' means couples who have entered into marriage as defined in section 7 of title 1, United States Code.
Training for certain eligible health centers.--A condition for the receipt of a grant under paragraph (1) is that the national adoption organization involved agree to make reasonable efforts to ensure that the eligible health centers with respect to which training under the grant is provided include-- ``(A) eligible health centers that receive grants under section 1001 (relating to voluntary family planning projects); ``(B) eligible health centers that receive grants under section 330 (relating to community health centers, migrant health centers, and centers regarding homeless individuals and residents of public housing); ``(C) eligible health centers that receive grants under this Act for the provision of services in schools; and ``(D) eligible health centers that do not perform or make referrals for abortions, or provide or make referrals for counseling that presents abortion as an option.
Participation of certain eligible health clinics.--In the case of eligible health centers that receive grants under section 330 or 1001, the Secretary shall provide for the training of the staff of such centers through the program under paragraph (1), subject to subsection (c)(4).
Requirements Regarding Federally Funded Family Planning Services.--The Secretary shall require that each program providing voluntary family planning services with a grant from the Secretary provide nondirective counseling and referrals regarding-- ``(1) prenatal care and delivery; ``(2) infant care; ``(3) foster care; and ``(4) adoption.
Religious Organizations.-- ``(1) In general.--Religious organizations may receive grants under subsection (a) on the same basis as any other nongovernmental provider without impairing the religious character of such organizations, and without diminishing the religious freedom of beneficiaries of assistance funded under such program.
Nondiscrimination against religious organizations.-- Religious organizations are eligible for grants under subsection (a) on the same basis as any other nonprofit private entity as long as the programs are implemented consistent with the Establishment Clause of the United States Constitution.
The Federal Government shall not discriminate against an organization that applies to receive such a grant on the basis that the organization has a religious character.
Religious character and freedom.-- ``(A) Religious organizations.--A religious organization receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall retain its independence from Federal, State, and local governments, including such organization's control over the definition, development, practice, and expression of its religious beliefs.
Additional safeguards.--The Federal Government shall not require a religious organization receiving a grant under subsection (a)-- ``(i) to alter its form of internal governance; or ``(ii) to remove religious art, icons, scripture, or other symbols; in order to be eligible for a grant under subsection (a).
Rights of beneficiaries of assistance.-- ``(A) In general.--If an individual described in subparagraph (B) has an objection to the religious character of the organization from which the individual receives services pursuant to a grant under subsection (a), the organization shall provide such individual, within a reasonable period of time after the date of such objection, with services from an alternative provider that is accessible to the individual and the value of which is not less than the value of the services that the individual would have received from such organization.
Individual described.--An individual described in this subparagraph is an individual who receives, applies for, or requests to apply for, services under a program carried out with a grant under subsection (a).
Employment practices.--A religious organization's exemption provided under section 702 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 regarding employment practices shall not be affected by its participation in, or receipt of funds from, a program carried out with a grant under subsection (a).
Nondiscrimination against beneficiaries.--Except as otherwise provided in law, a religious organization shall not discriminate against an individual in regard to providing services under a grant under subsection (a) on the basis of religion, a religious belief, or refusal to actively participate in a religious practice.
Fiscal accountability.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any religious organization receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall be subject to the same regulations as other grantees under such subsection to account in accord with generally accepted auditing principles for the expenditure of the grant.
Limited audit.--If a religious organization receiving a grant under subsection (a) segregates the grant funds into separate accounts, then only such funds shall be subject to audit.
Compliance.--Any party which seeks to enforce its rights under this subsection may assert a civil action for injunctive relief exclusively in an appropriate State court against the entity or agency that allegedly commits such violation.
Preemption.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to preempt any provision of a State constitution or State statute that prohibits or restricts the expenditure of State funds in or by religious organizations.
Limitations on use of funds for certain purposes.--A grant under subsection (a) may not be expended for sectarian worship, instruction, or proselytization.
Application for Grant.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.