This Act may be cited as the ``Base Closure Reuse Reform Act of 1997''.
REFORM OF PROPERTY DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS UNDER BASE CLOSURE LAWS TO PROMOTE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND PROTECT CLOSING INSTALLATIONS.
Applicability of Excess Profits Clause.-- (1) 1990 Law.--Section 2905(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note) is amended by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, except that provisions of such Act (and regulations under such Act) intended to prevent excess profits arising from the receipt of surplus property shall not apply''.
1988 Law.--Section 204(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Defense Authorization Amendments and Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 10 United States Code 2687 note) is amended by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, except that provisions of such Act (and regulations under such Act) intended to prevent excess profits arising from the receipt of surplus property shall not apply''.
Interim Lease Authority.--Section 2667(f) of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end the following new sentences: ``Subject to paragraph (5)(A), the Secretary concerned shall permit the lessee to make capital improvements to the leased property to facilitate economic development of the property and may not condition such permission by requiring the removal of the improvements upon the expiration of the lease.
However, the United States shall not be responsible for the cost of the improvements if the property reverts to United States control upon the expiration of the lease.
The Secretary concerned shall also permit the lessee to sublease the property for profit during the term of the interim lease.
''; and (2) in paragraph (5)-- (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking out the first sentence and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``Notwithstanding subsection (b)(2), an interim lease entered into under this subsection shall give the lessee the first right to acquire the property at the time of final disposal of the property.
If there has been more than one interim lessee with respect to the property, the Secretary shall develop a mechanism to select between competing lessees.
''; and (B) in subparagraph (C), by striking out ``Subparagraphs (A) and (B)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Subparagraph (A)''.
Lease Back Authority.--Section 2905(b)(4)(C) of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note) is amended-- (1) in clause (i)-- (A) by striking out the last sentence; and (B) by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``A component of the military department having jurisdiction over the installation before closure or realignment is not prohibited from entering into a lease under this clause with respect to property at that installation.
''; (2) in clause (ii), by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For purposes of the transfer of the real property to the redevelopment authority and the subsequent lease back, the valuation of the real property shall be deemed to be zero.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(v) Subject to clause (iv), the Secretary shall give the redevelopment authority the first right to acquire property subject to a lease under clause (i) upon the termination or expiration of the lease.
If, before the lease is actually entered into, the department or agency concerned determines that it does not require or desire the property and no other department or agency of the Federal Government seeks to become the lessee, the redevelopment authority shall have the first right to acquire the property.
Subparagraph (B) shall apply to a transfer to the redevelopment authority under this clause.''.
Authority to Contract for Certain Services.-- (1) 1990 Law.--Section 2905(b)(8) of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (A)-- (i) by striking out ``local governments'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``local governments and redevelopment authorities''; and (ii) by striking out ``by such governments''; (B) by striking out subparagraph (C) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(C) The Secretary may exercise the authority under subparagraph (A) with respect to an installation at any time after the date on which the installation is approved for closure under this part.
''; and (C) in subparagraph (D)-- (i) by striking out ``for services entered into with a local government''; and (ii) by striking out ``under the jurisdiction of such government'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``of the installation''.
1988 Law.--Section 204(b)(8) of the Defense Authorization Amendments and Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 10 United States Code 2687 note) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (A)-- (i) by striking out ``local governments'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``local governments and redevelopment authorities''; and (ii) by striking out ``by such governments''; (B) by striking out subparagraph (C) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(C) The Secretary may exercise the authority under subparagraph (A) with respect to an installation at any time after the date on which the installation is approved for closure under this title.
''; and (C) in subparagraph (D)-- (i) by striking out ``for services entered into with a local government''; and (ii) by striking out ``under the jurisdiction of such government'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``of the installation''.