This Act may be cited as the ``Brevard County Beach Equity Act of 2000''.
EROSION MITIGATION, BREVARD COUNTY, FLORIDA.
Definitions.--In this section, the following definitions apply: (1) Canaveral harbor project.--The term ``Canaveral Harbor Project'' means the Federal project for navigation authorized by section 2 of the Act entitled ``An Act authorizing the construction, repair, and preservation of certain public works on rivers and harbors, and for other purposes'', approved March 2, 1945 (59 United States Statutes at Large 16), as modified by section 101 of the River and Harbor Act of 1962 (76 United States Statutes at Large 1174).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary`` means the Secretary of the Army.
Shoreline protection project.--The term ``Shoreline Protection Project'' means the Federal project for shoreline protection authorized by section 101(b)(7) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1996 (110 United States Statutes at Large 3667).
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in cooperation with interested non-Federal entities, shall conduct a study of the shoreline in Brevard County, Florida, to determine whether any erosion or property damage along the shoreline is attributable to the Canaveral Harbor Project.
Scope.--The Secretary shall limit the scope of the study conducted under this subsection to a review of existing data, reports, and studies (whether conducted by a Federal or a non-Federal entity), relevant to erosion in Brevard County, Florida.
Review by independent expert.-- (A) In general.--In conducting the study under this subsection, the Secretary shall hire an independent coastal expert to review and report on the data, reports, and studies referred to in paragraph (2).
Selection.--The Secretary shall select the expert described in subparagraph (A) from a list of experts approved by the Corps of Engineers, the Canaveral Port Authority, and the County Commission of Brevard County, Florida.
Treatment of mitigation measures.--In determining the extent and rate of erosion under the study conducted under this subsection, the Secretary shall take into account the effects of each previously implemented measure designed to mitigate erosion or property damage attributable to the Canaveral Harbor Project, except those measures implemented under the Shoreline Protection Project.
Mitigation.-- (1) Determination.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall determine, based on the results of the study conducted under subsection (b), whether any measures are necessary to prevent or mitigate erosion or property damage, or to correct or repair past erosion or property damage, attributable to the Canaveral Harbor Project.
Authority.--After making a determination under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall plan, design, and implement any measures that the Secretary considers to be necessary to prevent, mitigate, correct, or repair, any erosion or property damage that is attributable to the Canaveral Harbor Project.
Allocation of costs.--Except as provided in paragraph (4), the Federal and non-Federal shares of the costs of implementing any measure under this subsection shall be the same as for the Canaveral Harbor Project.
Renourishment in certain areas.-- (A) Reallocation of costs.--If under paragraph (2) the Secretary carries out any renourishment of a shore or beach located within the boundaries of the area covered by the Shoreline Protection Project, the Secretary shall modify the project cooperation agreement for the Shoreline Protection Project to increase the Federal share of the project costs of initial construction and periodic renourishment to reflect the increased costs incurred by the Secretary.
Credit or reimbursement of funds.--Based on any reallocation of costs under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall credit or reimburse each non-Federal interest for any excess funds it may have expended with respect to the Shoreline Protection Project.
Repeal.--Section 310 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1999 (113 United States Statutes at Large 301) is repealed.
Funding.-- (1) Study.--Of the funds made available for the operation or maintenance of the Canaveral Harbor Project, not more than $250,000 may be used by the Secretary to conduct the study described in subsection (b).
Treatment of costs of mitigation measures.--The costs of any mitigation measure carried out under this section shall be allocated to the Canaveral Harbor Project as operation and maintenance costs.