This Act may be cited as the ``Time for Schools Act of 1997''.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAVE.
Entitlement to Leave.--Section 102(a) of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 United States Code 2612(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Entitlement to school involvement leave.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to section 103(f), an eligible employee shall be entitled to a total of 24 hours of leave during any 12-month period to participate in an activity of a school of a son or daughter of the employee, such as a parent-teacher conference or an interview for a school, or to participate in literacy training under a family literacy program.
Definitions.--In this paragraph: ``(i) Family literacy program.--The term `family literacy program' means a program of services that are of sufficient intensity in terms of hours, and of sufficient duration, to make sustainable changes in a family and that integrate all of the following activities: ``(I) Interactive literacy activities between parents and their sons and daughters.
Training for parents on how to be the primary teacher for their sons and daughters and full partners in the education of their sons and daughters.
An age-appropriate education program for sons and daughters.
Literacy.--The term `literacy', used with respect to an individual, means the ability of the individual to speak, read, and write English, and compute and solve problems, at levels of proficiency necessary-- ``(I) to function on the job, in the family of the individual, and in society; ``(II) to achieve the goals of the individual; and ``(III) to develop the knowledge potential of the individual.
School.--The term `school' means an elementary school or secondary school (as such terms are defined in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801)), a Head Start program assisted under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes), and a child care facility operated by a provider who meets the applicable State or local government licensing, certification, approval, or registration requirements, if any.
Limitation.--No employee may take more than a total of 12 workweeks of leave under paragraphs (1) and (3) during any 12-month period.''.
Schedule.--Section 102(b)(1) of such Act (29 United States Code 2612(b)(1)) is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``Leave under subsection (a)(3) may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule.''.
Substitution of Paid Leave.--Section 102(d)(2)(A) of such Act (29 United States Code 2612(d)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, or for leave provided under subsection (a)(3) for any part of the 24-hour period of such leave under such subsection''.
Notice.--Section 102(e) of such Act (29 United States Code 2612(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Notice for school involvement leave.--In any case in which the necessity for leave under subsection (a)(3) is foreseeable, the employee shall provide the employer with not less than 7 days' notice, before the date the leave is to begin, of the employee's intention to take leave under such subsection.
If the necessity for the leave is not foreseeable, the employee shall provide such notice as is practicable.''.
Certification.--Section 103 of such Act (29 United States Code 2613) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Certification for School Involvement Leave.--An employer may require that a request for leave under section 102(a)(3) be supported by a certification issued at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.''.
SCHOOL INVOLVEMENT LEAVE FOR CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES.
Entitlement to Leave.--Section 6382(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3)(A) Subject to section 6383(f), an employee shall be entitled to a total of 24 hours of leave during any 12-month period to participate in an activity of a school of a son or daughter of the employee, such as a parent-teacher conference or an interview for a school, or to participate in literacy training under a family literacy program.
In this paragraph: ``(i) The term `family literacy program' means a program of services that are of sufficient intensity in terms of hours, and of sufficient duration, to make sustainable changes in a family and that integrate all of the following activities: ``(I) Interactive literacy activities between parents and their sons and daughters.
Training for parents on how to be the primary teacher for their sons and daughters and full partners in the education of their sons and daughters.
An age-appropriate education program for sons and daughters.
The term `literacy', used with respect to an individual, means the ability of the individual to speak, read, and write English, and compute and solve problems, at levels of proficiency necessary-- ``(I) to function on the job, in the family of the individual, and in society; ``(II) to achieve the goals of the individual; and ``(III) to develop the knowledge potential of the individual.
The term `school' means an elementary school or secondary school (as such terms are defined in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801)), a Head Start program assisted under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes), and a child care facility operated by a provider who meets the applicable State or local government licensing, certification, approval, or registration requirements, if any.
No employee may take more than a total of 12 workweeks of leave under paragraphs (1) and (3) during any 12-month period.''.
Schedule.--Section 6382(b)(1) of such title is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``Leave under subsection (a)(3) may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule.''.
Substitution of Paid Leave.--Section 6382(d) of such title is amended by inserting before ``, except'' the following: ``, or for leave provided under subsection (a)(3) any of the employee's accrued or accumulated annual leave under subchapter I for any part of the 24-hour period of such leave under such subsection''.
Notice.--Section 6382(e) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) In any case in which the necessity for leave under subsection (a)(3) is foreseeable, the employee shall provide the employing agency with not less than 7 days' notice, before the date the leave is to begin, of the employee's intention to take leave under such subsection.
If the necessity for the leave is not foreseeable, the employee shall provide such notice as is practicable.''.
Certification.--Section 6383 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) An employing agency may require that a request for leave under section 6382(a)(3) be supported by a certification issued at such time and in such manner as the Office of Personnel Management may by regulation prescribe.''.
This Act takes effect 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act.