This Act may be cited as the ``New Automobile Add-On Disclosure and Consumer Protection Act''.
DISCLOSURES FOR PURCHASERS OF NEW AUTOMOBILES.
In accordance with regulations prescribed by the Federal Trade Commission under section 5, a dealer shall provide, to each consumer that purchases a new automobile from the dealer the following (with respect to each automobile): (1) Dealer add-on invoice.--With respect to the particular new automobile purchased by a consumer from the new car dealer, an invoice (separate from any other document) that contains the following: (A) A description of any add-on included with (or included in the total price of) the new automobile.
The consumer's request, consent, or agreement for provision by the dealer of any add-ons itemized under subparagraph (A).
With respect to any add-ons itemized under subparagraph (A), the following itemized: (i) The cost to the dealer of each add-on and the total cost to the dealer for all add- ons.
The cost to the consumer of each add- on and the total cost to the consumer for all add-ons, excluding any applicable taxes.
Any applicable taxes imposed on the consumer for each add-on and the total amount of such taxes for all add-ons.
Dealer add-on warranty statement.--With respect to the particular new automobile purchased by a consumer from the new car dealer, a warranty statement (separate from any other document) that contains the following: (A) A description of any written warranty or service contract provided by a warrantor, the dealer, or a third party with respect to any add-on itemized under paragraph (1)(A).
A description of any effect on a written warranty or service contract described under subparagraph (A) that results from the installation, modification, or provision of an add-on, including by a third party.
A description of any effect an add-on itemized under paragraph (1)(A) has on a written warranty of the new automobile as originally manufactured, including-- (i) the extent of such effect; and (ii) the extent to which (and manner in which) the dealer will cover any disparity between any written warranty for the automobile as originally manufactured and the written warranty for the automobile as affected by any add-ons.
Information (including separate documentation, if applicable) sufficient for the consumer to utilize or otherwise take advantage of any warranty described under subparagraphs (A) through (C).
A statement of the extent to which (and manner in which) the dealer will cover any disparity between any warranty for an add-on, or for the automobile as originally manufactured, and any such warranty actually provided to the customer.
Timing of disclosure.--The invoice required by paragraph (1) and warranty statement required by paragraph (2) shall be provided to the consumer-- (A) for any add-ons included with the automobile up to the time in which the sale of the automobile is finalized, at the time in which the sale is finalized; and (B) for any add-ons included with the automobile after the time the sale is finalized and up to the time in which the automobile is delivered to the consumer, at the time in which the automobile is delivered to the consumer.
Civil Penalty.--A dealer that violates section 2 shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 or the total cost of the new automobile involved (including add-ons, taxes, and any other fees charged to the customer by the dealer), whichever is greater.
The Federal Trade Commission may enforce a civil penalty under this subsection in a civil action in an appropriate district court of the United States.
Private Right of Action.--A consumer aggrieved by a violation of this Act may bring in an appropriate district court of the United States or, if otherwise permitted by the laws or rules of court of a State, in an appropriate court of that State-- (1) a civil action to enjoin a violation of this Act; (2) a civil action to recover-- (A) the greater of actual monetary loss or $10,000 in damages for each such violation; (B) up to three times the amount described in subparagraph (A), to be determined in the discretion of the court, if the court finds that the defendant willfully or knowingly committed such violation; and (C) a reasonable attorney fee and the costs of the action; or (3) both such actions.
Limitation.--Nothing in this Act shall prohibit the enforcement of any State laws or regulations relating to the sale of automobiles, or requiring the disclosure of information regarding automobiles to the consumer.
In this Act: (1) The term ``add-on'' means, with respect to a new automobile purchased from a dealer by a consumer-- (A) any motor vehicle equipment (as such term is used in section 30102(a) of title 49, United States Code) that is-- (i) not a system, part, or component of the new automobile as originally manufactured; and (ii) not itemized on the label required under section 3 of the Automobile Information Disclosure Act (15 United States Code 1232); (B) any modification of the new automobile, or of any motor vehicle equipment provided as a system, part, or component of the new automobile as originally manufactured, that is performed by, or on behalf of, the dealer; (C) any written warranty or service contract provided by a warrantor, the dealer, or a third party (other than the manufacturer); or (D) any service provided by, or on behalf of, the dealer to the consumer that is-- (i) related to any equipment described in subparagraph (A) (including installation) or to a modification described in subparagraph (B); (ii) not included in the cost of such equipment or modification; and (iii) not a financial service.
The term ``consumer'' has the meaning given the term ``ultimate purchaser'' in section 2 of the Automobile Information Disclosure Act (15 United States Code 1231).
The term ``dealer'' has the meaning given that term in section 30102(a) of title 49, United States Code.
The terms ``manufacturer'' and ``new automobile'' have the meanings given those terms in section 2 of the Automobile Information Disclosure Act (15 United States Code 1231).
The terms ``service contract'', ``warranty'', and ``warrantor'' have the meanings give those terms in section 101 of the Magnuson-Moss Warranty--Federal Trade Commission Improvement Act (15 United States Code 2301), except that any reference to a consumer product shall be deemed to be a reference to a new automobile or an add-on.
Within 180 days following the enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall prescribe regulations to carry out this Act, including guidelines setting forth a uniform method by which a dealer may provide the disclosures required by section 2.
This Act shall take effect 30 days following the issuance of a final rule by the Federal Trade Commission pursuant to section 5.