Qualified Expert Opinion.-- (1) Accompanying affidavit.--No medical malpractice liability action may be brought against a health care professional or a health care provider by any claimant unless, at the time the claimant brings the action (except as provided in subsection (c)), it is accompanied by the affidavit of a qualified specialist or medical expert containing the information required by paragraph (2).
Contents of affidavit.--To satisfy the requirements of paragraph (1), the affidavit shall include the specialist's or expert's statement of belief that, based on a review of the available medical record and other relevant material, there is a reasonable and meritorious cause for the filing of the action.
Qualified Specialist or Medical Expert.--With respect to a medical malpractice liability action, a qualified specialist or medical expert is a person who has been so recognized by the Secretary or has received proper accreditation from the medical licensing board of any State, such that such qualified specialist or medical expert is recognized-- (1) to be knowledgeable in the relevant issues involved in the action; (2) to practice (or to have practiced) or to teach (or to have taught) in the same area of health care or medicine that is at issue in the action; and (3) in the case of an action against a physician, to be board certified in a speciality relating to that area of medicine.
Extension in Certain Instances.-- (1) Unavailability of adequate medical records.--Subject to paragraph (2), subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to a claimant who brings a medical malpractice liability action without submitting an affidavit described in such subsection if, as of the time the claimant brings the action, the claimant certifies that adequate medical records or other information necessary to prepare the affidavit are unavailable.
Time limit.--In the case of an claimant who brings an action for which paragraph (1) applies, the action shall be dismissed unless the claimant submits the affidavit described in subsection (a) not later than 120 days after commencement of the action.
Medical Malpractice Arbitration Panels.-- (1) Establishment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for the establishment of medical malpractice arbitration panels which shall hear and render a decision on all medical malpractice claims.
Composition of arbitration panels.--Arbitration shall be conducted by one or more arbitrators who-- (A) are qualified specialists or medical experts; and (B) are selected by agreement of the parties, or, if the parties do not agree, who are qualified under applicable State law and selected by the court.
Mandatory participation and dissatisfaction.-- (A) Mandatory participation.--Participation in arbitration to resolve a medical malpractice claim is mandatory, and shall be in lieu of any other alternative dispute resolution method required by any other law or by any contractual arrangement made by or on behalf of the parties to the arbitration before the commencement of the action.
Dissatisfaction.--Any party dissatisfied with a determination reached by a medical malpractice arbitration panel with respect to a medical malpractice claim as a result of such arbitration shall not be bound by such determination, and may bring a civil action in any Federal district court of competent jurisdiction within the 30-day period beginning on the date such determination was reached.
The determination of such arbitration, and all statements, offers, and communications made during such arbitration, shall be inadmissible for purposes of adjudicating such action.
Frivolousness.-- (A) Federal district court.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), if a medical malpractice arbitration panel determines a medical malpractice claim to be frivolous, the panel shall dismiss such claim.
If such claim is dismissed, the claimant may bring a civil action in any Federal district court of competent jurisdiction.
If the defendant prevails in such action, the court may, in its discretion and as the interests of justice require, assess against the claimant a reasonable attorney's fee and other litigation costs and expenses (including expert fees) reasonably incurred.
Exception.--If a medical malpractice arbitration panel is unable to determine if a medical malpractice claim is frivolous, the panel may dismiss such claim.
If such claim is dismissed, the claimant may bring a civil action in any Federal district court of competent jurisdiction.
If the claimant prevails in such action, each party shall individually be responsible for reasonable attorney's fee and other litigation costs and expenses (including expert fees) reasonably incurred.
Disclosure.--Each State shall disclose to residents of the State the procedures relating to arbitration and formal adjudication for resolution of medical malpractice claims.
Additional requirements.--The Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary for Health and Human Services, shall proscribe regulations to ensure that medical malpractice arbitration is carried out in a manner that-- (A) is affordable for the parties involved; (B) encourages timely resolution of medical malpractice claims; (C) encourages the consistent and fair resolution of such claims; and (D) provides for reasonably convenient access to dispute resolution.
Effective Date.--This section shall apply with respect to any medical malpractice claim that arises more than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The provisions of this Act shall preempt any State law to the extent such law is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.