EXTENSION OF DUTY-FREE TREATMENT UNDER GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES.
In General.--Section 505 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2465) is amended by striking ``June 30, 1999'' and inserting ``June 30, 2004''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendment made by this section applies to articles entered on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Retroactive application for certain liquidations and reliquidations.-- (A) General rule.--Notwithstanding section 514 of the Tariff Act of 1930 or any other provision of law, and subject to paragraph (3), any entry-- (i) of an article to which duty-free treatment under title V of the Trade Act of 1974 would have applied if such entry had been made on June 30, 1999, and (ii) that was made-- (I) after June 30, 1999, and (II) before the date of enactment of this Act, shall be liquidated or reliquidated as free of duty, and the Secretary of the Treasury shall refund any duty paid with respect to such entry.
Entry.--As used in this paragraph, the term ``entry'' includes a withdrawal from warehouse for consumption.
Requests.--Liquidation or reliquidation may be made under paragraph (2) with respect to an entry only if a request therefor is filed with the Customs Service, within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, that contains sufficient information to enable the Customs Service-- (A) to locate the entry, or (B) to reconstruct the entry if it cannot be located.
ENTRY PROCEDURES FOR FOREIGN TRADE ZONE OPERATIONS.
In General.--Section 484 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1484) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Special Rule For Foreign Trade Zone Operations.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law and except as provided in paragraph (3), all merchandise (including merchandise of different classes, types, and categories), withdrawn from a foreign trade zone during any 7- day period, shall, at the option of the operator or user of the zone, be the subject of a single estimated entry or release filed on or before the first day of the 7-day period in which the merchandise is to be withdrawn from the zone.
The estimated entry or release shall be treated as a single entry and a single release of merchandise for purposes of section 13031(a)(9)(A) of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (19 United States Code 58c(a)(9)(A)) and all fee exclusions and limitations of such section 13031 shall apply, including the maximum and minimum fee amounts provided for under subsection (b)(8)(A)(i) of such section.
The entry summary for the estimated entry or release shall cover only the merchandise actually withdrawn from the foreign trade zone during the 7-day period.
Other requirements.-- The Secretary of the Treasury may require that the operator or user of the zone-- ``(A) use an electronic data interchange approved by the Customs Service-- ``(i) to file the entries described in paragraph (1); and ``(ii) to pay the applicable duties, fees, and taxes with respect to the entries; and ``(B) satisfy the Customs Service that accounting, transportation, and other controls over the merchandise are adequate to protect the revenue and meet the requirements of other Federal agencies.
Exception.--The provisions of paragraph (1) shall not apply to merchandise the entry of which is prohibited by law or merchandise for which the filing of an entry summary is required before the merchandise is released from customs custody.
Foreign trade zone; zone.--In this subsection, the terms `foreign trade zone' and `zone' mean a zone established pursuant to the Act of June 18, 1934, commonly known as the Foreign Trade Zones Act (19 United States Code 81a et sequentes).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on the date that is 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
MODIFICATION OF INSTALLMENT METHOD AND REPEAL OF INSTALLMENT METHOD FOR ACCRUAL METHOD TAXPAYERS.
Repeal of Installment Method for Accrual Basis Taxpayers.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 453 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to installment method) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Use of Installment Method.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, income from an installment sale shall be taken into account for purposes of this title under the installment method.
Accrual method taxpayer.--The installment method shall not apply to income from an installment sale if such income would be reported under an accrual method of accounting without regard to this section.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to a disposition described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (l)(2).''
Conforming amendments.--Sections 453(d)(1), 453(i)(1), and 453(k) of such Code are each amended by striking ``(a)'' each place it appears and inserting ``(a)(1)''.
Modification of Pledge Rules.--Paragraph (4) of section 453A(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to pledges, etc., of installment obligations) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``A payment shall be treated as directly secured by an interest in an installment obligation to the extent an arrangement allows the taxpayer to satisfy all or a portion of the indebtedness with the installment obligation.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to sales or other dispositions occurring on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.