Congress finds the following: (1) It is in the interest of the United States to maximize economic return from the growing trade in cruise ships sailings to and from Alaska by encouraging the use of United States berthing and repair facilities, labor, supplies, and other services, as well as the growth of new enterprises such as the carriage of passengers on luxury cruises between ports in Alaska.
In promoting additional economic benefits to the United States from the cruise ship industry, there is a need to ensure that existing employment and economic activity associated with the Alaska Marine Highway System, United States-flag tour boats operating from Alaska ports, and similar United States enterprises are protected from adverse impacts.
Cruise ship sailings to Alaska comprise a vital and growing segment of the United States travel industry.
Since 1989, the number of Alaska tourist arrivals via cruise ship has grown by 86 percent.
With over one-half million passengers per year, Alaska has become the third most popular cruise destination in the world, after the Caribbean and Europe.
No United States-flag cruise ships are presently available to enter the Alaska trade.
Thus, all cruise ships carrying passengers to and from Alaska destinations are foreign-flag vessels which are precluded, under current law, from carrying passengers between United States ports.
The City of Vancouver, British Columbia receives substantial economic benefit through providing services to cruise ships in the Alaska trade.
In 1995, Alaska sailings accounted for 283 voyages, up from 275 in 1994, and for a total of 595,577 passengers, up from 591,160.
Past estimates of Vancouver's gains from this industry included direct and indirect employment of almost 2,500 people, and direct and indirect payments for goods and services of approximately $120 million per year.
The transfer of cruise ship-based economic activity from Vancouver, British Columbia to United States ports could yield additional Federal revenues of nearly $100 million per year, and additional State and local government revenues of approximately $30 million.
FOREIGN FLAG CRUISE VESSELS.
Waiver.--Notwithstanding provisions of section 8 of the Act of June 19, 1886 (46 United States Code 289), or any other provision of law, passengers may be transported in foreign-flag cruise vessels between ports in Alaska and between ports in Alaska and other ports on the west coast of the contiguous states, except as otherwise provided by this section.
Coastwise Trade.--Upon a showing satisfactory to the Secretary of Transportation, by the owner or charterer of a United States cruise vessel, that service aboard such vessel qualified to engage in the coastwise trade is being offered or advertised pursuant to a Certificate of Financial Responsibility for Indemnification of Passengers for Nonperformance of Transportation (46 App.
United States Code 817(e)) for service in the coastwise trade between ports in Alaska or between ports in Alaska and other ports on the west coast of the contiguous states, or both, the Secretary shall notify the owner or operator of one or more foreign-flag cruise vessels transporting passengers under authority of this section, if any, that he shall, within one year from the date of notification, terminate such service.
Coastwise privileges granted to any owner or operator of a foreign-flag cruise vessel under this section shall expire on the 365th day following receipt of the Secretary's notification.
Notification.--Notifications issued by the Secretary under subsection (b) of this section shall be issued to the owners or operators of foreign-flag cruise vessels-- (1) in the reverse of the order in which foreign-flag cruise vessels entered the coastwise service under this section determined by the date of the vessels' first coastwise sailing; and (2) in the minimum number as to ensure that the passenger- carrying capacity thereby removed from coastwise service exceeds the passenger-carrying capacity of the United States cruise vessel which is entering the service.
Termination.--If, at the expiration of the 365-day period specified in subsection (b) of this section, the United States cruise vessel that has offered or advertised service pursuant to a Certificate of Financial Responsibility for Indemnification of Passengers for Nonperformance of Transportation (46 App.
United States Code 817(e)) has not entered the coastwise passenger trade between ports in Alaska or between ports in Alaska and other ports on the west coast of the contiguous states, then the termination of service required by subsection (b) shall not take effect until 90 days following the entry into trade by the United States vessel.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section, the term-- (1) ``cruise vessel'' means a vessel of greater than 5,000 deadweight tons which provides a full range of luxury accommodations, entertainment, dining and other services for its passengers; and (2)(A) ``foreign-flag cruise vessels'' does not apply to vessels which regularly carry for hire both passengers and vehicles or other cargo, or-- (B) which serve residents of their ports of call in Alaska or other ports in the United States as a common or frequently used means of transportation between United States ports.
Disclaimer.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as affecting or otherwise modifying the authority contained in the Act of June 30, 1961 (46 United States Code 289(b)) authorizing the transportation of passengers and merchandise in Canadian vessels between ports in Alaska and the United States.