This Act may be cited as the ``Fort Peck Rural County Water Supply System Act of 1995''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) there is a need for a water supply system in rural northeast Montana to provide a safe, reliable, and adequate water supply within the area under the jurisdiction of the Fort Peck Rural County Water District, Inc.; (2) no public water supply system currently serves the area; (3) ground water sources in the area are not potable; (4) the construction of a water supply system will allow for economic enhancement in Valley County in northeastern Montana; and (5)(A) adverse impacts on Montana, including the flooding of thousands of acres of productive crop land by the Fort Peck Reservoir, were caused by the construction of the Fort Peck Dam in 1939; and (B) the impacts have never been mitigated, and the predicted benefits of the construction of the dam have never been realized.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to authorize the construction of a water treatment facility and distribution system to provide clean and safe water for domestic and limited livestock use to residents and landowners within the area under the jurisdiction of the District; and (2) to allocate Federal funding for the construction of the water supply system instead of funding for agricultural irrigation systems, which has not been appropriated, as intended and as authorized under the Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin Program (authorized by section 9 of the Act entitled ``An Act authorizing the construction of certain public works on rivers and harbors for flood control, and for other purposes'', approved December 22, 1944 (commonly known as the ``Flood Control Act of 1944'') (58 United States Statutes at Large 891)).
In this Act (unless the context clearly requires otherwise): (1) Construction.--The term ``construction'' means such activities associated with the actual development or construction of facilities as are initiated on execution of contracts for construction.
District.--The term ``District'' means the Fort Peck Rural County Water District, Inc., a nonprofit corporation in Montana.
Feasibility study.--The term ``feasibility study'' means the study entitled ``Final Engineering Report and Alternative Evaluation for the Fort Peck Rural County Water District'', dated September 1994, that includes a water conservation plan, environmental report, and economic enhancement component.
Planning.--The term ``planning'' means activities such as data collection, evaluation, design, and other associated preconstruction activities required prior to the execution of contracts for construction.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Water supply system.--The term ``water supply system'' means the Fort Peck Rural County Water Supply System, to be established and operated substantially in accordance with the feasibility study.
FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
In General.--The Secretary shall enter into a cooperative agreement with the District for the planning, design, and construction by the District of the water supply system.
Service Area.--The water supply system shall provide for safe and adequate rural water supplies, economic enhancement, mitigation of wetland areas, and water conservation in the area under the jurisdiction of the District in Valley County, northeastern Montana (as described in the feasibility study).
Amount of Federal Contribution.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), under the cooperative agreement, the Secretary shall pay the Federal share of-- (A) the amount allocated in the total budget for the planning, design, and construction of the water supply system (as identified in the feasibility study); and (B) such sums as are necessary to defray increases in the budget.
Federal share.--The Federal share referred to in paragraph (1) shall be 80 percent and shall not be reimbursable.
Total.--The amount of Federal funds made available under the cooperative agreement shall not exceed the amount of funds authorized to be appropriated under section 9.
Limitations.--Not more than 5 percent of the amount of Federal funds made available to the Secretary under section 9 may be used for activities associated with-- (A) compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes); and (B) oversight of the planning, design, and construction by the District of the water supply system.
Limitation on Availability of Construction Funds.--The Secretary shall not obligate funds for the construction of the water supply system until the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) have been met.
The District shall design a water conservation program to ensure that users of water from the water supply system will use the best practicable technology and management techniques to conserve water use.
The program shall contain provisions for periodic review and revision by the District, in cooperation with the Secretary.
MITIGATION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE LOSSES.
In accordance with the feasibility study, mitigation for fish and wildlife losses incurred as a result of the construction and operation of the water supply system shall be on an acre-for-acre basis, based on ecological equivalency and concurrent with project construction.
EFFECT ON WATER PROJECTS IN STATES.
Nothing in this Act limits the authorization for water projects in Montana under any law that is in effect on, or takes effect after, the date of enactment of this Act.
EFFECT ON WATER RIGHTS.
Nothing in this Act-- (1) invalidates or preempts State water law or an interstate compact governing water; (2) alters the right of any State to any appropriated share of the waters of any body of surface or ground water, whether determined under any interstate compact, or any legislative or final judicial allocation, that is in effect on, or takes effect after, the date of enactment of this Act; (3) preempts or modifies any Federal or State law, or interstate compact, governing water quality or disposal; or (4) confers on any non-Federal entity the option to exercise any Federal right to the waters of any stream or to any ground water source.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $5,800,000, to remain available until expended.
The funds authorized to be appropriated may be increased or decreased by such amounts as are justified by reason of ordinary fluctuations in development costs incurred after October 1, 1994, as indicated by engineering cost indices applicable to the type of construction project authorized under this Act.