This Act may be cited as the ``International Patent Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the strength and quality of United States patents are recognized throughout the world; (2) patents are defined under United States law as a private property right; (3) the United States is regarded as the world leader in intellectual property; (4) patents are a societal and economic good for a country; (5) technology enhances a country's growth and patents are an integral part of that growth; (6) patents create jobs and new businesses; (7) patents are a source of lifting the standard of living in a country; (8) patents and innovation are a source of increasing income for business and citizens of the country; (9) patentable products are a source of trade for a country; and (10) the successful 207-year-old Federal agency responsible for issuing patents can be a source of expertise and support for other countries.
In this Act: (1) Director of the patent and trademark office.--The term ``Director of the Patent and Trademark Office'' means the Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property and the Director of the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
Patent and trademark office.--The term ``Patent and Trademark Office'' means the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
GSP country.--The term ``GSP country'' means a beneficiary developing country under title V of the Trade Act of 1974.
SOVEREIGN DUTIES OF THE PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE.
In General.--The Director of the Patent and Trademark Office, subject to the policy guidance of the Secretary of Commerce, shall be responsible for the following: (1) The establishment in the Patent and Trademark Office of a US/GSP International Country Notification Office for the purpose of providing official notification of the issuance of patents that are valid both under the laws of the United States and a GSP country with which the United States has entered into an agreement under subsection (b).
Ensuring that patents that are to be valid under the laws of such a GSP country and the United States be issued according to standards applicable to patents issued under United States law.
Ensuring that all examination and search duties for the grant of a patent that is to be valid under United States law and the laws of such a GSP country are performed by patent examiners in the Patent and Trademark Office who are United States citizens.
Agreements With Countries.--The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, shall seek to enter into negotiations with each GSP country desiring patents to be issued pursuant to this Act in order to conclude an agreement with that GSP country providing for the issuance and notification of such patents pursuant to this Act.
Special Payments.-- (1) Trust funds.--The Director of the Patent and Trademark Office shall establish a trust fund for each GSP country with which the United States has an agreement under subsection (b).
The Director shall use amounts in the fund to assist that GSP country in establishing or enhancing the patent system in that country, through technical assistance, education programs, and other appropriate programs.
There shall be deposited into a fund for a GSP country-- (A) 15 percent of the patent fees charged in connection with applications for patent filed and patents issued that are to be valid in both the United States and that country; and (B) a special handling fee for each such patent application or patent, as determined by agreement between the Director of the Patent and Trademark Office and that country.
Computer search facilities.--The United States shall make available computer search facilities containing the patent data base of the Patent and Trademark Office in each GSP country with which there is an agreement under subsection (b).
A fee shall be charged for the use of such patent search facilities in the GSP country.
The fee shall be determined by the Secretary of Commerce and the Director of the Patent and Trademark Office, pursuant to agreement with that country.
The Secretary of State shall make available such computer search facilities at the United States embassy or mission in that country.
The Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall provide information to the GSP countries with which agreements have been entered into under section 4(b) on the steps required to create a small business based on a patent issued to an individual or small business pursuant to this Act.
The Agency for International Development shall use funds otherwise available to develop and implement a program to provide instruction to the GSP countries with which agreements have been reached under section 4(b) in the methods of structuring a patent system to enhance economic development, including demonstrating the benefits that can accrue to universities and other institutions from acquiring intellectual property rights on the product of their research.