CONSISTENT ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY REGARDING NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM LANDS, NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LANDS, AND OTHER PUBLIC LANDS.
Lands Under Jurisdiction of Bureau of Land Management.--Section 303(a) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1733(a)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; (2) by striking the second sentence; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(2) Any person who knowingly violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, subject to fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
Any person who otherwise violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, subject to fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in such sections.
A person who violates any such provision or regulation may also be adjudged to pay all costs of the proceedings.''.
National Park System Lands.-- (1) Enforcement.--Section 3 of the National Park Service Organic Act (16 United States Code 3) is amended-- (A) by striking ``That the Secretary'' the first place it appears and inserting ``(a) Regulations for Use and Management of National Park System; Enforcement (1) The Secretary''; (B) by striking ``Service,'' and all that follows through ``proceedings.''
''; and (C) by inserting after the first sentence the following new paragraphs: ``(2) Any person who knowingly violates or fails to comply with any rule or regulation issued under this section shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, subject to fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
Any person who otherwise violates or fails to comply with any rule or regulation issued under this section shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, subject to fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in such sections.
A person who violates any such rule or regulation may also be adjudged to pay all costs of the proceedings.''.
Conforming amendments.--Such section is further amended-- (A) by striking ``He may also'' the first place it appears and inserting the following: ``(b) Special Management Authorities.--The Secretary of the Interior may''; (B) by striking ``He may also'' the second place it appears and inserting ``The Secretary may''; and (C) by striking ``No natural,'' and inserting the following: ``(c) Lease and Permit Authorities.--No natural''.
National Wildlife Refuge System Lands.--Section 4(f) of the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd(f)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``fined under title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than 1 year, or both.''
and inserting ``guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, subject to fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
A person who violates any such provision or regulation may also be adjudged to pay all costs of the proceedings.
''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``fined under title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned not more than 180 days, or both.''
and inserting ``guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, subject to fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
A person who violates any such provision or regulation may also be adjudged to pay all costs of the proceedings.''.
National Forest System Lands.--The eleventh undesignated paragraph under the heading ``Surveying the public lands'' of the Act of June 4, 1897 (16 United States Code 551), is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
PROTECTION OF NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LANDS; REGULATIONS.
Regulations for Use and Protection of National Forest System.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall make provisions for the protection of the National Forest System (as defined in section 11 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1609)) against destruction by fire and depredations.
The Secretary may issue such regulations and establish such service as will insure the objects of the National Forest System, namely, to regulate their occupancy and use and to protect National Forest System lands from destruction.
Violations; Penalties.--(1) Any person who knowingly violates any regulation issued under subsection (a) shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
Any person who otherwise violates any regulation issued under subsection (a) shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
A person who violates any regulation issued under subsection (a) may also be adjudged to pay all costs of the proceedings.
Procedure.--Any person charged with the violation of a regulation issued under subsection (a) may be tried and sentenced by any United States magistrate judge specially designated for that purpose by the court by which the magistrate judge was appointed, in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as provided for in subsections (b) through (e) of section 3401 of title 18, United States Code.''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF MINIMUM FINE FOR VIOLATION OF PUBLIC LAND FIRE REGULATIONS DURING FIRE BAN.
Lands Under Jurisdiction of Bureau of Land Management.--Section 303(a) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1733(a)), as amended by section 1(a), is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of a regulation issued under this section regarding the use of fire by individuals on the public lands, if the violation of the regulation was the result of reckless conduct, occurred in an area subject to a complete ban on open fires, and resulted in damage to public or private property, the fine may not be less than $500.''.
National Park System Lands.--Subsection (a) of section 3 of the National Park Service Organic Act (16 United States Code 3), as designated and amended by section 1(b), is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of a rule or regulation issued under this subsection regarding the use of fire by individuals on such lands, if the violation of the rule or regulation was the result of reckless conduct, occurred in an area subject to a complete ban on open fires, and resulted in damage to public or private property, the fine may not be less than $500.''.
National Forest System Lands.--Subsection (b) of section 551 of the Act of June 4, 1897 (16 United States Code 551), as designated and amended by section 1(d), which before such designation and amendment was the eleventh undesignated paragraph under the heading ``Surveying the public lands'' of such Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of a regulation issued under subsection (a) regarding the use of fire by individuals on National Forest System lands, if the violation of the regulation was the result of reckless conduct, occurred in an area subject to a complete ban on open fires, and resulted in damage to public or private property, the fine may not be less than $500.