PRICE SUPPORT PROGRAM FOR MILK.
In General.--Effective January 1, 1996, section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 United States Code 1446e) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
MILK PRICE SUPPORT PROGRAM FOR CALENDAR YEARS 1996 THROUGH 2002.
In General.--During the period beginning January 1, 1996, and ending December 31, 2002, the price of milk produced in the 48 contiguous States shall be supported as provided in this section.
Support Price.-- ``(1) In general.--During each of the calendar years 1996 through 2002, the price of milk used for cheese shall be supported at the rate provided in paragraph (2).
Milk used for nonfat dry milk or butter shall not be supported under this section.
Annual rate.--For calendar year 1996, the rate of price support for milk used for cheese shall be equal to $10.00 per hundredweight.
For each of the calendar years 1997 through 2002, the rate of price support for milk used for cheese shall be reduced by 10 cents per hundredweight from the rate in effect for the preceding calendar year.
Purchases.-- ``(1) In general.--The price of milk used for cheese shall be supported through the purchase of cheese.
Such purchases shall be based on the support price in effect during the applicable calendar year.
Sales through deip.--Sales for export under the dairy export incentive program established under section 153 of the Food Security Act of 1985 (15 United States Code 713a-14) shall not be considered as Commodity Credit Corporation purchases under subsection (d).
Support Rate Adjustments.--Effective January 1 of each of the calendar years 1996 through 2002, if the level of purchases of milk and the products of milk by the Commodity Credit Corporation under this section (less sales under section 407 for unrestricted use), as estimated by the Secretary by November 20 of the preceding calendar year, will exceed 1,500,000,000 pounds (milk equivalent, total milk solids basis), the Secretary shall decrease by 25 cents per hundredweight, in addition to the annual reduction under subsection (b)(2), the rate of price support for milk used for cheese in effect for the calendar year.
The support rate adjustment provided under this subsection shall be effective only for the calendar year applicable to the estimate of the Secretary.
After the support rate adjustment terminates, the support price shall be the level provided under subsection (b)(2).
Residual Authority for Refund and Compensatory Budget Deficit Assessment.-- ``(1) Refunds of 1995 assessments.--The Secretary shall provide for a refund of the entire reduction under subsection (h)(2) of this section, as in effect on December 31, 1995, in the price of milk received by a producer during calendar year 1995, if the producer provides evidence that the producer did not increase marketings in calendar year 1995 when compared to calendar year 1994.
A refund under this subsection shall not be considered as any type of price support or payment for purposes of sections 1211 and 1221 of the Food Security Act of 1985.
Residual assessment in calendar year 1996.-- ``(A) In general.--During the period beginning on May 1, 1996, and ending on December 31, 1996, the Secretary shall provide for a reduction in the price received by producers for all milk produced in the 48 contiguous States and marketed by producers for commercial use.
Amount.--The amount of the reduction under subparagraph (A) shall be an amount determined by the Secretary sufficient to equal, when applied to reductions made on milk marketed, the amount that compensates for refunds made under paragraph (1).
Enforcement.-- ``(A) Collection.--Reductions in price required under paragraph (2) shall be collected and remitted to the Commodity Credit Corporation in the manner prescribed by the Secretary.
Penalties.--If any person fails to collect or remit the reduction required by paragraph (2) or fails to comply with such requirements for recordkeeping or as otherwise are required by the Secretary to carry out this subsection, the person shall be liable to the Secretary for a civil penalty up to an amount determined by multiplying-- ``(i) the quantity of milk involved in the violation expressed in hundredweights; by ``(ii) the support rate for milk in effect under this section at the time of the violation.
Enforcement in courts.--The Secretary may enforce this subsection in the courts of the United States.
Commodity Credit Corporation.--The Secretary shall carry out the program authorized by this section through the Commodity Credit Corporation.
Period.--This section shall be effective only during the period beginning January 1, 1996, and ending December 31, 2002.''.
Milk Manufacturing Marketing Adjustment.--Section 102 of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (7 United States Code 1446e- 1) is repealed.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A CLASS IV ACCOUNT.
Establishment of Class IV Account.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, effective January 1, 1996, the Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a special milk marketing order to equalize returns on all milk used in the 48 contiguous States of the United States to produce Class IV final products (butter, nonfat dry milk, and dry whole milk) among all milk marketed by producers for commercial use in the 48 contiguous States.
Class IV Price and Differential; Proration.-- (1) Price.--The Secretary shall determine a milk equivalent value per hundredweight for Class IV final products each month based on the average wholesale market prices during the month for Class IV final products.
Such milk equivalent value at 3.67 percent milkfat shall be the per hundredweight Class IV price under the special Class IV account established under subsection (a).
Differential.--The Administrator of the special Class IV account shall announce, on the first business day of each month, the per hundredweight Class IV differential applicable under the order to the preceding month.
Such monthly Class IV differential shall be the amount, if any, by which the support rate for milk in effect under section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 exceeds the Class IV price established pursuant to paragraph (1).
Proration.--On or before the twentieth day after the end of each month, the Administrator of the special Class IV account shall-- (A) determine the amount of milk produced in the 48 contiguous States of the United States and marketed for commercial use in making Class IV final products during the preceding month; (B) calculate the amount equal to the number of hundredweights of milk used for Class IV final products during the preceding month (as determined under subparagraph (A)) multiplied by the Class IV differential for the month established under paragraph (2), and add to that amount the cost of administering the special Class IV account during the current month; and (C) prorate the amount established under subparagraph (B) among the total amount, in hundredweights, of milk produced in the 48 contiguous States and marketed for commercial use during such preceding month.
Account Obligations.--On or before the twenty-fifth day after the end of each month-- (1) each person making payment to a producer for milk produced in any of the 48 contiguous States of the United States and marketed for commercial use shall collect from each producer the amount determined by multiplying the quantity of milk handled for the account of such producer during the preceding month by the Class IV differential proration established pursuant to subsection (b)(3)(C).
Such amount shall be remitted to the Administrator of the special Class IV account; and (2) any producer marketing milk of that producer's own production in the form of milk or dairy products to consumers, either directly or through retail or wholesale outlets, shall remit to the Administrator of the special Class IV account the amount determined by multiplying the quantity of such milk marketed by such producer by the Class IV differential proration established under subsection (b)(3)(C).
Distribution of Account Proceeds.--On or before the thirtieth day after the end of each month, the Administrator of the special Class IV account shall pay to each person that used skim milk and butterfat to produce Class IV final products during the preceding month a proportionate share of the total special Class IV account proceeds for such month.
The proportion of the total proceeds payable to each person shall be the same proportion that the skim milk and butterfat used by such person to product Class IV final products during the preceding month is of the total skim milk and butterfat used by all persons during the preceding month to product Class IV final products.
Effect on Blend Prices.--Producer blend prices under a milk marketing order shall be adjusted to account for revenue distributions required under subsections (c) and (d).
Administration of Class IV Account.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall appoint a person to serve as Administrator of the Class IV account and shall delegate to that person such powers as are needed to fulfill the duties of Administrator.
Enforcement.-- (1) Collection.--The amounts specified in subsection (c) shall be collected and remitted to the Administrator in the manner prescribed by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Penalties.--If any person fails to remit the amounts required in subsection (c) or fails to comply with such requirements for recordkeeping or otherwise as are required by the Secretary to carry out this section, the person shall be liable to the Secretary for a civil penalty up to an amount determined by multiplying-- (A) the quantity of milk involved in the violation; by (B) the support rate for milk in effect under section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 for the applicable calendar year.
Enforcement.--The Secretary may enforce this section in the courts of the United States.
Issuance of Class IV Account.--The Secretary shall issue regulations to effectuate the Class IV account without regard to the notice and comment requirements in section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
Definition of Milk Marketing Order.--For purposes of this section, the term ``milk marketing order'' means a milk marketing order issued pursuant to section 8c of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, as reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 (7 United States Code 608c), and any comparable State milk marketing order or system.
Class IV Designation.--Effective January 1, 1996, section 8c(5)(A) of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, as reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 (7 United States Code 608c(5)(A)), is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Each marketing order issued pursuant to this section for milk and its products shall include all skim milk and butterfat used to produce butter, nonfat dry milk, and dry whole milk as a Class IV classification.''.
DAIRY EXPORT INCENTIVE PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 153 of the Food Security Act of 1985 (15 United States Code 713a-14) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by-- (A) striking ``2001'' and inserting ``2002''; and (B) striking ``an export incentive program'' and inserting ``export incentive programs (the export bid program and the price equalization program)''; (2) in subsection (b), by-- (A) inserting ``exporter bid'' before ``program''; and (B) inserting ``of Agriculture'' after ``Secretary'' the first time it appears in the subsection; (3) in subsection (c), by inserting ``exporter bid'' before ``program'' the first time it appears in the subsection; (4) in subsection (d), by inserting ``exporter bid'' before ``program'' the first time it appears in the subsection; (5) in subsection (e), by inserting ``exporter bid'' before ``program''; and (6) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f)(1) The price equalization program established under this section shall provide for the Corporation to make payments to the Administrator of the Class IV account established under section 1202 of the Agricultural Reconciliation Act of 1995, at the request of the Administrator, as provided in this subsection.
The Secretary shall have the right to accept or reject any per-unit amount requested by the Administrator under such criteria as the Secretary deems appropriate.
Under the price equalization program, the Administrator may request, on a quarterly basis, price equalization payments on the milk equivalent, total milk solids basis, of amounts of solids not fat and butterfat exported from the United States during the preceding quarter.
The rate of payment per unit of milk equivalent exported shall be an amount equal to the difference between the support rate for milk in effect under section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 for the applicable quarter and the average Class IV price during such quarter, as determined under criteria established by the Secretary.
The Corporation may not make any payments under the price equalization program during the 12-month period beginning on July 1 of each year that will be inconsistent with the obligations of the United States under any trade agreement to which it is a party.
For purposes of this paragraph, any unit of milk equivalent on which a payment is made under the export bid program authorized by this section shall only be counted one time to determine consistency with any quantitative trade obligation of the United States.
The price equalization program shall be operated under such rules and regulations issued by the Secretary as the Secretary deems necessary to ensure that-- ``(A) first priority in funds and tonnage allocations available for the operations of the programs under this section is given to the export bid program; and ``(B) sufficient documentation is provided of the export of the amounts of milk equivalent on which payments are made.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become effective January 1, 1996.
CONSOLIDATION AND REFORM OF FEDERAL MILK MARKETING ORDERS.
Hearing by the Secretary and Follow-Up Action.--As soon as practicable after the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall invite proposals to consolidate and reform Federal milk marketing orders issued under section 8c of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 (7 United States Code 608c), and conduct one or more hearings to consider such proposals.
Any such hearing also shall consider how all milk, including manufacturing grade milk, shall be regulated under either a Federal or State order (with manufacturing grade producers receiving pool proceeds from Class III and Class IV sales only).
Expedited Process.--The hearing provided for in subsection (a) shall be conducted under administrative hearing procedures, except that the Secretary shall have 90 days after the public hearing to determine, based on the hearing record, whether the consolidation of the orders will tend to accomplish the purposes of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, and shall announce the determination through publication in the Federal Register by the end of such 90-day period.
Such consolidation of orders provided for under the Secretary's determination shall be implemented within 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Sense of Congress Regarding Consolidation of Federal Orders.-- It is the sense of Congress that Federal milk marketing orders in operation under the Agricultural Adjustment Act, reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 should be consolidated to between 8 and 14 orders.