This Act may be cited as the ``Mortgage E-Verify Act of 2010''.
VERIFICATION UNDER E-VERIFICATION PROGRAM.
Fannie Mae.--Subsection (b) of section 302 of the Federal National Mortgage Association Charter Act (12 United States Code 1717(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7)(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the corporation may not-- ``(i) refinance, restructure, or modify, or otherwise authorize or enter into any agreement for the refinancing, restructuring, or modification of any single-family housing mortgage that is held by or that backs any security issued by the corporation, or ``(ii) purchase, or issue any security that is backed by, any single-family housing mortgage made for the refinancing, restructuring, or modification of the mortgagor's previous single-family housing mortgage on the same property, unless the identity and work eligibility of the mortgagor under such mortgage has been confirmed by an inquiry under subparagraph (B).
An inquiry under this subparagraph is an inquiry made through the basic pilot program under section 403(a) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 United States Code 1324a note; commonly referred to as the E-Verify program).
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, lenders for single-family housing mortgages and the corporation may submit such inquiries regarding the identities and work eligibility of mortgagors under such mortgages, and may be provided confirmations and nonconfirmations pursuant to such inquiries, under such basic pilot program.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `single-family housing mortgage' means a mortgage that is secured by a 1- to 4-family residence.''.
Freddie Mac.--Subsection (a) of section 305 of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 United States Code 1454(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6)(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Corporation may not-- ``(i) refinance, restructure, or modify, or otherwise authorize or enter into any agreement for the refinancing, restructuring, or modification of any single-family housing mortgage that is held by or that backs any security issued by the Corporation, or ``(ii) purchase, or issue any security that is backed by, any single-family housing mortgage made for the refinancing, restructuring, or modification of the mortgagor's previous single-family housing mortgage on the same property, unless the identity and work eligibility of the mortgagor under such mortgage has been confirmed by an inquiry under subparagraph (B) ``(B) An inquiry under this subparagraph is an inquiry made through the basic pilot program under section 403(a) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 United States Code 1324a note; commonly referred to as the E-Verify program).
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, lenders for single-family housing mortgages and the Corporation may submit such inquiries regarding the identities and work eligibility of mortgagors under such mortgages, and may be provided confirmations and nonconfirmations pursuant to such inquiries, under such basic pilot program.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `single-family housing mortgage' means a mortgage that is secured by a 1- to 4-family residence.''.
FHA.--Title II of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1707 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
VERIFICATION REQUIREMENT FOR MODIFICATION OF MORTGAGES.
Prohibition.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may not-- ``(1) authorize or enter into any agreement for the refinancing, restructuring, or modification of any single- family housing mortgage that is insured by the Secretary under this Act, or ``(2) insure any single-family housing mortgage made for the refinancing, restructuring, or modification of the mortgagor's previous single-family housing mortgage on the same property, unless the identity and work eligibility of the mortgagor under such mortgage has been confirmed by an inquiry under subsection (b).
E-Verify Inquiries.--An inquiry under this subsection is an inquiry made through the basic pilot program under section 403(a) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 United States Code 1324a note; commonly referred to as the E-Verify program).
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, lenders for single-family housing mortgages and the Secretary may submit such inquiries regarding the identities and work eligibility of mortgagors under such mortgages, and may be provided confirmations and nonconfirmations pursuant to such inquiries, under such basic pilot program.
Single-Family Housing Mortgage.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `single-family housing mortgage' means a mortgage that is secured by a 1- to 4-family residence.