SHORT TITLE AND FINDINGS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Helium Privatization Act of 1995''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the United States Government's helium recovery program was instituted in 1925, when helium conservation was deemed to be a matter of national security and no private sector helium recovery industry existed; (2) today, as compared to 1925, there is little likelihood that the United States will have to field a fleet of blimps on an emergency basis; (3) private sources of helium are more than adequate for serving existing and foreseeable future national needs; (4) since 1925, there has been a dramatic increase in private industry's involvement in helium recovery, as a result of the free market discovery of numerous commercial uses for helium; (5) currently, private industry accounts for 90 percent of all helium extraction and consumption; (6) the Government's helium recovery program currently owes the Department of the Treasury $1,400,000,000 and in recent years has lost as much as an additional $120,000,000 yearly on interest alone, and there is no prospect for repayment of this debt without significant reform; and (7) with combined public and private helium reserves considerably in excess of foreseeable national helium needs, there is no longer any need for the Federal Government to own and operate a helium extraction and reserve program.
AMENDMENT OF HELIUM ACT.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Helium Act (50 United States Code 167 to 167n).
Sections 3, 4, and 5 are amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Extraction and Disposal of Helium on Federal Lands.--(1) The Secretary may enter into agreements with private parties for the recovery and disposal of helium on Federal lands upon such terms and conditions as he deems fair, reasonable and necessary.
The Secretary may grant leasehold rights to any such helium.
The Secretary may not enter into any agreement by which the Secretary sells such helium other than to a private party with whom the Secretary has an agreement for recovery and disposal of helium.
Such agreements may be subject to such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Secretary.
Any agreement under this subsection shall be subject to the existing rights of any affected Federal oil and gas lessee.
Each such agreement (and any extension or renewal thereof) shall contain such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate by the Secretary.
This subsection shall not in any manner affect or diminish the rights and obligations of the Secretary and private parties under agreements to dispose of helium produced from Federal lands in existence at the enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1995 except to the extent that such agreements are renewed or extended after such date.
Storage, Transportation, and Sale.--The Secretary is authorized to store, transport, and sell helium only in accordance with this Act.
Monitoring and Reporting.--The Secretary is authorized to monitor helium production and helium reserves in the United States and to periodically prepare reports regarding the amounts of helium produced and the quantity of crude helium in storage in the United States.
STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION OF CRUDE HELIUM.
Storage and Transportation.--The Secretary is authorized to store and transport crude helium and to maintain and operate existing crude helium storage at the Bureau of Mines Cliffside Field, together with related helium transportation and withdrawal facilities.
Cessation of Production, Refining, and Marketing.--Effective one year after the date of enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1995, the Secretary shall cease producing, refining and marketing refined helium and shall cease carrying out all other activities relating to helium which the Secretary was authorized to carry out under this Act before the date of enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1995, except those activities described in subsection (a).
The amount of helium reserves owned by the United States and stored in the Bureau of Mines Cliffside Field at such date of cessation, less 600,000,000 cubic feet, shall be the helium reserves owned by the United States required to be sold pursuant to section 8(b) hereof.
Disposal of Facilities.--(1) Within one year after the date of enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1995, the Secretary shall dispose of all facilities, equipment, and other real and personal property, together with all interests therein, held by the United States for the purpose of producing, refining and marketing refined helium.
The disposal of such property shall be in accordance with the provisions of law governing the disposal of excess or surplus properties of the United States.
All proceeds accruing to the United States by reason of the sale or other disposal of such property shall be treated as moneys received under this chapter for purposes of section 6(f).
All costs associated with such sale and disposal (including costs associated with termination of personnel) and with the cessation of activities under subsection (b) shall be paid from amounts available in the helium production fund established under section 6(f).
Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any facilities, equipment, or other real or personal property, or any interest therein, necessary for the storage and transportation of crude helium or any equipment needed to maintain the purity, quality control, and quality assurance of helium in the reserve.
Existing Contracts.--All contracts which were entered into by any person with the Secretary for the purchase by such person from the Secretary of refined helium and which are in effect on the date of the enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1995 shall remain in force and effect until the date on which the facilities referred to in subsection (c) are disposed of.
Any costs associated with the termination of such contracts shall be paid from the helium production fund established under section 6(f).
FEES FOR STORAGE, TRANSPORTATION AND WITHDRAWAL.
``Whenever the Secretary provides helium storage, withdrawal, or transportation services to any person, the Secretary is authorized and directed to impose fees on such person to reimburse the Secretary for the full costs of providing such storage, transportation, and withdrawal.
All such fees received by the Secretary shall be treated as moneys received under this Act for purposes of section 6(f).''.
SALE OF CRUDE HELIUM.
Section 6 is amended as follows: (1) Subsection (a) is amended by striking out ``from the Secretary'' and inserting ``from persons who have entered into enforceable contracts to purchase an equivalent amount of crude helium from the Secretary''.
Subsection (b) is amended by inserting ``crude'' before ``helium'' and by adding the following at the end thereof: ``Except as may be required by reason of subsection (a), the Secretary shall not make sales of crude helium under this section in such amounts as will disrupt the market price of crude helium.''.
Subsection (c) is amended by inserting ``crude'' before ``helium'' after the words ``Sales of'' and by striking ``together with interest as provided in this subsection'' and all that follows down through the period at the end of such subsection and inserting the following: ``all funds required to be repaid to the United States as of October 1, 1993, under this section (hereinafter referred to as `repayable amounts').
The price at which crude helium is sold by the Secretary shall not be less than the amount determined by the Secretary as follows: ``(1) Divide the outstanding amount of such repayable amounts by the volume (in mcf) of crude helium owned by the United States and stored in the Bureau of Mines Cliffside Field at the time of the sale concerned.
Adjust the amount determined under paragraph (1) by the Consumer Price Index for years beginning after December 31, 1993.''.
Subsection (d) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Extraction of Helium From Deposits on Federal Lands.--All moneys received by the Secretary from the sale or disposition of helium on Federal lands shall be paid to the Treasury and credited against the amounts required to be repaid to the Treasury under subsection (c) of this section.''.
Subsection (e) is repealed.
Subsection (f) is amended by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(f)'' and by adding the following at the end thereof: ``(2) Within 7 days after the commencement of each fiscal year after the disposal of the facilities referred to in section 4(c), all amounts in such fund in excess of $2,000,000 (or such lesser sum as the Secretary deems necessary to carry out this Act during such fiscal year) shall be paid to the Treasury and credited as provided in paragraph (1).
Upon repayment of all amounts referred to in subsection (c), the fund established under this section shall be terminated and all moneys received under this Act shall be deposited in the Treasury as General Revenues.''.
Section 8 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Review of Reserves.--The Secretary shall review annually the known helium reserves in the United States and make a determination as to the expected life of the domestic helium reserves (other than federally owned helium stored at the Cliffside Reservoir) at that time.
Stockpile Sales.--Not later than January 1, 2004, the Secretary shall commence offering for sale crude helium from helium reserves owned by the United States in such minimum annual amounts as would be necessary to dispose of all such helium reserves in excess of 600,000,000 cubic feet (mcf) on a straight-line basis between such date and January 1, 2014; provided that the minimum price for all such sales, as determined by the Secretary in consultation with the helium industry, shall be such as will ensure repayment of the amounts required to be repaid to the Treasury under section 6(c), and provided further that the minimum annual sales requirement may be deferred only if, and to the extent that, the Secretary is unable to arrange sales at the minimum price.
The sales shall be at such times during each year and in such lots as the Secretary determines, in consultation with the helium industry, are necessary to carry out this subsection with minimum market disruption.
Discovery of Additional Reserves.--The discovery of additional helium reserves shall not affect the duty of the Secretary to make sales of helium as provided in subsection (b), as the case may be.''.
REPEAL OF AUTHORITY TO BORROW.
Sections 12 and 15 are repealed.
Section 16 is amended by redesignating existing section 16 as section 16(a) and inserting the following at the end thereof: ``(b)(1) The Inspector General of the Department of the Interior shall cause to be prepared, not later than March 31 following each fiscal year commencing with the date of enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1995, annual financial statements for the Helium Operations of the Bureau of Mines.
The Director of the Bureau of Mines shall cooperate with the Inspector General in fulfilling this requirement, and shall provide him with such personnel and accounting assistance as may be necessary for that purpose.
The financial statements shall be audited by the General Accounting Office, and a report on such audit shall be delivered by the General Accounting Office to the Secretary of the Interior and Congress, not later than June 30 following the end of the fiscal year for which they are prepared.
The audit shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
The financial statements shall be comprised of the following: ``(A) A balance sheet reflecting the overall financial position of the Helium Operations, including assets and liabilities thereof; ``(B) the Statement of Operations, reflecting the fiscal period results of the Helium Operations; ``(C) a statement cash flows or changes in financial position of the Helium Operations; and ``(D) a reconciliation of budget reports of the Helium Operations.
The Statement of Operations shall include but not be limited to the revenues from, and costs of, sales of crude helium, the storage and transportation of crude helium, the production, refining and marketing of refined helium, and the maintenance and operation of helium storage facilities at the Bureau of Mines Cliffside Field.
The term `revenues' for this purpose shall exclude (A) royalties paid to the United States for production of helium or other extraction of resources, except to the extent that the Helium Operations incur direct costs in connection therewith, and (B) proceeds from sales of assets other than inventory.
The term `expenses' shall include, but not be limited to (i) all labor costs of the Bureau of Mines Helium Operations, and of the Department of the Interior in connection therewith, and (ii) for financial reporting purposes but not in connection with the determination of sales prices in section 6(c), all current-period interest on outstanding repayable amounts (as described in section 6(c)) calculated at the same rates as such interest was calculated prior to the enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1995.
The balance sheet shall include, but not be limited to, on the asset side, the present discounted market value of crude helium reserves; and on the liability side, the accrued liability for principal and interest on debt to the United States.
For financial reporting purposes but not in connection with the determination of sales prices in section 6(c), the balance sheet shall also include accrued but unpaid interest on outstanding repayable amounts (as described in section 6(c)) through the date of the report, calculated at the same rates as such interest was calculated prior to the enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1995.