This Act may be cited as the ``Early Hearing Loss Detection, Diagnosis, and Intervention Act of 1997''.
The purposes of this Act are to authorize statewide early detection, diagnosis, referral, and intervention networks, technical assistance, a national applied research program, and interagency and private sector collaboration for policy development, in order to assist the States in making progress toward the following goals: (1) All babies born in hospitals in the United States and its territories should be screened for hearing loss before leaving the hospital (unless the parents of the children object to the screening).
Babies who are not born in hospitals should be screened within the first 3 months of life.
Diagnostic audiologic testing, if indicated, should be performed in a timely manner to allow appropriate referral for treatment/intervention before the age of 6 months.
All universal newborn hearing screening programs should include a component which ensures linkage to diagnosis and the community system of early intervention services.
Public policy in early hearing detection, diagnosis, and intervention should be based on applied research and the recognition that infants, toddlers, and children who are deaf or hard-of-hearing have unique language, learning, and communication needs, and should be the result of consultation with pertinent public and private sectors.
STATEWIDE EARLY DETECTION, DIAGNOSIS, AND INTERVENTION NETWORKS.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall make awards of grants or cooperative agreements to develop statewide early detection, diagnosis, and intervention networks for the following purposes: (1) To develop State capacity to support newborn hearing loss detection, diagnosis, and intervention.
To monitor the extent to which hearing detection is conducted in birthing hospitals throughout the State, and assist in the development of universal newborn hearing detection programs in birthing hospitals and nonhospital birthing sites.
To develop statewide models which ensure effective screening, referral, and linkage with appropriate diagnostic, medical, and qualified early intervention services, providers, and programs within the community.
To collect data on statewide early detection, diagnosis, and intervention that can be used for applied research and policy development.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, DATA MANAGEMENT, AND APPLIED RESEARCH.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall make awards of grants or cooperative agreements to provide technical assistance to State agencies to complement an intramural program and to conduct applied research related to infant hearing detection, diagnosis, and treatment/intervention.
The program shall carry out the following: (1) Provide technical assistance on data collection and management.
Develop standardized procedures for data management to ensure quality monitoring of infant hearing loss detection, diagnosis, and intervention programs.
Study the costs and effectiveness of hearing detection conducted by State-based programs in order to answer issues of importance to national and State policymakers.
Identify the causes and risk factors for congenital hearing loss that might lead to the development of preventive interventions.
Study the effectiveness of early hearing detection, diagnosis, and treatment/intervention programs by assessing the health, developmental, cognitive, and language status of these children at school age.
Promote the sharing of data regarding early hearing loss with State-based birth defects and developmental disabilities monitoring programs for the purpose of identifying previously unknown causes of hearing loss.
National Institutes of Health.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health, acting through the Director of the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, shall for purposes of this Act carry out a program of research on the efficacy of new screening techniques and technology, including clinical trials of screening methods, studies on efficacy of intervention, and related basic and applied research.
In General.--In carrying out programs under this Act, the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Director of the National Institutes of Health shall collaborate and consult with other Federal agencies; State and local agencies (including those responsible for early intervention services pursuant to part C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act); consumer groups serving individuals who are deaf and hard-of-hearing; persons who are deaf and hard-of-hearing and their families; qualified professional personnel who are proficient in deaf or hard-of-hearing children's language and who possess the specialized knowledge, skills, and attributes needed to serve deaf and hard-of-hearing infants, toddlers, children, and their families; other health and education professionals and organizations; third-party payers and managed care organizations; and related commercial industries.
Policy Development.--The Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Director of the National Institutes of Health shall coordinate and collaborate on recommendations for policy development at the Federal and State levels and with the private sector, including consumer and professional based organizations, with respect to early hearing detection, diagnosis, and treatment/ intervention.
State Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Intervention Networks; Data Collection.--The Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration and the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall coordinate and collaborate in assisting States to establish early detection, diagnosis, and intervention networks under section 3 and to develop a data collection system under section 4.
Statewide Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Intervention Networks.--For the purpose of carrying out section 3, there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $8,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2003.
Technical Assistance, Data Management, and Applied Research.-- (1) Centers for disease control and prevention.--For the purpose of carrying out section 4(a), there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2003.
National institutes of health.--For the purpose of carrying out section 4(b), there are authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $4,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2003.