This Act may be cited as the ``Welfare Extension and Marriage Promotion Act of 2004''.
EXTENSION OF THE TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM THROUGH JUNE 30, 2004.
In General.--Activities authorized by part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (except section 403(a)(2) of such Act, as in effect during fiscal year 2002), and by sections 510, 1108(b), and 1925 of such Act, shall continue through June 30, 2004, in the manner authorized for fiscal year 2002, notwithstanding section 1902(e)(1)(A) of such Act, and out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are hereby appropriated such sums as may be necessary for such purpose.
Grants and payments may be made pursuant to this authority through the third quarter of fiscal year 2004 at the level provided for such activities through the third quarter of fiscal year 2002.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 403(a)(3)(H)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 603(a)(3)(H)(ii)) is amended by striking ``March 31'' and inserting ``June 30''.
EXTENSION OF THE NATIONAL RANDOM SAMPLE STUDY OF CHILD WELFARE AND CHILD WELFARE WAIVER AUTHORITY THROUGH JUNE 30, 2004.
Activities authorized by sections 429A and 1130(a) of the Social Security Act shall continue through June 30, 2004, in the manner authorized for fiscal year 2002, and out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are hereby appropriated such sums as may be necessary for such purpose.
Grants and payments may be made pursuant to this authority through the third quarter of fiscal year 2004 at the level provided for such activities through the third quarter of fiscal year 2002.
HEALTHY MARRIAGE PROMOTION GRANTS; REPEAL OF BONUS FOR REDUCTION OF ILLEGITIMACY RATIO.
Section 403(a)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 603(a)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Healthy marriage promotion grants.-- ``(A) Authority.--The Secretary shall award competitive grants to States, territories, and tribal organizations for not more than 50 percent of the cost of developing and implementing innovative programs to promote and support healthy, married, 2-parent families.
Healthy marriage promotion activities.--Funds provided under subparagraph (A) shall be used to support any of the following programs or activities: ``(i) Public advertising campaigns on the value of marriage and the skills needed to increase marital stability and health.
Education in high schools on the value of marriage, relationship skills, and budgeting.
Marriage education, marriage skills, and relationship skills programs, that may include parenting skills, financial management, conflict resolution, and job and career advancement, for non-married pregnant women and non-married expectant fathers.
Pre-marital education and marriage skills training for engaged couples and for couples or individuals interested in marriage.
Marriage enhancement and marriage skills training programs for married couples.
Divorce reduction programs that teach relationship skills.
Marriage mentoring programs which use married couples as role models and mentors in at-risk communities.
Programs to reduce the disincentives to marriage in means-tested aid programs, if offered in conjunction with any activity described in this subparagraph.
Appropriation.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated for fiscal year 2004 $50,000,000 for grants under this paragraph.''.
SECRETARY'S FUND FOR RESEARCH, DEMONSTRATIONS, AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
Section 413 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 613) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k) Funding for Research, Demonstrations, and Technical Assistance.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, which shall be available to the Secretary for the purpose of conducting and supporting research and demonstration projects by public or private entities, and providing technical assistance to States, Indian tribal organizations, and such other entities as the Secretary may specify that are receiving a grant under this part, which shall be expended primarily on activities described in section 403(a)(2)(B), and which shall be in addition to any other funds made available under this part.