Title V of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended-- (1) by striking the title heading and inserting the following: ``TITLE V--PROMOTING EQUITY AND EMPOWERMENT''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART D--EMPOWERING FUTURE ENTREPRENEURS ``SEC.
SHORT TITLE AND FINDINGS.
Short Title.--This part may be cited as the ``Future Entrepreneurs of America Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: ``(1) In order to reach their career goals in our dynamic American economy, young people need to take personal responsibility to obtain the skills, knowledge, constructive attitudes, and experiences that will enable them to function as creative, self-confident participants in the workforce.
Research has found that 61 percent of high school students are interested in starting their own business and 75 percent of students believe it is important for the Nation's schools to teach more about entrepreneurship and starting a business.
States have begun to express increased interest in entrepreneurship education.
State educational leaders are recognizing that self-employment is a viable career option for young people and are exploring ways to better prepare them to own and operate their own businesses.
As part of a lifelong learning process, entrepreneurship education helps to increase the motivation of young people to learn, helps them develop a sense of individual opportunity, enhances their personal growth, helps them develop an appreciation of the importance of innovation, helps develop their problem solving and leadership skills, helps them learn to manage their finances, and helps them develop the sort of optimistic outlook and self-reliant attitudes that will benefit them for their entire working lives.
Entrepreneurship education integrates instruction in economic literacy, including how the economy functions, the workings of the social security system, and the importance of personal savings.
The entrepreneurs and inventors of tomorrow are in our schools today.
The entrepreneurial spirit needs to be nurtured at all levels of our Nation's educational system especially beginning with students in grades 7 through 12.
Authority.--In any fiscal year in which the appropriations under section 5408(a) equal or exceed $50,000,000, the Secretary shall make grants to States from allocations under subsection (d) to enable them to carry out entrepreneurship education programs for students in grades 7 through 12.
Agency To Receive Grant.--A grant award to a State under subsection (a) shall be made to the State educational agency.
State Plan.-- ``(1) Approved state plan required.--No State shall receive a grant under subsection (a) unless it has submitted to the Secretary a plan, which the Secretary has approved.
State plan contents.--The State plan described in paragraph (1) shall include-- ``(A) a description of how the State will use a grant; ``(B) a description of how the programs supported by a grant will-- ``(i) involve the business community; and ``(ii) be coordinated with other relevant Federal, State, regional, and local programs; and ``(C) a description of how the State will evaluate program performance.
Allocation of Funds.-- ``(1) Allocation factors.--Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall allocate the amounts made available to carry out this section pursuant to subsection (a) to each State according to the relative populations in all the States of students in grades 7 through 12, as determined by the Secretary based on the most recent satisfactory data.
Minimum allocation.--Subject to the availability of appropriations and notwithstanding paragraph (1), a State that has submitted an approved plan under subsection (c) shall be allocated an amount not less than $400,000 for a fiscal year.
Reallocation.--In any fiscal year an allocation under this subsection-- ``(A) for a State that has not submitted a plan under subsection (c); or ``(B) for a State whose plan submitted under subsection (c) has been disapproved by the Secretary; shall be reallocated to the remaining States in accordance with paragraph (1).
Use of Grant Funds.-- ``(1) Required uses.--A grant made to a State under subsection (a) shall be used-- ``(A) to provide funds to local educational agencies and public schools to carry out entrepreneurship education programs for students in grades 7 through 12 based on the concept of lifelong learning necessary to encourage the entrepreneurial spirit; and ``(B) to monitor and evaluate programs supported under subparagraph (A).
Permissible use.--A grant made to a State under subsection (a) may be used for professional development that helps to prepare teachers and administrators for entrepreneurial education.
Limitation on administrative costs.--A State receiving a grant under subsection (a) may use not more than 4 percent of the total amount of the grant in each fiscal year for the administrative costs of carrying out this section.
Report to the Secretary.--Each agency receiving a grant as described in subsection (b) shall transmit a report to the Secretary with respect to each fiscal year for which a grant was received.
The report shall describe the programs supported by the grant and the results of the State's monitoring and evaluation of such programs.
DIRECT LOCAL GRANT PROGRAM.
``In any fiscal year in which the appropriations under section 5408(a) are less than $50,000,000, the Secretary may make grants directly to local educational agencies and public schools to provide entrepreneurship education to students in grades 7 through 12.
Authority.--The Secretary shall make a grant to or execute a contract with an organization or institution with substantial experience in the field of entrepreneurship education to establish, operate, and maintain a national clearinghouse (in this part referred to as the ``Clearinghouse'') for instructional materials and information regarding exemplary entrepreneurship education programs and best practices.
Application.--An organization or institution desiring to establish, operate, and maintain the Clearinghouse shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information, as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Basis and Term.--The Secretary shall make the grant or contract authorized by subsection (a) on a competitive, merit basis for a term of 5 years.
Use of Funds.--The Clearinghouse shall use the funds provided under a grant or contract made under subsection (a)-- ``(1) to maintain a repository of instructional materials and related information regarding entrepreneurship education programs for secondary schools, including middle schools, for use by States, localities, and the general public; ``(2) to disseminate to States, localities, and the general public, through electronic and other means, instructional materials and related information regarding entrepreneurship education programs for secondary schools, including middle schools; and ``(3) to the extent that resources allow, to provide technical assistance to States, localities, and the general public on the design, establishment, and implementation of entrepreneurship education programs for secondary schools, including middle schools.
Consultation.--The Clearinghouse shall consult with the Small Business Administration with respect to its activities under subsection (d).
Submission to Clearinghouse.--Each Federal agency or department that develops entrepreneurship education programs or instructional materials for such programs shall submit to the Clearinghouse information on the programs and copies of the materials.
Application of Copyright Laws.--In carrying out this section the Clearinghouse shall ensure compliance with title 17, United States Code.
Performance Measures.--The Secretary shall develop measures to evaluate the performance of programs assisted under sections 5402 and 5403.
Evaluation According to Performance Measures.--Applying the performance measures developed under subsection (a), the Secretary shall evaluate programs assisted under sections 5402 and 5403-- ``(1) to judge their performance and effectiveness; ``(2) to identify which of the programs represent the best practices of entities developing entrepreneurship education programs for students in grades 7 through 12; and ``(3) to identify which of the programs can be replicated and used to provide technical assistance to States, localities, and the general public.
REPORT TO THE CONGRESS.
``For each fiscal year for which there are appropriations under section 5408(a), the Secretary shall transmit a report to the Congress describing the status of the implementation of this part.
The report shall include the results of the evaluation required by section 5405 and a description of the programs supported under sections 5402 and 5403.
``In this part-- ``(1) the term `entrepreneurship education' means educational activities and experiences, planned and supervised by qualified teachers, that enable students to explore business ownership opportunities, acquire the skills and knowledge necessary to start a business, and develop a range of entrepreneurial competencies that will help them to explore and identify their lifelong career goals as business owners or as competent employees; and ``(2) the term `qualified teacher' means a teacher who holds a valid teaching certification or is considered to be qualified by the State educational agency in the State in which the teacher works.
Authorization.--For the purposes of carrying out this part, there are authorized to be appropriated $60,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Limitation on Funds for Clearinghouse.--The Secretary may use not less than 2 percent and not more than 5 percent of amounts appropriated under subsection (a) for each fiscal year to carry out section 5404.
Limitation on Funds for Secretary's Evaluation.--The Secretary may use not more than $200,000 from the amounts appropriated under subsection (a) for each fiscal year to carry out section 5405.
Limitation on Administrative Costs.--Except as provided in subsection (b) and as necessary to carry out section 5405 using amounts described in subsection (c), the Secretary shall not use any portion of the amounts appropriated under subsection (a) for the costs of administering this part.
Funds for Grants.--For each fiscal year the Secretary shall use all amounts appropriated under subsection (a), other than the amounts described in subsections (b) and (c), only for grants under section 5402 or 5403.