This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Agreements Compliance Act of 1993''.
REQUESTS FOR REVIEW OF FOREIGN COMPLIANCE.
Chapter 1 of title III of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2411 et seq.)
is amended by inserting after section 306 the following new section: ``SEC.
REQUESTS FOR REVIEW OF FOREIGN COMPLIANCE.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) The term `interested person' means any person that has a significant economic interest that is being, or has been, adversely affected by the failure of a foreign country to comply materially with the terms of a trade agreement.
The term `trade agreement' means any bilateral trade agreement to which the United States is a party.
Request for Review.-- ``(1) An interested person may request the Trade Representative to undertake a review under this section to determine whether a foreign country is in material compliance with the terms of a trade agreement.
A request for the review of a trade agreement under this section may be made only during-- ``(A) the 30-day period beginning on each anniversary of the effective date of the trade agreement; and ``(B) the 30-day period ending on the 90th day before the termination date of the trade agreement, if the first day of such 30-day period occurs not less than 180 days after the last occurring 30-day period referred to in subparagraph (A).
The Trade Representative shall commence a review under this section if the request-- ``(A) is in writing; ``(B) includes information reasonably available to the petitioner regarding the failure of the foreign country to comply with the trade agreement; ``(C) identifies the economic interest of the petitioner that is being adversely affected by the failure referred to in subparagraph (B); and ``(D) describes the extent of the adverse effect.
If 2 or more requests are filed during any period described in paragraph (2) regarding the same trade agreement, all of such requests shall be joined in a single review of the trade agreement.
Review.-- ``(1) If 1 or more requests regarding any trade agreement are received during any period described in subsection (b)(2), then within 90 days after the last day of such period the Trade Representative shall determine whether the foreign country is in material compliance with the terms of the trade agreement.
In making a determination under paragraph (1), the Trade Representative shall take into account-- ``(A) the extent to which the foreign country has adhered to the commitments it made to the United States; ``(B) the extent to which that degree of adherence has achieved the objectives of the agreement; and ``(C) any act, policy, or practice of the foreign country, or other relevant factor, that may have contributed directly or indirectly to material noncompliance with the terms of the agreement.
The acts, policies, or practices referred to in subparagraph (C) may include structural policies, tariff or nontariff barriers, or other actions which affect compliance with the terms of the agreement.
In conducting any review under para- graph (1), the Trade Representative may, if the Trade Representative considers such action necessary or appropriate-- ``(A) consult with the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Agriculture; ``(B) seek the advice of the United States International Trade Commission; and ``(C) provide opportunity for the presentation of views by the public.
Action After Affirmative Determination.-- ``(1) If, on the basis of the review carried out under subsection (c), the Trade Representative determines that a foreign country is not in material compliance with the terms of a trade agreement, the Trade Representative shall determine what action to take under section 301(a).
For purposes of section 301, any determination made under subsection (c) shall be treated as a determination made under section 304.
In determining what action to take under section 301(a), the Trade Representative shall seek to minimize the adverse impact on existing business relations or economic interests of United States persons, including products for which a significant volume of trade does not currently exist.
International Obligations.--Nothing in this section may be construed as requiring actions that are inconsistent with the international obligations of the United States, including the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.''.
Congressional Notification.--Section 309(3)(A) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2419(3)(A)) is amended by striking out ``section 302,'' and inserting ``sections 302 and 306A(c),''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of the Trade Act of 1974 relating to chapter 1 of title III is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 306 the following: ``Sec.
Requests for review of foreign compliance.