This Act may be cited as the ``Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument Completion Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the Act entitled ``An Act to designate the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument in the State of Washington, and for other purposes'', approved August 26, 1982 (96 United States Statutes at Large 301; 16 United States Code 431 note), required the United States to acquire all land and interests in land in the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument; (2) the Act directed the Secretary of Agriculture to acquire the surface interests and the mineral and geothermal interests by separate exchanges and expressed the sense of Congress that the exchanges be completed by November 24, 1982, and August 26, 1983, respectively; and (3) the surface interests exchange was consummated timely, but the exchange of all mineral and geothermal interests has not yet been completed a decade and a half after the Act's enactment.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide for the expeditious completion of the previously mandated Federal acquisition of private mineral and geothermal interests within the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument.
ACQUISITION OF MINERAL RIGHTS WITHIN THE NATIONAL VOLCANIC MONUMENT.
Section 3 of the Act entitled ``An Act to designate the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument in the State of Washington, and for other purposes'', approved August 26, 1982 (96 United States Statutes at Large 302; 16 United States Code 431 note), is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``and except that the Secretary may acquire mineral and geothermal interests only by exchange.
It is the sense of the Congress that in the case of mineral and geothermal interests such exchanges should be completed within one year after the date of enactment of this Act''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Expeditious Completion of Mineral and Geothermal Interests.-- ``(1) Definition of holder.--In this subsection, the term `holder' means a company, or its successor, referred to in subsection (c).
In general.--Within the period described in paragraph (7), the Secretary of the Interior shall acquire by exchange the mineral and geothermal interests in the Monument of each holder.
Monetary credits.-- ``(A) Issuance.--In exchange for the mineral and geothermal interests acquired by the Secretary of the Interior from a holder under paragraph (2), the Secretary of the Interior shall issue to the holder monetary credits that may be exercised by the holder for payment of-- ``(i) not more than 50 percent of the bonus or other payments made by successful bidders in any sales of mineral, oil, gas, or geothermal leases under the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 181 et sequentes), the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et sequentes), or the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1001 et sequentes); or ``(ii) not more than 50 percent of any royalty, rental, or advance royalty payment made to the United States to maintain any mineral, oil or gas, or geothermal lease issued under the Acts listed in clause (i).
Value of credits.--The credits issued under subparagraph (A) shall equal the fair market value of all mineral and geothermal interests conveyed in the exchange as determined under paragraph (4).
Acceptance of credits.--The Secretary of the Interior shall accept credits issued under subparagraph (A) in the same manner as cash for the payments described in subparagraph (A).
The use and exercise of the credits shall be subject to the laws (including regulations) governing such payments, to the extent the laws are consistent with this subsection.
Treatment of credits for distribution to states.--All amounts in the form of credits accepted by the Secretary of the Interior under subparagraph (C) for the payments described in subparagraph (A) shall be considered to be money received for the purpose of section 35 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 191) and section 20 of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1019).
Valuation of interests.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the mineral and geothermal interests to be conveyed by each holder in the exchanges required by paragraph (2) shall be valued by one of the following methods, as selected by the Secretary of the Interior: ``(i) Use of appraisal report.--The 1982 value established by the report of the third party appraisal completed on September 11, 1991, shall be adjusted to reflect changes in the consumer price index for all urban consumers published by the Department of Labor as of the date on which the exchange is to be consummated pursuant to paragraph (7), or such other value as shall be mutually agreed to by the Secretary of the Interior and the holders not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this subsection.
New appraisal.-- ``(I) Selection of appraiser.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary of the Interior and the holders shall mutually agree on the selection of a qualified appraiser to conduct an appraisal of the mineral and geothermal interests.
No agreement on appraiser.-- If no appraiser is mutually agreed to under subclause (I), not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this subsection-- ``(aa) the Secretary of the Interior and the holders shall each designate a qualified appraiser; and ``(bb) the two designated appraisers shall select a third qualified appraiser to perform the appraisal with the advice and assistance of the designated appraisers and in accordance with the instructions that were mutually agreed on for the September 11, 1991, third part appraisal.
Date of valuation.--The value of the mineral and geothermal interests to be conveyed by each holder shall be calculated as of August 26, 1982, adjusted to reflect changes in the consumer price index for all urban consumers published by the Department of Labor as of the date on which the exchange is to be consummated pursuant to paragraph (7).
Costs.--The Secretary of the Interior shall bear the costs of the process established by this clause.
Timely appraisal report.--The appraisal report resulting from subparagraph (A) shall be presented to the Secretary of the Interior timely to permit the Secretary of the Interior to determine the value of the mineral and geothermal interests to be conveyed by each holder.
Not later than the date that is 180 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary of the Interior shall notify each holder of the determination.
Failure of process.--If the Secretary of the Interior fails to make a determination under subparagraph (B) by the date that is 180 days after the date of enactment of this subsection or if any holder does not agree with the value determined by the Secretary of the Interior under subparagraph (B), one or more of the holders may petition the United States Court of Federal Claims for a determination of the value of the mineral and geothermal interests to be conveyed by the holders in accordance with this subsection.
Subject to the right of appeal, a determination by the Court shall be binding for purposes of this subsection on all parties.
Exchange account.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not later than 30 days after the completion of each exchange with a holder required by this subsection, the Secretary of the Interior shall establish, with the Minerals Management Service of the Department of the Interior, an exchange account for the holder for monetary credits described in paragraph (3).
Initial balance.--The initial balance of credits in each holder's account shall be equal to the value as determined under paragraph (4) of the mineral and geothermal interests conveyed by the holder in the exchange.
Use of credits.--The balance of credits in a holder's account shall be available to the holder or its assigns for the purposes of paragraph (3).
The Secretary of the Interior shall adjust the balance of credits in the account to reflect payments made pursuant to paragraph (3).
Transfer of credits.-- ``(i) In general.--A holder may transfer or sell any credits in the holder's account to another person.
Use of transferred credits.--Credits transferred under clause (i) may be used in accordance with this subsection only by a person that is qualified to bid on, or that holds, a mineral, oil, or gas lease under the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 181 et sequentes), the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et sequentes), or the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1001 et sequentes).
Notification.--A holder shall notify the Secretary of the Interior of any transfer or sale under this subparagraph promptly after the transfer or sale.
Time limit on use of credits.--On the date that is 5 years after an account is created under subparagraph (A), the Secretary of the Interior shall terminate the account and any remaining credits in the account shall become unusable.
Title to interests.--On the date of the establishment of an exchange account for a holder under paragraph (5)(A), title to any mineral and geothermal interests that are held by the holder and are to be acquired by the Secretary of the Interior under paragraph (2) shall transfer to the United States.
Completion of exchanges.--The Secretary of the Interior shall complete the exchanges under paragraph (2) not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this subsection or as soon as practicable after completion of the process described in paragraph (4)(C).''.
Passed the Senate July 17, 1998.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.