This Act may be cited as the ``Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) too many law enforcement officers die, while protecting the public, as a result of gunshot wounds; (2) according to studies, between 1985 and 1994, 709 law enforcement officers in the United States were feloniously killed in the line of duty; (3) more than 92 percent of such law enforcement officers were killed by firearms; (4) the number of law enforcement officers who die as a result of gunshot wounds has declined significantly since the introduction of modern bulletproof material; (5) according to studies, between 1985 and 1994, bullet resistant materials helped save the lives of more than 2,000 law enforcement officers in the United States; (6) the number of law enforcement officers who are killed in the line of duty would significantly decrease if every law enforcement officer in the United States had access to an armor vest; and (7) the Executive Committee for Indian Country Law Enforcement Improvements reports that violent crime in Indian country has risen sharply, despite decreases in the national crime rate, and has concluded that there is a ``public safety crisis in Indian country''.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to save lives of law enforcement officers by helping State and local law enforcement departments provide officers with armor vests.
Grant Authorization.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance is authorized to make grants to States, units of local government, and Indian tribes to purchase armor vests for use by law enforcement officers.
Uses of Funds.--Awards shall be distributed directly to the State, unit of local government, or Indian tribe and shall be used for the purchase of not more than 1 armor vest for each police officer in a jurisdiction.
Preferential Consideration.--In awarding grants under this Act, the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance may give preferential consideration, where feasible, to applications from jurisdictions that-- (1) have the greatest need for armor vests based on the percentage of officers in the department who do not have access to a vest; (2) have a mandatory wear policy that requires on-duty officers to wear armor vests whenever feasible; and (3) have a violent crime rate at or above the national average as determined by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Minimum Amount.--Unless all applications submitted by any State or unit of local government pursuant to subsection (a) have been funded, each qualifying State or unit of local government shall be allocated in each fiscal year pursuant to subsection (a) not less than 0.25 percent of the total amount appropriated in the fiscal year for grants pursuant to that subsection.
Maximum Amount.--A qualifying State or unit of local government may not receive more than 5 percent of the total amount appropriated in each fiscal year for grants pursuant to subsection (a).
Matching Funds.--The portion of the costs of a program provided by a grant under subsection (a) may not exceed 50 percent, unless the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance determines a case of fiscal hardship and waives, wholly or in part, the requirement under this subsection of a non-Federal contribution to the costs of a program.
Allocation of Funds.--At least half of the funds awarded under this program shall be allocated to units of local government or Indian tribes with fewer than 100,000 residents.
State and Tribal Applications.--To request a grant under this Act, the chief executive of a State shall submit an application to the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance, signed by the Attorney General of the State requesting the grant, or Indian tribe shall submit an application to the Director, in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Local Applications.--To request a grant under this Act, the chief executive of a unit of local government shall submit an application to the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance, signed by the chief law enforcement officer of the unit of local government requesting the grant, in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Renewal.--A State, unit of local government, or Indian tribe is eligible to receive a grant under this Act every 3 years.
Regulations.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall promulgate regulations to implement this section (including the information that must be included and the requirements that the States and units of local government must meet) in submitting the applications required under this Section.
PROHIBITION OF PRISON INMATE LABOR.
Any State, unit of local government, or Indian tribe that receives financial assistance provided using funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act may not purchase equipment or products manufactured using prison inmate labor.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) The term ``armor vest'' means-- (A) body armor which has been tested through the voluntary compliance testing program operated by the National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Center of the National Institute of Justice (NIJ), and found to comply with the requirements of NIJ Standard 0101.03, or any subsequent revision of such standard; or (B) body armor which exceeds the specifications stated in subparagraph (A), and which the law enforcement officer's agency or department permits the officer to wear on duty.
The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
The term ``qualifying State or unit of local government'' means any State or unit of local government which has submitted an application for a grant, or in which an eligible entity has submitted an application for a grant, which meets the requirements prescribed by the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance and the conditions set out in section 3.
The term ``Indian tribe'' has the same meaning as in section 4(e) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
There are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for each fiscal year to carry out this program.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
In the case of any equipment or products that may be authorized to be purchased with financial assistance provided using funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act, it is the sense of the Congress that entities receiving the assistance should, in expending the assistance, purchase only American-made equipment and products.