This Act may be cited as the ``North American Slavery Memorial Council Act''.
There is established the North American Slavery Memorial Council (in this Act referred to as the ``Council'').
The duties of the Council shall be to-- (1) establish an architectural design for a national memorial and museum to slavery in North America appropriate to honor the memory of victims of slavery (in this Act referred to as the ``Memorial and Museum''); (2) establish a single site within the District of Columbia suitable for the construction and operation of the Memorial and Museum; (3) construct the Memorial and Museum; and (4) operate the Memorial and Museum.
Number and Appointment.--The Council shall be composed of the following members: (1) Voting members.--65 voting members, who shall be appointed-- (A) 15 by the President of the United States; (B) 25 by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, appointed from among members of the House of Representatives; and (C) 25 by the President pro tempore of the Senate, on the recommendation of the majority and minority leaders of the Senate, from among members of the Senate.
Nonvoting members.--3 ex officio nonvoting members, who shall be appointed-- (A) 1 by the Secretary of the Interior; (B) 1 by the Secretary of State; and (C) 1 by the Secretary of Education.
Continuation of Membership.--If a member was appointed to the Council as a Member of Congress and the member ceases to be a Member of Congress, that member may continue as a member for not longer than the 60-day period beginning on the date that member ceases to be a Member of Congress.
Term.--Each member shall be appointed for a term of 5 years, except that the terms of the 5 members of the House of Representatives and the 5 members of the Senate appointed during a Congress shall expire at the end of that Congress.
Vacancies.-- (1) A vacancy in the Council shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
A member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member, except the 5 members of the House of Representatives and the 5 members of the Senate, may serve after the expiration of a term until a successor takes office.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members shall each be paid at the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable under section 5376 of title 5 for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Council.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Members of the Council who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Council.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.-- One-third of the voting members of the Council shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; Vice Chairperson.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Council shall be appointed by the President of the United States from among the members of the Council.
The term of office of the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall be 5 years.
A vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.--The Council shall meet not less frequently than monthly.
Director.--The Council shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Chairperson.
The Director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate of basic pay payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code.
The Director shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
Staff.--With the approval of the Council, the Director may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel as the Director considers appropriate.
Experts and Consultants.--With the approval of the Council, the Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Council, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Council to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Council may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Council considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Council may, if authorized by the Council, take any action which the Council is authorized to take by this section.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Council may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Council.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Council.
For purposes of Federal income, estate, and gift taxes, property accepted under this subsection shall be considered as a gift, bequest, or devise to the United States.
Mails.--The Council may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Council, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Council, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Council to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Architectural Design.--The Council shall determine the architectural design of the Memorial and Museum subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts and the National Capital Planning Commission.
Acquisition of Real Property in District of Columbia.--The Council may, for the purpose of establishing a single site for the Memorial and Museum and with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior in consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts and the National Capital Planning Commission, acquire real property in the District of Columbia by one or more of the following procedures: (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law (including the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code et sequentes)), any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States Government may transfer to the Council any real property in the District of Columbia that is under the administrative jurisdiction of the department, agency, or instrumentality and that the Council considers suitable for the Memorial and Museum.
The Council may purchase, with the consent of the owner, any real property within the District of Columbia that the Council considers suitable for the Memorial and Museum.
Construction.--The Council shall construct the Memorial and Museum on the site established under subsection (b) in accordance with the architectural design determined under subsection (a).
Operation.--In operating the Memorial and Museum, the Council shall-- (1) adopt bylaws; (2) establish annual budgets; (3) subject to the availability of funds and the provisions of annual budgets, purchase, accept, borrow, or otherwise acquire artifacts and other property for addition to the collections of the Memorial and Museum; (4) establish policy with respect to the utilization of the collections of the Memorial and Museum; (5) establish policy with respect to educational programs, exhibitions, and research projects relating to slavery in North America; (6) establish programs in cooperation with institutions including other museums, historical societies, educational institutions, cultural organizations, and other organizations for the education and promotion of understanding regarding slavery in North America; and (7) support the efforts of such institutions to educate and promote the understanding regarding slavery in North America.
Insurance.--The Council shall maintain insurance on the Memorial and Museum covering the risks, in the amounts, and containing the terms the Council considers necessary.
When requested by the Congress, the Comptroller General shall audit the financial transactions of the Council, including those involving donated funds, under generally accepted auditing standards.
The Council shall make available for an audit under this section all records, items, or property used by the Council that are necessary for the audit.
Each year, the Council shall submit to the Congress a report on the activities of the Council, including an accounting of all financial transactions involving donated funds.
APPLICABILITY OF COMMEMORATIVE WORKS ACT.
The Memorial and Museum is not a commemorative work within the meaning of the Commemorative Works Act (40 United States Code 1001 et sequentes).
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
Use of Amounts for Construction or Operation.--Amounts appropriated to the Council-- (1) may not be used for construction of the Memorial and Museum; and (2) may be used for operation of the Memorial and Museum only if amounts received under section 6(c) that are equal to or greater than such appropriated amounts are also so used.
Prior Authority Required.--Any spending authority (as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 401(c)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 651(c)(2)(A) and (C))) contained in this Act shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.