This Act may be cited as the ``General Accounting Office Oversight and Improvement Act of 1993''.
TITLE I--INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF INSPECTOR GENERAL.
In General.--Chapter 7 of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 704 as section 705; and (2) by inserting after section 703 the following new section: ``Sec.
Inspector general ``(a) There is established the Office of Inspector General within the General Accounting Office.
The Inspector General shall be appointed and perform his duties in accordance with the provisions of section 8F of the Inspector General Act of 1978.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 7 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking out the item relating to section 704 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``704.
Relationship to other laws.''.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.
The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 8E and 8F as sections 8F and 8G, respectively; (2) in section 8G (as redesignated by paragraph (1) of this section)-- (A) by striking out ``8C, or 8D'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``8C, 8D, or 8E''; and (B) by striking out ``section 8E(a)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``section 8F(a)''; (3) by inserting after section 8D the following new section: ``special provisions concerning the general accounting office ``Sec.
(1) For purposes of this section the term `Inspector General' means the Inspector General of the Office of the Inspector General for the General Accounting Office established under section 704 of title 31, United States Code.
To the extent provided under section 705 of title 31, United States Code-- ``(A) the General Accounting Office shall be an establishment under this Act; and ``(B) the Comptroller General of the United States shall be the head of such establishment under this Act.
(1) Notwithstanding section 3 of this Act, the Inspector General-- ``(A) shall be appointed jointly by-- ``(i) the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate; and ``(ii) the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives; and ``(B) may only be removed from office by a joint resolution of Congress, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, only for-- ``(i) permanent disability; ``(ii) inefficiency; ``(iii) neglect of duty; ``(iv) malfeasance; or ``(v) a felony or conduct involving moral turpitude.
An Inspector General removed from office under paragraph (1)(B) may not be reappointed to the office.
''; and (4) in section 11-- (A) in paragraph (1) by inserting ``, and the Comptroller General of the United States'' before ``; as the case may be;'' and (B) in paragraph (2) by inserting ``, and the General Accounting Office'' before ``; as the case may be''.
Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Inspector General, General Accounting Office.''.
REORGANIZATION WITHIN THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.
The Comptroller General may reorganize, consolidate, or terminate the Office of Special Investigations and transfer or terminate any function of such Office consistent with the provisions and amendments made by this title to-- (1) eliminate the performance of any function by the Office of Special Counsel, which shall be performed by the Inspector General of the General Accounting Office after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) provide for greater efficiency by the General Accounting Office.
TITLE II--GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE FINAL REPORTS AND CONGRESSIONAL REQUESTS FOR REPORTS SEC.
FINAL REPORTS AND CONGRESSIONAL REQUESTS FOR REPORTS.
In General.--Chapter 7 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 720 the following new sections: ``Sec.
Final reports ``(a) For purposes of this section, the term `agency' means a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States Government (except a mixed-ownership Government corporation) or the District of Columbia government.
(1) In addition to actions taken under section 718(b)(1), the Comptroller General shall provide an agency that is relevant to a report, an opportunity to review any finding of the General Accounting Office in such report before such report is final and released.
After providing the review made available under paragraph (1), the Comptroller General shall include a summary of the agency response as a part of the final report.
To the greatest extent practicable consistent with applicable law, the Comptroller General shall include a list of all organizational contacts and sources of information used in each final report.
If a Member of Congress requests the Comptroller General to withhold the release of a final report to any person, the Comptroller General may release such report no earlier than 7 days after the date on which such request is received.
A final report may not be released, unless the Comptroller General makes a written determination included in such report that the General Accounting Office has complied with all internal quality control procedures.
Congressional requests for reports ``(a) No later than 3 days after receiving a request for a report-- ``(1) from the chairman of a committee of the Congress, the Comptroller General shall notify the ranking member of such committee that such request was received; and ``(2) from the ranking minority member of a committee of the Congress, the Comptroller General shall notify the chairman of such committee that such request was received.
(1) No later than 3 days after approving a request to prepare a report for a Member of the Congress the Comptroller General shall-- ``(A) notify the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of the Senate of such approval if the requester is a Senator; and ``(B) notify the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives of such approval if the requester is a Member of the House of Representatives.
The Comptroller General shall provide appropriate notification for publication in the Congressional Record of all approvals of requests from Members of Congress to prepare reports.
All such approvals shall be published in the Congressional Record.
The Comptroller General shall treat all requests from chairmen and ranking members of committees of the Congress on an equal basis.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 720 the following: ``721.
Congressional requests for reports.''.
TITLE III--GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE PEER REVIEW COMMITTEE SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE PEER REVIEW COMMITTEE.
There is established the General Accounting Office Peer Review Committee (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Committee'').
Appointment.--(1) The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Comptroller General of the United States from a list of individuals jointly nominated by the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of the Senate, and a list of individuals jointly nominated by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
The Comptroller General shall designate one of the members appointed under paragraph (1) to serve as Chairman of the Committee.
The Comptroller General shall appoint an appropriate individual to fill any vacancy which may occur on the Committee.
Members.--The Committee shall be composed of no more than 15 members of whom-- (1) 2 members shall be Senators, who shall not be members of the same political party; (2) 2 members shall be Members of the House of Representatives who shall not be members of the same political party; (3) 2 members shall be Inspectors General of executive agencies; (4) 2 members shall be individuals who are not Federal officers or employees; and (5) 7 members shall have experience or expertise in Federal administrative policymaking, procedure, and processes.
Ex Officio Member.--The Comptroller General shall serve as a nonvoting ex officio member of the Committee.
Compensation.--(1) No member of the Committee who is a Federal officer or employee shall receive compensation for service to the Committee.
Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, no member of the Committee who is not a Federal officer or employee shall receive compensation for service to the Committee.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Committee who are not Federal officers and employees shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Committee.
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE.
The Committee shall-- (1) recommend a formal process and standards for review under which agencies, and affected parties may appeal to the General Accounting Office to correct factual errors, and to reconsider findings contained in General Accounting Office studies, audits, investigations, and reports which are based on or substantially influenced by erroneous information, or previously unconsidered information; (2) recommend procedures to notify the Congress, the public, and the media of modifications or retractions to studies, audits, investigations, and reports following a review described under paragraph (1); (3) review policies and guidelines, and recommend improvements to eliminate inappropriate advocacy of policy or the expression of unsubstantiated conclusions within General Accounting Office reports and testimony; (4) recommend improvements to ensure that General Accounting Office work product is fair, factual, unbiased, professional and consistent with the purposes for which the General Accounting Office was established; (5) review the General Accounting Office's internal quality control procedures, including-- (A) Government Auditing Standards; (B) the General Accounting Office's Communications Manual; (C) the General Accounting Office Policy Procedures Manual; and (D) the Post-Assignment Quality Review System; (6) recommend procedures for making the requester of any service by the General Accounting Office to remain anonymous to the General Accounting Office team members conducting and overseeing the relevant investigation and reporting activities; (7) review the General Accounting Office's policies and procedures, and make recommendations to eliminate duplicative or superfluous auditing and investigative activities; (8)(A) provide an estimate to the Congress on the number of annual man-hours and costs incurred by respondents to General Accounting Office audits; and (B) recommend policies, guidelines or procedures to reduce compliance costs without adversely affecting the necessary activities of General Accounting Office auditors or the quality of work product; and (9) make recommendations to the Comptroller General and the Congress on measures to-- (A) improve professionalism, impartiality, independence, and excellence within the General Accounting Office; (B) improve hiring practices, employee training and morale, administrative structure and policies; and (C) further the purposes for which the General Accounting Office was established.
In General.--To the greatest extent practicable consistent with applicable law, the Comptroller General shall implement the recommendations of the Committee (including the establishment or modification of procedures, guidelines, and standards).
Upon the termination of the Committee the Comptroller shall submit to Congress a report on the recommendations made pursuant to this Act.
Notification to the Congress.--No later than 90 days after the date of the termination of the Committee, the Comptroller General shall notify the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives of any Committee recommendation that the Comptroller General is unable to implement and the specific reason for such inability.
The General Accounting Office shall provide administrative and support services for the Committee.
FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT.
The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Committee.
The Committee shall terminate 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.