This Act may be cited as the ``Regional Comprehensive Emergency Preparedness, Coordination, and Recovery Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Responders to the terrorist attacks at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the tragedy in Pennsylvania on September 11, 2001, from numerous jurisdictions assisted the fire and rescue workers responsible for responding within their jurisdictions.
Even in the largest municipality, first responders need the support of local elected officials and neighboring jurisdictions, as well as support from numerous regional, State, Federal, and private sector entities.
The sheer number of agencies taking part in any emergency response demands coordination, mutual support, and effective communication.
Regional planning and coordination of response efforts are essential to ensure the least loss of life and damage to property.
Regional councils of governments, regional planning commissions, and development districts have the accountability and experience necessary to coordinate comprehensive regional plans that encompass the needs of the Federal, State, and local governments, the private sector, and all other parties with a stake in providing for the security of their communities.
Regional councils of government can ensure the development of a coordinated emergency preparedness and recovery plan involving Federal, State, and local governments and the private sector.
Coordinated, area-wide training, equipment acquisition, and recovery planning is essential for effective regional preparedness and mitigation.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to encourage and facilitate the development and implementation of regional emergency preparedness and coordination plans among Federal, State, and local governments and the private sector within the region and to facilitate preparedness and mitigation efforts.
In this Act: (1) The term ``region'' means a designated multijurisdictional planning area or a sub-State district with boundaries established by State law or through mutual agreement of local governments.
The term ``regional council'' means a multipurpose association of governments in a planning region, including councils of governments, regional planning commissions, and area development districts.
The term ``local government'' means any city, county, or township within the United States.
The term ``State'' means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, or any territory of the United States.
The term ``stakeholder'' means Federal, State, local, private, and nonprofit entities, including, but not limited to-- (A) local elected officials; (B) local State emergency management agencies; (C) local fire and rescue personnel; (D) health professionals; (E) local school representatives; (F) college and university representatives; (G) the business community; (H) port and airport officials; (I) utilities; (J) State departments of transportation; and (K) other individuals and entities identified by the stakeholders.
The term ``regional plan'' means a regional emergency preparedness, response, mitigation, and recovery plan.
REQUIREMENT TO COORDINATE THE DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS, COORDINATION, AND RECOVERY PLANS.
In General.--The regional councils as defined in section 3(2) shall-- (1) convene all local governments, Federal, State, and private sector interests within a region to coordinate the development of emergency preparedness, response, mitigation, and recovery plans for the entire region; and (2) convene all stakeholders within the region.
Elements of the Regional Plan.--The emergency response plan required to be developed under subsection (a) shall include, at a minimum-- (1) an assessment of potential targets for destruction; (2) an assessment of available equipment and manpower to respond to a disaster; (3) an assessment of equipment needs; (4) establishment of a regional communication system among stakeholders; (5) establishment of a secure information repository that includes information needed, as necessary, to coordinate stakeholder responsibilities within the region; and (6) information on the following: (A) Response resources.-- (i) Locations, contacts, capabilities, and capacities of emergency medical facilities.
Locations, contacts, and equipment listings for fire, police, and emergency medical technician services.
Locations of, and 24-hour contacts for, appropriate medical facilities and personnel and other potential first responders.
Locations and contacts for area stakeholders involved in the operation and maintenance of essential services within the region.
Locations and contacts for area key military personnel and facilities.
Support facilities.-- (i) Locations, capabilities, and capacities of existing shelters.
Locations of, and available facilities at, schools, colleges, universities, churches, and other public buildings.
Locations of major water and food supplies.
Infrastructure.-- (i) Locations of water treatment and storage facilities and distribution mains.
Locations of utilities lines, pipelines, and generating facilities.
Locations of sewer mains and treatment plants.
Locations of voice, data, video, microwave, and satellite uplink communication facilities.
Locations of radio and television studios and transmission sites.
Locations and capacities of shortwave radio facilities and volunteers.
Locations of major bridges and dams.
Locations of major educational facilities.
Transportation facilities.-- (i) Locations and capacities of major transportation facilities, lines, and terminals, including ports and airports.
Locations and capacities of local and regional transportation routes.
At-risk populations.-- (i) Locations of large population concentrations and the times of those concentrations.
Schedules of major public events and capacities of venues.
Population statistics, including block level population data.
Locations of elderly, infirm, and disabled persons who need special assistance.
Potential targets.-- (i) Locations of major concentrations of hazardous and biohazard chemicals.
Locations of fuel depots and dispensing facilities which meet certain Environmental Protection Agency thresholds.
Locations of major concentrations of munitions and explosives.
Locations of other potential targets, such as nuclear power plants, in the region.
Debris disposal.-- (i) Identification of locations for debris disposal.
Identification of potential health hazards to personnel involved in debris disposal.
Planning Activities.--Planning activities pursuant to this section shall include analyzing and documenting the possibility of a disaster and the potential consequences or impacts upon life, property, and the environment and planning for utilization of Geographic Information Systems, to assess hazards and evaluate the consequences of potential emergencies or disasters.
Approval of Regional Plan.--The plan shall be approved by the designated regional planning agency's governing body and Governor or Governors not later than the date that is 12 months after the designated agency has received an initial planning grant under this Act.
Update of Regional Plan.--The regional plan shall be reviewed annually and updated as needed, based on revised threat assessments, trainings, and drills.
Security of Mapping and Infrastructure Information Contained Within Regional Plan.--(1) For security purposes, the information contained in the regional plan required under subsection (b)(5) shall be available only to those public and private officials and agencies that have responsibility under such plan.
Computer and software technology shall be required for securing the key resources and critical infrastructure that may be outlined within the regional plan.
It shall be necessary to seek the appropriate measures to protect the key resources and critical infrastructure within each region in coordination with other agencies and representatives from within the region including Federal, State, and local government personnel, agencies and authorities, the private sector, and other entities.
It shall be necessary to continue to review and analyze and make recommendations for improvements in the policies and procedures governing the security of this information and sharing it with law enforcement, intelligence, emergency management, and other entities related to homeland security within the Federal Government and between such representatives within the region, including Federal, State, and local government personnel agencies, authorities, and the private sector.
In General.--From the amounts appropriated to Federal or State agencies for emergency preparedness and homeland security, an amount of not less than three percent shall be allocated to the Department of Homeland Security, or other agency designated by Congress, for the preparation, review, and update of regional plans required by this Act.
Such funds shall be allocated to designated regional councils for the purposes set forth in this Act.
Formula.--Allocations to regions shall be according to a formula that takes into account the population of a region, base amounts necessary to prepare a regional plan, vulnerability to catastrophic events, and the presence of facilities of State or national significance.
Consistency.--Funding from Federal agencies for local, regional, or State projects for emergency preparedness, response, recovery, or mitigation shall require consistency with regional plans.