For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Administration.--The term ``Administration'' means the Federal Aviation Administration.
Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Air transportation.--The term ``air transportation'' means foreign air transportation, interstate air transportation, or the transportation of mail by aircraft.
Aircraft.--The term ``aircraft'' means any contrivance invented, used, or designed to navigate, or fly in, the air.
Function.--The term ``function'' means any duty, obligation, power, authority, responsibility, right, privilege, activity, or program.
Office.--The term ``office'' includes any office, administration, agency, institute, unit, organizational entity, or component thereof.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall reorganize the Federal Aviation Administration in accordance with this Act.
Transfer of Functions.--In carrying out the reorganization under this Act, the Secretary shall transfer to another office of the Department any function of the Administration that is not directly related to the promotion of air safety.
Use of Funds.--In carrying out the reorganization under this Act, the Secretary is authorized to use funds made available for the Administration for the functions transferred to other offices of the Department under subsection (b)(1) to carry out those functions.
Continuing Effect of Legal Documents.--Until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Secretary or other authorized official, a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law, all orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, agreements, grants, contracts, certificates, licenses, registrations, privileges, and other administrative actions shall continue if they are-- (1) issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by the President, any Federal agency or official thereof, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the performance of functions that are transferred under this Act; and (2) in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, or were final before the date of enactment of this Act and are to become effective on or after such date.
Proceedings Not Affected.-- (1) In general.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect any proceedings, including notices of proposed rulemaking, or any application for any license, permit, or financial assistance pending before the Federal Aviation Administration on the date of enactment of this Act, and those proceedings and applications shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this title had not been enacted, and shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection may be construed to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any proceeding referred to in paragraph (1) under the same terms and conditions, and to the same extent, that such proceeding could have been discontinued if this Act had not been enacted.
Suits Not Affected.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect suits commenced before the date of enactment of this Act.
In all such suits, proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Nonabatement of Actions.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against the Federal Aviation Administration or by and against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer of the Federal Aviation Administration, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act.
Administrative Actions Relating to Promulgation of Regulations.--Any administrative action relating to the preparation or promulgation of a regulation by the Federal Aviation Administration relating to a function transferred under this title may be continued by the Department with the same effect as if this title had not been enacted.
Reference in any other Federal law, Executive order, regulation, or any document relating to-- (1) the Administrator, with regard to the functions transferred under section 2, shall be deemed to refer to the Secretary; and (2) the Administration, with regard to functions transferred under section 2, shall be deemed to refer to the Department.
Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Congress recommended legislation containing technical and conforming amendments (including amendments to subtitle VII of title 49, United States Code) to reflect the changes made by this Act.