This Act may be cited as the ``Municipal Preparation and Strategic Response Act''.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Emergency response unit.--The term ``emergency response unit'' means a State or local emergency response unit, including any fire department, police department, sheriff's office, paramedic unit, local public health unit, or hospital, or any other entity determined by a State or unit of local government to be essential to emergency response and preparedness.
Unit of local government.--The term ``unit of local government'' includes any city, county, town, borough, tribe, or other municipality or consortia of local governments.
The Congress finds that-- (1) in the event of a catastrophe or an attack on the Nation, emergency response units are the first to respond to the scene and thereby take the greatest risks, underscoring the need for a coordinated response to an emergency; (2) potential contamination of reservoirs, water supplies, sewers, and food supplies, as well as the potential release of biochemical agents and contaminants are a threat to front line rescuers and appropriate protocols and procedures must be established; (3) the potential threats of a disruption of communications and other high technology systems through the use of electronic warfare techniques must be identified and appropriate protocol and procedures must be established; and (4) there is a clear and present need to coordinate a response to terrorism-related emergencies among emergency response units and between local, State, and Federal agencies.
In General.--The Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall make grants on a competitive basis to units of local government and emergency response units.
Use of Grants.--Grants made under this section shall be used to-- (1) develop strategic response plans that-- (A) provide for a clearly defined and unified response to a terrorist attack or other catastrophe; (B) coordinate the activities and procedures of various emergency response units; (C) define the relationship, roles, responsibilities, jurisdictions, command structures, and communication protocols of emergency response units; (D) coordinate response procedures with similar emergency response units in neighboring units of local government as well as with State and Federal agencies; (E) identify potential local targets of terrorism and include specific response procedures for each potential target; (F) assess and address threats and outline coordinated response procedures; and (G) identify areas where additional training, equipment, or other assistance is needed to implement such procedures; (2) prepare and issue reports to units of local government, State legislatures, and Congress that include recommendations for specific legislative action; and (3) conduct public forums or other appropriate activities to educate the public about-- (A) potential threats and steps the public can take to prepare for them; (B) the contents of the strategic response plans; (C) how to communicate with authorities in the event of an emergency; (D) the location of safe public assembly areas or other emergency shelters; and (E) other appropriate information.
STATE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATORS.
The Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall designate for each State a representative of the Federal Emergency Management Agency to-- (1) advise and assist units of local government with the development of strategic response plans; (2) act as a liaison between units of local government and the Federal Government; and (3) coordinate the sharing of information about Federal Government initiatives and protocol.
There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2002 $1,000,000,000 to carry out this Act.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
Grants for Counterterrorism Training.--Section 33(b)(3) of the Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1974 (15 United States Code 2229(b)(3)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (M) by striking ``or'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (N) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(O) to fund counterterrorism training and provide related equipment.''.
Special Rule.--Section 33(b)(6) of such Act (15 United States Code 2229(b)(6)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Exemption.--This paragraph shall not apply to grants that are made exclusively for the purposes described in paragraph (3)(O).''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 33 of such Act (15 United States Code 2229) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Authorization for Counterterrorism Programs.--In addition to amounts authorized under subsection (e), there are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2002 $250,000,000 for grants to be used exclusively for the purposes described in subsection (b)(3)(O).
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
LAW ENFORCEMENT COUNTERTERRORISM GRANTS.
Grants for Counterterrorism Training.--Section 1701(b)(1) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796dd(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (C) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) provide counterterrorism training and related equipment.''.
Special Rule.--Section 1701(i) of such Act (42 United States Code 3796dd(i)) is amended by adding at the end ``This subsection shall not apply to grants that are made exclusively for the purposes described in subsection (b)(1)(D).''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 1001(a)(11) of such Act (42 United States Code 3793(a)(11)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); and (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) In addition to the amounts authorized under subparagraph (A), there are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2002 $250,000,000 for grants to be used exclusively for the purposes described in section 1701(b)(1)(D).
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
Subparagraph (C) shall not apply to such sums.