This Act may be cited as the ``Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge Establishment Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Cahaba River in Alabama is recognized nationally for its unique biological diversity which includes providing habitat for 131 species of fish (more than any other river its size in North America).
The Cahaba River is home to 64 rare and imperiled species of aquatic plants and animals, including fishes, freshwater turtles, mussels, and snails.
The Cahaba River is home to 12 species of fish, mussels, and snails listed as endangered or threatened species.
The Cahaba River is home to six terrestrial species of plants and animals listed as endangered or threatened species.
The Cahaba River harbors the largest population in the world of the imperiled shoals lily, known locally as the Cahaba Lily.
The Cahaba River watershed contains extremely rare plant communities that are home to eight species of plants previously unknown to science and a total of 69 rare and imperiled species of plants.
The Cahaba River is home to at least a dozen endemic aquatic animals that are found nowhere else in the world.
The Cahaba River is the longest remaining free-flowing river in Alabama, flowing through five counties in central Alabama.
The Cahaba River is recognized as an Outstanding Alabama Water by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management.
The Cahaba River has high recreational value for hunters, anglers, birdwatchers, canoeists, nature photographers, and others.
The Cahaba River Watershed supports large populations of certain game species, including deer, turkey, and various species of ducks.
The Cahaba River area is deserving of inclusion in the National Wildlife Refuge System.
In this Act: (1) Refuge.--The term ``Refuge'' means the Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge established by section 4(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is established in Bibb County, Alabama, the Cahaba National Wildlife Refuge, consisting of approximately 3,500 acres of Federal lands and waters, and interests in lands and waters, within the boundaries depicted upon the map entitled ``Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge-Proposed'', dated April 10, 2000.
Boundary revisions.--The Secretary may make such minor revisions of the boundaries of the Refuge as may be appropriate to carry out the purposes of the Refuge or to facilitate the acquisition of property within the Refuge.
Availability of map.--The Secretary shall keep the map referred to in paragraph (1) available for inspection in appropriate offices of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Effective Date.--The establishment of the Refuge under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) shall take effect on the date the Secretary publishes, in the Federal Register and publications of local circulation in the vicinity of the area within the boundaries referred to in that paragraph, a notice that sufficient property has been acquired by the United States within those boundaries to constitute an area that can be efficiently managed as a National Wildlife Refuge.
ACQUISITION OF LANDS AND WATERS.
In General.--The Secretary, subject to the availability of appropriations, may acquire up to 3,500 acres of lands and waters, or interests therein, within the boundaries of the Refuge described in section 4(a)(1).
Inclusion in Refuge.--Any lands, waters, or interests acquired by the Secretary under this section shall be part of the Refuge.
In administering the Refuge, the Secretary shall-- (1) conserve, enhance, and restore the native aquatic and terrestrial community characteristics of the Cahaba River (including associated fish, wildlife, and plant species); (2) conserve, enhance, and restore habitat to maintain and assist in the recovery of animals and plants that are listed under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1331 et sequentes); (3) in providing opportunities for compatible fish- and wildlife-oriented recreation, ensure that hunting, fishing, wildlife observation and photography, and environmental education and interpretation are the priority general public uses of the Refuge, in accordance with section 4(a)(3) and (4) of the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668ee(a)(3), (4)); and (4) encourage the use of volunteers and to facilitate partnerships among the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, local communities, conservation organizations, and other non- Federal entities to promote public awareness of the resources of the Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge and the National Wildlife Refuge System and public participation in the conservation of those resources.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary-- (1) such funds as may be necessary for the acquisition of lands and waters within the boundaries of the Refuge; and (2) such funds as may be necessary for the development, operation, and maintenance of the Refuge.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.