This Act may be cited as the ``National Recreation Lakes Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Lakes created by Federal dam projects have become powerful magnets for diverse recreation activities, drawing hundreds of millions of visits annually and generating tens of billions of dollars in economic benefits.
Recreational opportunities are provided at such lakes, on surrounding lands, and on downstream waters, by Federal agencies and through partnerships among Federal, State, and local government agencies and private persons.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To require Federal agencies responsible for management of lakes created by Federal dam projects to pursue strategies for enhancing recreational experiences at such lakes.
To direct Federal agencies to utilize creative management of lakes created by Federal dam projects that optimizes both recreational opportunities and other purposes of such projects, including the provision of agricultural and municipal water supplies, flood control and navigation benefits, and production of hydroelectric power, as applicable.
In this Act: (1) Council.--The term ``Council'' means the Federal Lakes Recreation Leadership Council, an interdepartmental coordinating body established by a memorandum of agreement among the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the Interior, and the Chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority dated October 27, 1999.
Federal manmade lake.--The term ``Federal manmade lake'' means-- (A) any impoundment or diversion of water that is part of a water resources project operated, maintained, or constructed by any Federal agency and that has a maximum storage capacity of 50 acre feet or more; and (B) any water downstream of such an impoundment or diversion.
Federal lake management agency.--The term ``Federal lake management agency'' means any Federal agency that manages a Federal manmade lake.
National demonstration lakes.--The term ``National Demonstration Lake'' means a federal manmade lake that is designated as a National Demonstration Lake in accordance with section 6.
Recreation.--The term ``recreation'' means-- (A) any water-related recreational activity that may take place on or in a Federal manmade lake, including boating, swimming, fishing, sailing, and diving; (B) any water-related recreational activity that may take place below the impoundment creating a Federal manmade lake, including rafting, kayaking, canoeing, and fishing; and (C) any recreational activities that take place on federally managed lands in the vicinity of the Federal manmade lake, including fishing and wildlife-related activities, that are allowed under existing land management plans.
RECREATION AS AUTHORIZED PURPOSE OF ALL FEDERAL MANMADE LAKE PROJECTS.
In General.--The head of each Federal lake management agency shall-- (1) treat recreation as an authorized purpose of each Federal manmade lake that is managed by the agency; and (2) give recreation appropriate attention in all agency decisions and policies relating to such Federal manmade lakes.
Downstream Waters.--The head of each Federal agency shall, in conducting any activity relating to waters that are downstream waters of a Federal manmade lake, consider recreation uses of such waters.
Reports.-- (1) Initial report by federal lake management agencies.-- Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the head of each Federal lake management agency shall submit a report to the Congress and the Council that describes -- (A) actions taken by the agency to communicate to personnel of the agency the requirements of this Act and other laws relating to recreation use of Federal manmade lakes; and (B) actions to be taken by the agency to expand recreation opportunities at Federal manmade lakes, including a schedule for taking such actions (2) Council.--Not later than 36 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and every 24 months thereafter, the Council, or if the Council does not exist the head of each Federal lake management agency that manages 50 or more Federal manmade lakes, shall submit a report to the Congress describing actions take by the members of the Council or such agency, as applicable, to expand recreation opportunities at Federal manmade lakes.
Relationship to Other Law.--This Act does not affect-- (1) any other authorized purposes of any Federal manmade lake; (2) any contract entered into before the date of the enactment of this Act; or (3) the authority of States to manage fish and wildlife.
RECREATION FEE DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Section 315 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a note) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by inserting ``, the Bureau of Reclamation,'' after ``the National Park Service''; (B) by striking ``Service) and'' and inserting ``Service),''; and (C) by inserting before ``shall each'' the following: ``, and the Secretary of the Army (acting through the Corps of Engineers)''; (2) in subsection (b) by striking ``four agencies'' and inserting ``6 agencies''; and (3) in subsection (e)-- (A) by striking ``and'' and inserting a comma; and (B) by inserting ``, and the Secretary of the Army'' before ``shall carry out''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL RECREATION LAKES DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.--There is established the National Recreation Lakes Demonstration Program.
The program shall consist of the conduct of activities in accordance with this section at up to 20 National Demonstration Lakes designated in accordance with this section.
Designation of National Demonstration Lakes.-- (1) In general.--The head of each participating Federal lake management agency under paragraph (2) may designate Federal manmade lakes that are managed by the agency as National Demonstration Lakes.
The total number of Federal manmade lakes designated by each agency may not exceed the number allocated to the agency by the Council.
Participating agencies.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the participating Federal lake management agencies are the following: (A) The Corps of Engineers.
The Bureau of Reclamation.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
The National Park Service.
The Tennessee Valley Authority.
The Bureau of Land Management.
Criteria.--The Council shall develop and issue criteria for use by participating agencies in the selecting candidates for designation as National Demonstration Lakes.
The Council shall consult with participating agencies to encourage geographic and opportunity diversity.
Allocation of lakes.--The Council shall allocate to each participating agency under paragraph (2) a maximum number of Federal manmade lakes that the agency may designate as National Demonstration Lakes.
Effective period of designation.--A designation of a Federal manmade lake as a National Demonstration Lake shall be effective for a period specified by the agency head making the designation, not to exceed 10 years.
Authorized Activities.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the head of a participating Federal lake management agency may conduct at a National Demonstration Lake managed by the agency any activity to experiment with fees, concessions agreements, and innovative management structures, notwithstanding any requirement or restriction under any other law.
Enhancement of recreation activities.--The head of a participating Federal lake management agency may not conduct any activity under this subsection unless the activity enhances opportunities for recreation activities that occur on a National Demonstration Lake managed by the agency or other recreation activities that occur in proximity to such a lake.
Local Advisory Committees.-- (1) In general.--The head of a participating Federal lake management agency shall establish, for each National Demonstration Lake managed by the agency, an advisory committee comprised of State and local government and private sector representatives.
Federal advisory committee act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to any advisory committee established under this section.
Reports.--The head of each participating Federal lake management agency shall periodically report to the Congress regarding activities of the agency under this section.
PERIODIC REVIEW AND REVISION OF OPERATING POLICIES FOR FEDERAL MANMADE LAKES.
The head of each Federal lake management agency shall-- (1) conduct a comprehensive review of its operating policies for Federal manmade lakes managed by the agency, at least once every 15 years; and (2) revise such policies as necessary to incorporate new information and ensure coordinated management of such lakes to produce high levels of benefits for all authorized purposes of the lakes.
REVISED COST SHARING REQUIREMENTS FOR RECREATION PROJECTS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Federal share of the costs to construct, reconstruct, or operate facilities for recreation at a Federal manmade lake, including the costs of lands, may be 100 percent.
Conforming Amendments to Federal Water Project Recreation Act.--The Federal Water Project Recreation Act is amended-- (1) in section 2 (16 United States Code 460l-13)-- (A) in subsection (a) by striking ``and to bear'' and all that follows through ``recreation,''; and (B) in subsection (b)-- (i) by striking ``recreation and''; and (ii) by striking ``recreation or''; (2) in section 3 (16 United States Code 460l-14)-- (A) in subsection (b)(1) by striking ``and will bear'' the first place it appears and all that follows through ``recreation,''; and (B) in subsection (c) by striking paragraph (2); and (3) in section 4 (16 United States Code 460l-15) by striking ``recreation and'' and all that follows through ``those purposes''.
ASSISTANCE TO UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN VICINITY OF NATIONAL DEMONSTRATION LAKES.
In General.--The head of any Federal lake management agency that manages a National Demonstration Lake may carry out activities to improve communications and cooperation between the agency and local community interests in the vicinity of the lake with respect to such management, including planning, advisory boards, marketing, and other activities.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year to remain available until expended-- (1) to the head of each Federal lake management agency that manages a National Demonstration Lake $1,000,000 for each such lake to carry out this section; and (2) to the Secretary of the Interior $2,000,000 to coordinate activities of Federal lake management agencies under this section.
USE OF FEDERAL WATER PROJECT FUNDING FOR MATCHING REQUIREMENTS FOR RECREATION PROJECTS AT NATIONAL DEMONSTRATION LAKES.
Federal Aid in Fish Restoration Act.--The Act of August 9, 1950 (chapter 658; 16 United States Code 777 et sequentes), popularly known as the Federal Aid in Fish Restoration Act, is amended by striking the second section 13 and inserting the following: ``SEC.
APPLICATION OF FEDERAL WATER PROJECT SPENDING TO NON-FEDERAL SHARE OF COVERED RECREATION PROJECTS.
In General.--The use for any covered recreation project of amounts appropriated for a Federal water project shall be treated as payment of the non-Federal share of costs required under this Act.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Covered recreation project.--The term `covered recreation project' means construction or reconstruction of facilities for recreation at a National Demonstration Lake that is carried out with assistance under this Act.
Other terms.--Each of the terms `National Demonstration Lake' and `recreation' has the meaning that term has in section 2 of the National Recreation Lakes Act.''.
Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act.--The Act of September 2, 1937 (chapter 899; 16 United States Code 669 et sequentes), popularly known as the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
APPLICATION OF FEDERAL WATER PROJECT SPENDING TO NON-FEDERAL SHARE OF RECREATION PROJECTS.
In General.--The use for any covered recreation project of amounts appropriated for a Federal water project shall be treated as payment of the non-Federal share of costs required under this Act.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Covered recreation project.--The term `covered recreation project' means construction or reconstruction of facilities for recreation at a National Demonstration Lake that is carried out with assistance under this Act.
Other terms.--Each of the terms `National Demonstration Lake' and `recreation' has the meaning that term has in section 2 of the National Recreation Lakes Act.