This Act may be cited as the ``Rail-Highway Grade Crossing Safety Act of 1994''.
Congress finds that-- (1) there are approximately 170,000 public and 110,000 private at-grade rail-highway crossings in the United States; (2) during 1993, there were nearly 4,900 accidents at these crossings; (3) it is necessary to improve safety at our Nation's rail- highway crossings and along rail rights-of-way; (4) there are insufficient public funds to provide for the installation of warning systems that are automatically activated by approaching trains at all public crossings; (5) many of the Nation's public rail-highway crossings are unnecessary and should be closed; (6) rail-highway crossing consolidation will reduce the potential for rail-highway crossing collisions and will allow States to concentrate on improving safety at the remaining crossings; (7) incentives are needed to encourage State and local governments to increase the consolidation of rail-highway crossings; and (8) increased funding must be provided to educate motorists in their responsibilities at crossings in order to realize the full benefits from the public investment in rail-highway crossing warning systems.
RAIL-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING CLOSING PROGRAM.
Increased Federal Share.--Section 120(c) of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``rail-highway crossing closures,'' after ``vanpooling,''.
Incentive Funds; Benefits and Costs Analyses.--Section 130 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (j) and inserting after subsection (g) the following: ``(h) Incentive Funds for Closing Crossings.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), any State, after adopting a policy requiring the review of the need for all new public at-grade rail-highway crossings, may, in its discretion, use the funds authorized under this section to provide an incentive payment to a local jurisdiction upon the permanent closing by the jurisdiction of a public at-grade crossing.
Conditions.--The incentive payments authorized by paragraph (1) of this subsection may be in amounts of not to exceed $7,500: Provided, That the funds are matched by an equal payment from the railroad owning the tracks on which the crossing is located.
Use of funds.--The local jurisdiction receiving funds under this subsection shall use the Federal funds portion of the incentive payment for transportation safety improvements only.
Public Benefits and Costs Analyses.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall establish guidelines to enable States to determine the public benefits and costs resulting from any new rail-highway grade crossings.''.
Section 104(d)(1) of title 23, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Operation lifesaver.--Before making an apportionment of funds under subsection (b)(3) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall set aside $500,000 of the funds authorized to be appropriated for the surface transportation program for such fiscal year for carrying out a public information and education program to help prevent and reduce motor vehicle accidents, injuries, and fatalities, to improve driver performance at railway-highway crossings, and to help prevent trespassing on rail rights-of-way and the resulting injuries and fatalities.
Expenditure of any funds in excess of $300,000 shall be contingent upon receipt of matching funds from nonpublic sources.''.
GRADE CROSSING CORRIDOR SAFETY INCENTIVE PROGRAM.
Funding of Program.--Section 104(d) of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Grade crossing corridor safety incentive program.-- Before making an apportionment of funds under subsection (b)(3) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall set aside $15,000,000 of the funds authorized to be appropriated for the surface transportation program for such fiscal year to carry out a program to provide a financial incentive to States that review and implement grade crossing safety improvements on a corridor basis in accordance with section 130(k).''.
Establishment of Program.--Section 130 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k) Grade Crossing Corridor Safety Incentive Program.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a program to provide an additional financial incentive to States that review and implement grade crossing safety improvements on a corridor basis.
Such financial incentive would be in addition to those funds available in accordance with the preceding subsections.
Project approval.--Funds authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection shall be available for obligation at the discretion of the Secretary.
The Secretary shall issue investment criteria for approving projects under this section.
Applicability of other provisions.--All provisions of this chapter, other than provisions relating to apportionment formulas and Federal share, shall apply to funds made available to carry out this subsection, except as determined by the Secretary to be inconsistent with this subsection.
Funds authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section shall remain available until expended.