This Act may be cited as the ``Economic Development Loan Assistance Demonstration Program Act of 1993''.
ESTABLISHMENT AND SCOPE OF DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall carry out a program to demonstrate the effectiveness of encouraging economic development in enterprise zones by making grants to community development corporations for reducing interest rates on loans for economic development activities in the enterprise zones.
Selection of Enterprise Zones.-- (1) Number.--The Secretary shall carry out the demonstration program under this Act with respect to 5 enterprise zones, which the Secretary shall select not later than the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date the termination of the period referred to in section 701(a)(4)(B) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987.
Diversity.--Of the enterprise zones selected under this subsection, not less than 2 shall be located in rural areas (as described in section 701(a)(2)(B) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987) and not less than 2 shall be located in metropolitan statistical areas (as designated by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget).
In selecting the enterprise zones, the Secretary shall provide for national geographic diversity among enterprise zones participating in the demonstration program.
GRANTS FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN ASSISTANCE.
Authority.--Under the demonstration program under this Act, the Secretary may make grants to any community development corporation sponsored by a bank or thrift institution, by a nonbank economic development corporation, or by residents of an enterprise zone selected under section 2(b).
Use.--Each community development corporation receiving a grant under the demonstration program under this Act shall use the grant amounts to assist businesses and nonprofit organizations by reducing interest rates on loans for economic development activities carried out in an enterprise zone selected under section 2(b).
Other Requirements.--The Secretary shall require each community development corporation receiving a grant under the demonstration program under this Act to-- (1) use the grant amounts to reduce the interest rate on a loan described in subsection (b) by an amount not to exceed 60 percent of the market rate of interest on such loan; and (2) take any actions necessary to inform businesses and nonprofit organizations of the availability of such loans, including holding informational meetings, making public announcements, and placing notices in newspapers and other publications.
The Secretary shall monitor the use of grants made under this Act and the costs of administering such grants.
Annual Report.--The Secretary shall submit to the Congress, not later than 1 year after the date that amounts to carry out this Act are first made available under appropriations Acts and for each year thereafter in which amounts are available to carry out the demonstration program, a report containing an evaluation of the effectiveness of grants made under the demonstration program.
Study and Report on Expanded Program.-- (1) Study.--The Secretary shall conduct a study regarding the effects and costs of carrying out a long-term and expanded program of making grants for the purposes under this Act.
The study shall determine the need for such grants and the amount of funds necessary to carry out an effective program of national scope.
Report.--The Secretary shall submit to the Congress, not later than September 31, 1996, a report regarding the results of the study under paragraph (1) and any recommendations for carrying out a program as described in paragraph (1).
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Economic development activities.--The term ``economic development activities'' means the construction and rehabilitation of housing, downtown and neighborhood commercial revitalization, industrial development and redevelopment, small and minority business assistance, neighborhood marketing, training, and technical assistance, research and planning for nonprofit development groups, and other activities which create permanent private sector jobs.
Enterprise zone.--The term ``enterprise zone'' means an area that is designated as an enterprise zone under section 701 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act in fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996 a total of $100,000,000.
The Secretary may issue any regulations necessary to carry out this Act.