This Act may be cited as the ``Next Generation Technology Innovation Awards Act of 2000''.
NEXT-GENERATION TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION AWARDS FOR SCHOOLS.
In General.--Part B of title III of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6891 et sequentes) is amended to read as follows: ``PART B--NEXT-GENERATION TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION AWARDS ``SEC.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this part to-- ``(1) expand the knowledge base about the use of the next generation of advanced computers and telecommunications in delivering new applications for teaching and learning; ``(2) address questions of national significance about the next generation of technology and its use to improve teaching and learning; and ``(3) develop, for wide-scale adoption by State educational agencies and local educational agencies, models of innovative and effective applications of technology to teaching and learning, such as high quality video, voice recognition devices, modeling and simulation software (particularly web- based software and intelligent tutoring), hand-held devices, and virtual reality and wireless technologies, which are aligned with challenging State academic content and student performance standards.
Program Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements on a competitive basis through the Office of Educational Technology to eligible applicants in order to carry out the purposes of this part.
Period of award.--A grant, contract, or cooperative agreement awarded under this part shall be for a period of not more than 5 years.
Eligible Applicants.--In order to receive an award under this part, an applicant shall be a consortium which includes-- ``(1) at least one State educational agency or local educational agency; and ``(2) at least one institution of higher education, for- profit entity, museum, library, or other public or private entity with a particular expertise that would assist the educational agency in carrying out the purposes of this part.
Application Requirements.--In order to receive an award under this part, an eligible applicant shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, and containing such information, as the Secretary may require.
Such application shall include-- ``(1) a description of the proposed project and how it would carry out the purposes of this part; and ``(2) a detailed plan for the independent evaluation of the project, which shall include benchmarks to monitor progress toward specific project objectives.
Priorities.--In making awards under this part, the Secretary may establish one or more priorities consistent with the objectives of this part, including the following: ``(1) A priority for projects which develop innovative models of effective use of educational technology, including the development of distance learning networks, software, (including software deliverable through the Internet), and online-learning resources.
A priority for projects serving more than one State and involving large-scale innovations in the use of technology in education.
A priority for projects which develop innovative models for serving traditionally underserved populations, including low-income students, students with disabilities, and students with limited English proficiency.
A priority for projects for which applicants provide substantial financial and other resources to achieve the goals of the project.
A priority for projects which develop innovative models for using electronic networks to provide challenging courses, such as Advanced Placement courses.
A priority for projects which establish high-speed, large bandwidth capacity Internet access.
``A recipient shall use funds awarded under this part to-- ``(1) develop new applications of educational technologies and telecommunications to support school reform efforts, such as wireless and web-based telecommunications, hand-held devices, web-based learning resources, distributed learning environments (including distance learning networks), and the development of educational software and other applications; ``(2) integrate technology across the curriculum of the State educational agency or the local educational agency (as the case may be); and ``(3) carry out other activities consistent with the purposes of this part, including the following: ``(A) Developing innovative models for improving teachers' ability to integrate technology effectively into course curriculum through sustained, intensive, and high-quality professional development.
Developing high-quality, standards-based digital content, including multimedia software, digital video, and web-based resources, including-- ``(i) new technological formats to facilitate better subject matter understanding in particularly challenging learning environments in areas such as physics, foreign languages, or Advanced Placement courses; ``(ii) computer modeling, visualization, and simulation tools; ``(iii) new methods for assessing student performance; ``(iv) web-based and other distance learning curricula and related materials, such as interoperable software components; ``(v) learning-focused digital libraries, information retrieval systems, and other designs for supporting broad re-use of learning content; and ``(vi) software which supports the development, modification, and maintenance of educational materials.
Using telecommunications and other technologies to make programs accessible to students with special needs (such as low-income students, students with disabilities, students in remote areas, and students with limited English proficiency) through such activities as using technology to support mentoring.
Providing classroom and extracurricular opportunities for female students to explore the different uses of technology and gain awareness of careers and opportunities in the technology field.
Promoting school-family partnerships, which may include services for adults and families, particularly parent education programs providing parents with training, information, and support on how to help their children achieve high academic standards.
Acquiring connectivity linkages, resources, distance learning networks, and services, including hardware and software, as needed to accomplish the goals of the project.
Collaborating with other technology research and development programs of the Secretary and the Federal government.
EVALUATION ``The Secretary is authorized to-- ``(1) develop tools and provide resources for recipients of funds under this part to evaluate their activities; ``(2) provide technical assistance to assist recipients of funds under this part in evaluating their projects; ``(3) conduct independent evaluations of the activities assisted under this part; and ``(4) disseminate findings and methodologies from evaluations of activities assisted under this part, or other information obtained from such projects which would promote the design, replication, or implementation of effective models for evaluating the impact of educational technology on teaching and learning.
LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
``A recipient of funds under this part may not use more than 3 percent of the funds awarded to the recipient for any fiscal year for administrative costs or technical assistance.
In General.--Subject to subsections (b) and (c), the Secretary may require any recipient of an award under this part to share in the cost of the activities assisted under such award, which may be in the form of cash or in-kind contributions fairly valued.
Increase.--The Secretary may increase the non-Federal share required of a recipient of an award under this part after the first year such recipient receives funds under such award.
Maximum.--The non-Federal share required under this section may not exceed 50 percent of the cost of the activities assisted pursuant to an award under this part.
Notice.--The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register the non-Federal share required under this section.
``For purposes of carrying out this part, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and for each of the four succeeding fiscal years.''.
Conforming Repeal of Former Program for National Challenge Grants.-- (1) In general.--Subpart 2 of part A of title III of such Act (20 United States Code 6841 et sequentes) is amended-- (A) by striking section 3136; and (B) by redesignating section 3137 as section 3136.
Other conforming amendments.--Section 3114 of such Act (20 United States Code 6814) is amended-- (A) by striking subsection (b); (B) by redesignating paragraph (2) of subsection (a) as subsection (b) and moving such provision 2 ems to the left; (C) by redesignating paragraph (1) of subsection (a) as subsection (a) and moving such provision 2 ems to the left; (D) by striking ``(A)(i)'' and inserting ``(1)(A)''; (E) by striking ``(ii)'' and inserting ``(B)''; (F) by striking ``(B)'' and inserting ``(2)''; (G) by striking ``(C)'' and inserting ``(3)''; (H) in the heading, by striking ``; FUNDING RULE''; and (I) by striking ``(a) Authorization of Appropriations.--''.