This Act may be cited as the ``Capital Budget Commission Act of 1994''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) deteriorating infrastructure and the demand for capital improvements and investment are at a critical stage; (2) limited funding is available for maintaining the existing infrastructure and building new infrastructure; (3) there is increased interest in capital budgeting and alternative financing options given present and future budget constraints; and (4) there is a need for evaluating what is to be included in a capital budget.
There is established a commission to be known as the Capital Budget Commission (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Study.--The Commission shall study capital budgeting and evaluate what should be included in a capital budget for the United States Government.
The Commission shall focus on investments that sustain growth and establish a process which encourages long-term investment and how to account for that investment.
Reports.--The Commission shall submit a preliminary and final report pursuant to section 8, each of which shall contain-- (1) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission on the matters described in subsection (a); and (2) specific recommendations with respect to-- (A) ways in which the Congress would implement capital budgeting for the United States Government; (B) prioritizing what should be included in a capital budget and establishing a method or formula to determine how to account for those items; and (C) possible changes in the executive and legislative branches which would facilitate the implementation of a capital budget.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members, to be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, as follows: (1) 3 members appointed by the President.
3 members, 1 of whom shall be a Senator, appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate from among the recommendations made by the majority leader of the Senate.
3 members, 1 of whom shall be a Senator, appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate from among the recommendations made by the minority leader of the Senate.
3 members, 2 of whom shall be Members of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
3 members, 2 of whom shall be Members of the House of Representatives, appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Additional Qualifications.--The Commission members (not including the Members of Congress) shall be chosen from among individuals who are knowledgable about capital budgeting by virtue of their education and experience as demonstrated in their professional careers.
Continuation of Membership.--If a member was appointed to the Commission as a Member of Congress and the member ceases to be a Member of Congress, that member may continue as a member for not longer than the 60-day period beginning on the date that member ceases to be a Member of Congress.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--8 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by a majority of the members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Chairperson.
The Director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of the title 5, United States Code.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals not to exceed the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-18 of the General Schedule.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Preliminary Report.--The Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a preliminary report not later than 12 months after the date on which all the members of the Commission have been appointed.
Final Report.--The Commission shall submit a final report to the President and the Congress not later than 18 months after the date on which all the members of the Commission have been appointed.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final report pursuant to section 8(b).
Amounts shall be made available to carry out this Act only to the extent such amounts are made available in advance in appropriations Acts.