SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES IN ACT; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Asylum at Ports of Entry System Improvements Act of 1993''.
References to Immigration and Nationality Act.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; references in Act.
Expedited consideration and exclusion procedures for asylum claims by persons with missing or fraudulent documents.
Enhanced penalties for alien smuggling and asylum abuse.
EXPEDITED CONSIDERATION AND EXCLUSION PROCEDURES FOR ASYLUM CLAIMS BY PERSONS WITH MISSING OR FRAUDULENT DOCUMENTS.
Admissions Fraud.--Section 212(a)(6)(C) (8 United States Code 1182(a)(6)(C)) is amended-- (1) in the section heading by striking ``misrepresentation'' and inserting ``fraud, misrepresentation, and failure to present documents'', (2) in clause (i) by inserting ``or clause (ii)'' after ``clause (i)''; (3) by redesignating clause (ii) as clause (iii), and (4) by inserting after clause (i) the following new clause: ``(ii) Fraudulent documents and failure to present documents.-- ``(I) Any alien who, in seeking entry to the United States or boarding a common carrier for the purpose of coming to the United States, presents any document which, in the determination of the immigration officer to whom the document is presented, is forged, counterfeit, altered, falsely made, stolen, or inapplicable to the alien presenting the document, or otherwise contains a misrepresentation of a material fact, is excludable.
Any alien who, in entering the United States or boarding a common carrier for the purpose of coming to the United States, presents a document which relates or purports to relate to the alien's eligibility to enter the United States, and willfully fails to present such document to an immigration officer upon arrival at a port of entry into the United States, is excludable.''.
Expedited Exclusion Procedures.--The Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by inserting after section 235 the following new section: ``expedited procedures for certain asylum cases ``Sec.
Senior Asylum Officers; Special Mobile Asylum Team.-- ``(1) Senior asylum officers.--The Attorney General shall designate a class of asylum officers having at least 2 years of experience in asylum adjudications as senior asylum officers who shall perform duties under this section at United States airports and other ports of entry in the United States.
Special mobile asylum team.-- ``(A) The Attorney General may, from time to time, designate from among the senior asylum officers provided for in paragraph (1) such officers as the Attorney General considers necessary to constitute a Special Mobile Asylum Team to help manage large scale asylum situations or to conduct spot checks at United States airports or other ports of entry in the United States.
Funds appropriated subject to section 404(b) shall be available to the Attorney General for mobilizing the Special Mobile Asylum Team in emergency large scale asylum situations.
Examination by Immigration Officer.-- ``(1) Any alien who is believed by the examining immigration officer, based on reasonable suspicion grounded on articulable facts, to be excludable under section 212(a)(6)(C) but who requests, or indicates a desire for, asylum shall be detained for further inquiry to be conducted by a senior asylum officer promptly after the alien's arrival.
Whenever any such officer has reason to believe that an alien who is otherwise excludable under section 212(a)(6)(C) of such Act may have a claim to asylum, such officer shall inform the alien of his right to apply for asylum and inquire of the alien to determine if the alien desires to request asylum.
Determinations by Senior Asylum Officer.-- ``(1) For each case under subsection (b), the senior asylum officer shall determine only-- ``(A) whether the alien has a nonfrivolous claim for asylum; and ``(B) whether the alien has been firmly resettled in another nation.
In each case under this subsection, the alien shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel of his choosing (at no expense to the Government).
Ineligibility for Asylum and Exclusion.--(1)(A) If the senior asylum officer determines that the alien's claim to asylum is frivolous or that the alien has been firmly resettled in another nation, the officer shall find the alien ineligible for asylum and shall order the alien excluded from the United States.
The alien shall be held in detention pending final disposition of the alien's case, except where the Attorney General determines that the alien's detention is not in the public interest.
Any alien ordered excluded under subparagraph (A) shall be ineligible for withholding of deportation under section 243.
The exclusion of an alien in the United States under paragraph (1) shall be directed by the Attorney General to a country promptly designated by the alien if that country is willing to accept the alien into its territory, unless the Attorney General concludes that deportation to such country would be prejudicial to the interests of the United States.
No alien shall be permitted to make more than one such designation.
If the government of the country designated by the alien fails to advise the Attorney General within 5 days following the original inquiry whether that government will or will not accept such alien into its territory, then the Attorney General may thereafter disregard such designation.
Petition for Review.--An alien adversely affected by an order of a senior asylum officer under this section may, within 48 hours after such order is issued, file a petition for review of the order in a proceeding before an asylum immigration judge.
Such review shall be the sole and exclusive administrative review of such order.
Administrative Review.--An asylum immigration judge, shall promptly hold an administrative hearing which shall be limited to the issues set forth in subsection (g).
Scope of Review.--The issues referred to in subsection (f) are-- ``(1) whether the applicant is an alien; ``(2) whether the applicant has sought entry to the United States with fraudulent documents or with no documents; ``(3) whether the applicant's request for asylum is frivolous; and ``(4) whether the applicant has been firmly resettled in another nation.
Asylum Adjudication in Certain Circumstances.--A senior asylum officer may refer an alien not excludable under subsection (d) for asylum adjudication by the Executive Office of Immigration Review while an exclusion proceeding is pending if such proceeding cannot be scheduled within 90 days.
Judicial Review.--No court shall have jurisdiction to review, except by petition for habeas corpus, any individual determination made with respect to an alien found excludable from the United States under subsection (d).
In any such case, review by habeas corpus shall be limited to examination on the questions set forth in subsection (g).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 235 the following new item: ``Sec.
Expedited procedures for certain asylum cases.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to aliens who arrive in, or seek admission to, the United States on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
ENHANCED PENALTIES FOR ALIEN SMUGGLING AND ASYLUM ABUSE.
In General.--Section 274(a)(1) (8 United States Code 1324(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``for the purpose of commercial advantage or private financial gain'' after ``Any person who''; (2) by striking ``five years'' and inserting ``10 years''; and (3) by inserting before the period at the end of such paragraph ``(or 20 years, or both, in the case of such a violation in which the person is determined to knowingly or recklessly have caused serious bodily injury to, or have placed in jeopardy the life of, any alien involved in the offense)''.
Effective Dates.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to violations occurring on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Section 101(a) (8 United States Code 1101(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(47) The term `frivolous' means, with respect to a claim for asylum, a claim that-- ``(A) the grounds of the claim are outside the scope of the definition of a refugee under this section, ``(B) the claim is totally lacking in substance, or ``(C) the claim is manifestly lacking in any credibility.
The term `firmly resettled' means, after an alien's entry into a country of refuge, the alien's receipt of an offer of permanent resident status, citizenship, or some other type of permanent resettlement unless the alien establishes that-- ``(A) the entry into that country was a necessary consequence of the flight from persecution, that the alien remained in the country only as long as was necessary to arrange onward travel, and that the alien did not establish significant ties in that country; or ``(B) the conditions of residence in that country were so substantially and consciously restricted by the authorities of the country that the alien was not in fact resettled, taking into account the conditions under which other residents of that country live, the type of housing made available to the alien, whether permanent or temporary, the types and extent of employment available to the alien, whether permanent or temporary, and the extent to which the alien received permission to hold property and to enjoy other rights and privileges ordinarily available to other residents in the country such as travel documentation (including documentation for a right of entry or reentry), education, public relief, or naturalization.''.
Except as otherwise provided, the amendments made by this Act shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.