REPORT ON ACTIONS TO ACHIEVE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN DEVELOPMENT OF THEATER MISSILE DEFENSES.
Not later than June 1, 1994, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report on steps that can be taken by the United States to achieve greater cooperation from allies of the United States and international organizations for the payment of the costs involved in the development and production of Theater Missile Defense systems.
FUNDING THEATER MISSILE DEFENSE PROGRAMS.
Requirement for Annual Authorization of New Obligational Authority for TMD Programs.--The Congress shall establish by law for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 1995) the level of new obligational authority (stated as a single dollar amount) for research, development, test, and evaluation and for procurement for Theater Missile Defense programs of the Department of Defense for that fiscal year.
Limitation on United States Contribution for TMD Programs.--(1) Not more than 80 percent of the amount established pursuant to subsection (a) for any fiscal year may be provided from amounts appropriated to the Department of Defense from the general fund of the Treasury, and no appropriation may be made to the Department of Defense for any fiscal year which would cause the total amount appropriated for that fiscal year for research, development, test, and evaluation and for procurement for Theater Missile Defense programs of the Department of Defense to exceed 80 percent of such amount.
Any additional funds for research, development, test, and evaluation and for procurement for Theater Missile Defense programs for any fiscal year for which an amount has been established pursuant to subsection (a) shall be derived from the Theater Missile Defense Cooperation Account under section 2610 of title 10, United States Code, as added by section 3.
The President may waive the limitation in paragraph (1) and the requirement in paragraph (2) to the extent that the President determines appropriate in the national security interest of the United States.
Policy Regarding Incremental Increases in Foreign Contributions for TMD Programs.--It is the intent of Congress that, except as provided in subsection (d), the percentage of the cost of the development and production of Theater Missile Defense systems that is borne by the United States should decrease incrementally, and the percentage that is borne by allied nations and international organizations should increase incrementally, over the fiscal years after fiscal year 1995 so that the percentage actually borne by the United States in later fiscal years is significantly less than the maximum of 80 percent provided for under subsection (b).
Exemption.--The financial contribution requirements established for allied nations in the administration of this section shall not apply to any foreign nation that, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, is paying at least 20 percent of the total cost of the contracts in existence under a theater missile defense interceptor system program being carried out on such date in cooperation between that foreign nation and the United States.
THEATER MISSILE DEFENSE COOPERATION ACCOUNT.
Establishment.--(1) Chapter 155 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Theater Missile Defense: acceptance of contributions from allies; Theater Missile Defense Cooperation Account ``(a) Acceptance Authority.--The Secretary of Defense may accept from any allied foreign government or any international organization any contribution of money made by such foreign government or international organization for use by the Department of Defense for Theater Missile Defense programs.
Establishment of Theater Missile Defense Cooperation Account.--(1) There is established in the Treasury a special account to be known as the `Theater Missile Defense Cooperation Account'.
Contributions accepted by the Secretary of Defense under subsection (a) shall be credited to the Account.
Use of the Account.--Funds in the Account are hereby made available for obligation for research, development, test, and evaluation, and for procurement, for Theater Missile Defense programs of the Department of Defense, subject to annual limitations provided by law in total obligations for such purpose.
Investment of Money.--(1) Upon request by the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Treasury may invest money in the Account in securities of the United States or in securities guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States.
Any interest or other income that accrues from investment in securities referred to in paragraph (1) shall be deposited to the credit of the Account.
Notification of Conditions.--The Secretary of Defense shall notify Congress of any condition imposed by the donor on the use of any contribution accepted by the Secretary under the authority of this section.
Reporting Requirement.--Not later than 30 days after the end of each quarter of each fiscal year, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report on the contributions accepted by the Secretary under this section during the preceding quarter.
Annual Audit by GAO.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an annual audit of money accepted by the Secretary of Defense under this section and shall submit a copy of the results of each such audit to Congress.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations to carry out this section.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``2610.
Theater Missile Defense: acceptance of contributions from allies; Theater Missile Defense Cooperation Account.''.
Effective Date.--Section 2610 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect on October 1, 1994.