This Act may be cited as the ``International Indigenous Peoples Protection Act of 1993''.
Deteriorating Situation Facing Indigenous and Tribal Peoples.-- The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The situation of indigenous and tribal peoples in developing countries is deteriorating world-wide.
Many of these populations face severe discrimination, denial of human rights, loss of cultural and religious freedoms, or in the worst cases, cultural or physical destruction.
If current trends in many parts of the world continue the cultural, social, and linguistic diversity of humankind will be radically and irrevocably diminished.
In addition, immense, undocumented repositories of ecological, biological, and pharmacological knowledge will be lost, as well as an immeasurable wealth of cultural, social, religious, and artistic expression, which together constitute part of the collective patrimony of the human species.
The pressures on indigenous and tribal peoples, about 10 percent of the world's population, include denial of political and civil rights and of opportunities for self- determination, destruction of natural resources necessary for survival, and ethnic, racial, and economic marginalization.
In many cases, unsound development policy that results in destruction of natural resources seriously jeopardizes indigenous and tribal peoples' physical survival and their cultural autonomy, frequently also undermining the possibility for long-term sustainable economic development.
The loss of the cultural diversity for indigenous and tribal peoples is not an inevitable or natural process.
In light of United States concern and respect for human rights and basic human freedoms, including rights to express cultural and religious preferences, as well as the United States desire for sustainable economic development, it is incumbent on the United States to take a leadership role in addressing indigenous and tribal peoples' rights to physical and cultural survival.
Definition of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples.--Indigenous and tribal peoples in developing countries are those populations that are ethnically, culturally, or socially distinct from the politically dominant society on the regional or national level.
These peoples are often (but not invariably) minorities, and invariably have little, if any, political representation or influence in governments.
Many such peoples are marginally integrated into market economies and practice traditional, partially or wholly subsistence-based forms of economic activity.
Examples of indigenous or tribal peoples include lowland South American Indians, Basarwa of Botswana and Namibia, Mayan Indians in Central America, and registered tribes in India.
PROMOTING AND PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS AND TRIBAL PEOPLES.
The Secretary of State and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall ensure-- (1) that United States foreign policy and foreign assistance vigorously promote the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples throughout the world; and (2) that United States foreign assistance is not provided for any project or program detrimental to the rights of indigenous or tribal peoples or to their livelihood.
The rights of indigenous and tribal peoples to be promoted and protected pursuant to this section include the right to maintain their cultural, religious, and other traditions, customs, and institutions.
BASELINE REPORT ON INDIGENOUS AND TRIBAL PEOPLES.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section and section 5 is to help-- (1) guide future United States foreign assistance and other actions that could affect indigenous and tribal peoples, and (2) permit United States actions that would assist these peoples.
Preparation of Report.--The Administrator of the Agency for International Development, in consultation with the Secretary of State, shall prepare a report on indigenous and tribal peoples in developing countries.
This report shall include the following: (1) A description of the economic, political, and social situation of indigenous and tribal peoples.
A discussion of the effects of United States bilateral foreign assistance and United States-supported multilateral assistance on indigenous and tribal peoples, including a description of those projects and activities currently being funded by the Agency for International Development-- (A) which have a positive impact on indigenous and tribal peoples, or (B) which have a negative impact on indigenous and tribal peoples.
A comprehensive strategy for regularly monitoring and improving the situation of indigenous and tribal peoples, including-- (A) a description of the methodology and the guidelines to be used in carrying out the monitoring required by section 5, and (B) a description of the specific actions that the Agency for International Development proposes to take to improve the situation of indigenous and tribal peoples.
Consultation With NGOs.--The Administrator shall consult with nongovernmental organizations with experience in monitoring and reporting on indigenous and tribal peoples, and with other interested persons, throughout the preparation of the report required by subsection (b), but in particular-- (1) in determining the scope of that report; and (2) in developing the methodology to be used in preparing that report.
Submission to Congress.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit the report prepared pursuant to subsection (b) to the Congress.
MONITORING REGARDING INDIGENOUS AND TRIBAL PEOPLES.
Monitoring.--The Agency for International Development (in consultation with the Department of State), on a regular basis, shall collect information concerning and shall analyze the situation of indigenous and tribal peoples in developing countries.
Use of NGOs.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Agency shall, wherever appropriate, use nongovernmental organizations with experience in monitoring and reporting on indigenous and tribal peoples.
Annual Reports to Congress.--Following completion of the report required by section 4, the Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall submit to the Congress, not later than February 1 each year, a report which-- (1) presents the findings resulting from the monitoring of indigenous and tribal peoples carried out pursuant to subsection (a); (2) updates the information provided in the report submitted pursuant to section 4; and (3) describes the activities which the Agency for International Development proposes to fund for the coming fiscal year to address the problems facing indigenous and tribal peoples in developing countries, specifying which activities will be carried out by the Agency and which will be carried out by nongovernmental organizations.
ANNUAL HUMAN RIGHTS REPORTS.
In each report submitted to the Congress pursuant to sections 116(d) and 502B(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, the Secretary of State shall include a description of each country's practices regarding the observation of and respect for the internationally recognized human rights of indigenous and tribal peoples in that country.