This Act may be cited as the ``Aviation Medical Assistance Act of 1998''.
In this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Air carrier.--The term ``air carrier'' has the meaning given that term in section 40102(a)(2) of title 49, United States Code.
Aircraft.--The term ``aircraft'' has the meaning given that term in section 40102(a)(6) of title 49, United States Code.
Airport.--The term ``airport'' has the meaning given that term in section 40102(a)(9) of title 49, United States Code.
Foreign air transportation.--The term ``foreign air transportation'' has the meaning given that term in section 40102(a)(23) of title 49, United States Code.
Interstate air transportation.--The term ``interstate air transportation'' has the meaning given that term in section 40102(a)(25) of title 49, United States Code.
Major air carrier.--The term ``major air carrier'' means an air carrier that-- (A) has been issued an applicable certificate as an air carrier under section 41102 of title 49, United States Code; and (B) during the 12-month period ending March 31 of the most recent year preceding the date of enactment of this Act, accounted for at least 1 percent of domestic- scheduled passenger revenues, as reported to the Department of Transportation pursuant to part 241 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations.
Medically qualified individual.--The term ``medically qualified individual'' includes any individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise qualified to provide medical care in a State, including an ambulance attendant.
MEDICAL KIT EQUIPMENT AND TRAINING.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall review and reevaluate regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration regarding-- (1) the equipment required to be carried in medical kits of aircraft operated by air carriers; and (2) the training required of flight attendants in the use of the equipment.
Regulations.--If, on the basis of a review conducted under subsection (a), the Administrator determines that it is necessary to issue revised regulations, the Administrator shall issue a notice of proposed rulemaking to issue those revised regulations.
REPORTS REGARDING DEATHS ON AIRCRAFT.
During the 1-year period beginning on the 90th day following the date of enactment of this Act, a major air carrier shall make a good faith effort to obtain, and shall submit, on a monthly basis, a report to the Administrator that provides information concerning-- (1) the number of individuals who died on aircraft of the air carrier, including any individual who was declared dead after being removed from such an aircraft as a result of a medical incident that occurred on that aircraft; (2) the age of each individual described in paragraph (1); (3)(A) with respect to each individual described in paragraph (1), whether the primary cause of death was a cardiac arrest; and (B) if the primary cause of death of an individual described in paragraph (1) was a cardiac arrest, whether the cardiac arrest was the result of ventricular fibrillation; (4) with respect to each death or medical incident that occurred on an aircraft referred to in paragraph (1), whether the aircraft was diverted as a result of the death or incident; and (5) such other information as the Administrator may request as necessary to aid in a decision concerning whether to require automatic external defibrillators-- (A) in airports; (B) on aircraft operated by air carriers; or (C) in airports and on aircraft described in subparagraph (B).
DECISION ON AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS.
In General.--Not later than 120 days after the last day of the 1-year period described in section 4, the Administrator shall make a decision concerning whether automatic external defibrillators should be required-- (1) in airports; (2) on aircraft operated by air carriers; or (3) in airports and on aircraft described in paragraph (2).
Form of Decision.-- (1) In general.--If the Administrator decides under subsection (a) that automatic external defibrillators should be required in airports or aircraft described in that subsection, the Administrator shall, with respect to each such requirement-- (A) issue proposed regulations to implement the requirement; or (B) submit to Congress proposed legislation to implement the requirement.
Notice.--If the Administrator decides under subsection (a) that automatic external defibrillators should not be required in airports or on aircraft described in that subsection, the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register a notice of that decision.
Contents.--If the Administrator decides that automatic external defibrillators should be required-- (1) on aircraft operated by air carriers, a proposed regulation described in subsection (b)(1)(A) or recommendation for proposed legislation described in subsection (b)(1)(B) shall include information with respect to-- (A) the size of the aircraft on which those defibrillators should be required; (B) the class flights (whether interstate or foreign air transportation, or both) on which those defibrillators should be required; (C) the training that should be required for air carrier personnel in the use of those defibrillators; and (D) the associated equipment and medication that should be required to be carried in each aircraft medical kit; and (2) at airports, a proposed regulation described in subsection (b)(1)(A) or recommendation for proposed legislation described in subsection (b)(1)(B) shall include information with respect to-- (A) the size of the airport at which those defibrillators should be required; (B) the training that should be required for airport personnel in the use of those defibrillators; and (C) the associated equipment and medication that should be required at each airport.
Limitation.--The Administrator may not require automatic external defibrillators on helicopters and on aircraft with a maximum payload capacity (as defined in section 119.3 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations) of 7,500 pounds or less.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), an individual shall not be liable for damages in any action brought in a Federal or State court arising from an act or omission of the individual in providing or attempting to provide assistance in the case of an in-flight medical emergency.
Exception.--The exemption under subsection (a) shall not apply in any case in which an individual provides, or attempts to provide the assistance referred to in that paragraph in a manner that constitutes gross negligence or willful misconduct.