This Act may be cited as the ``HHS Women Scientist Employment Opportunity Act''.
The Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 201 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following title: ``TITLE XXVIII--WOMEN'S SCIENTIFIC EMPLOYMENT WITH DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES ``SEC.
In General.-- ``(1) In general.--For each agency specified in paragraph (2), the Secretary, in collaboration with the head of the agency, shall-- ``(A) establish policies for the agency on matters relating to the employment by the agency of women as scientists, and periodically review and as appropriate revise such policies; and ``(B) monitor the extent of compliance with such policies and take appropriate action in cases in which the Secretary determines that the policies have been violated.
Specified agencies.--The agencies referred to in paragraph (1) are the National Institutes of Health, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Food and Drug Administration, and such other agencies or offices of the Department of Health and Human Services as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Certain Functions.-- ``(1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (a) with respect to a specified agency, the Secretary shall provide for the following: ``(A) Determining the concerns of women scientists employed at the agency.
Developing a policy defining the standard tenure process for employment at the agency.
Determining the reason for departure from the agency by interviewing women and men scientists as they leave.
Distributing yearly to all employees of the agency copies of the policy of the agency on flexible family leave.
Monitoring the number of women, including minority women, included on the committees, panels, and other working groups (and in meetings) of the agency.
Making efforts to recruit minority women, based on the small numbers of tenured minority women scientists.
Developing additional goals related to women and minority women scientists at the agency.
Agency-specific provisions.--With respect to the National Institutes of Health, in carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary shall (in addition to activities under paragraph (1)) provide for the implementation of the recommendations of the group known as the Task Force on the Status of NIH Intramural Women Scientists.
Inclusion of Women on Intramural and Extramural Conferences and Other Groups.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a policy at each specified agency of requiring inclusion of women scientists in greater numbers on or in conferences, workshops, meetings, international congresses, and other groups funded or sponsored by the agency.
Such policy shall provide for the inclusion of not less than one woman scientist in each such group, except as provided in paragraph (2).
This paragraph applies whether such groups are held for employees of the agency headquarters, for employees of field offices, or both.
Exclusion; written explanation.--The policy established in paragraph (1) may provide that no woman scientist will be included in a group for purposes of such paragraph if the Secretary provides a waiver of the requirement.
The Secretary may grant such a waiver only if-- ``(A) the individual with the chief responsibility for the group involved submits to the Secretary a written request for the waiver and the request provides an explanation of the reasons underlying the need for the waiver; and ``(B) the Secretary makes a determination that extraordinary circumstances justify providing the waiver.
Study on Pay Equity.-- ``(1) In general.--For each specified agency, the Secretary shall provide for a study to identify any pay differences among men and women scientists employed by the agency, both tenured and untenured.
The study shall include recommendations on measures to adjust any disparities or inequities, and shall identify a program to communicate information on salary ranges to all employees.
Report.--Not later than 240 days after the date of the enactment of the HHS Women Scientist Employment Opportunity Act, the Secretary shall complete the study required in paragraph (1) and submit to the Committee on Commerce of the House of Representatives, and to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate, a report describing the findings made as a result of the study.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the term `specified agency' means an agency specified in subsection (a)(2).
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2002.