This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on Elections Procedures Act''.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on Elections Procedures (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Purpose.--The purpose of the Commission shall be to study Federal, State, and local electoral processes and to make recommendations on the implementation of standardized voting procedures, including standardized technology, for Federal, State, and local elections.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 10 members who shall be appointed as follows: (1) 2 shall be appointed by the President.
2 shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
2 shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
2 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
2 shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Qualifications of Members.--Members shall be appointed to the Commission from among individuals who have expertise in election laws, the United States Constitution, and the history of the United States, or other pertinent qualifications or experience.
Terms.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Appointments shall be for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Additional meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The members of the Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
Quorum.--A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall examine the nature and consequences of Federal, State, and local government electoral processes and make recommendations on its findings.
Specific Issues To Be Addressed.--Among other electoral issues the Commission determines are relevant, the Commission shall examine and report to the President, the Congress, and the Federal Election Commission on the following issues: (1) Voting procedures in Federal, State, and local government elections.
Legislation and regulatory efforts that affect voting procedures issues.
The implementation of standardized voting procedures, including standardized technology for Federal, State and local government elections.
Final Report.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the initial meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Congress, and the Federal Election Commission a final report which includes an analysis of the matters discussed under subsection (b) and recommendations for addressing the problems identified as part of the Commission's analysis.
Separate Views.--Any member of the Commission may submit additional findings and recommendations as part of the final report.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission may find advisable to fulfill the requirements of this Act.
The Commission may administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services that are necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter 1 of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.--(1) The chairperson of the Commission may appoint and terminate staff of the Commission, request the detail of Federal employees, and accept temporary and intermittent services in accordance with section 3161 of title 5, United States Code.
The employment of an executive director of the Commission shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 4.
There are authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 for the Commission to carry out this Act.