This Act may be cited as the ``Airline Competition and Lower Fares Act''.
Written Determination.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a separate written determination with respect to each high-density airport as to whether the demand among air carriers for slots at the airport can be met with the slots at the airport that are available to the Secretary.
Initial Withdrawal of Slots.--If the Secretary determines under subsection (a) that the demand among air carriers for slots at a high- density airport cannot be met with the slots at the airport that are available to the Secretary, the Secretary shall withdraw slots at that airport from dominant air carriers at the airport for redistribution pursuant to this Act.
Such withdrawals shall be made in accordance with section 41714 of title 49, United States Code, and other applicable laws and regulations.
Subsequent Withdrawals.-- (1) Written determination.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the auction under section 3(a), and every 2 years thereafter, the Secretary shall issue a written determination as to whether the redistribution of additional slots under this Act would significantly increase competition between air carriers.
Requirement to withdraw slots.--If the Secretary determines under paragraph (1) that the redistribution of additional slots would significantly increase competition, the Secretary shall withdraw slots, in accordance with this section, in a manner which will ensure such an increase.
Such withdrawals shall be made in accordance with section 41714 of title 49, United States Code, and other applicable laws and regulations.
Limitation on Slot Withdrawals.-- (1) Initial auction.--The Secretary may not withdraw for redistribution under this Act more than 10 percent of the total number of slots held at a high-density airport by a dominant air carrier for auction pursuant to section 3(a).
Subsequent auctions.--The Secretary may not withdraw for redistribution under this Act more than 5 percent of the total number of slots held at a high-density airport by a dominant air carrier for auction pursuant to section 3(b).
Calculation of percentage.--In calculating under this subsection the total number of slots held at a high-density airport by a dominant air carrier, the Secretary shall not take into account slots used by the carrier for direct flights between the high-density airport and low-competition airports.
Prohibition on Certain Slot Withdrawals.--The Secretary may not withdraw for redistribution under this Act a slot of a dominant air carrier at a high-density airport if-- (1) the Secretary determines that the slot has been used by the carrier for direct flights between the airport and a low- competition airport throughout at least 24 of the preceding 30 calendar months; or (2) the slot is used for international flights.
In General.--After a withdrawal of slots at a high-density airport pursuant to section 2, the Secretary shall auction such slots to new entrant air carriers and limited incumbent air carriers at the airport and shall award each slot, pursuant to this section, to the highest bidder for the slot.
Limitation on Use of Slots.--The Secretary, in a manner which to the extent practicable represents the times and characteristics of all slots available for auction pursuant to this subsection, shall ensure that-- (1) 40 percent of the slots redistributed under this Act at each high-density airport other than John Federal Reporter Kennedy International Airport; and (2) 10 percent of the slots redistributed under this Act at John Federal Reporter Kennedy International Airport, are distributed for use for flights between the airport and low- competition airports.
Eligible Bidders.--A person may bid for or hold a slot at a high-density airport offered at an auction conducted under this section only if that person-- (1) is a new entrant air carrier or limited incumbent air carrier at the airport; (2) is a citizen of the United States, or in the case of a partnership or corporation, organized under the laws of the United States or a State; (3) has appropriate safety certification from the Federal Aviation Administration; (4) has appropriate economic certification from the Department of Transportation; (5) has not declined any slot at the airport for which the new entrant air carrier or limited incumbent air carrier was eligible before January 1, 1986; (6) is qualified, as determined by the Secretary, to use a purchased slot; and (7) is not substantially owned or otherwise controlled, as determined by the Secretary, by a person who fails to meet any of the requirements established by paragraphs (1) through (6).
Limitation on Transfer of Slots.--A slot obtained by a new entrant air carrier or limited incumbent air carrier at a high-density airport through an auction conducted under this section may only be sold, leased, traded, or transferred to any other new entrant air carrier or limited incumbent air carrier at the airport that meets the requirements of subsection (c).
Changes in Ownership.--If there is a change in the ownership of a new entrant air carrier or limited incumbent air carrier that obtains a slot through an auction conducted under this section, the slot shall revert to the Secretary; except that the Secretary may allow the new entrant air carrier or limited incumbent air carrier to retain the slot if the Secretary determines that such action is in the best interest of promoting competition.
Limitation on Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this section or section 2, including the use of competitive bidding, may be construed-- (1) to alter slots allocation criteria and procedures established by section 41714 of title 49, United States Code, or any other provision of law; (2) to diminish the authority of the Secretary under any other provision of law to regulate or withdraw slots; or (3) to convey any rights, including any expectation of renewal of a slot assignment, that differ from the rights that apply to other slots at the same airport that were not issued pursuant to this section.
Revenues.--The Secretary may use funds received from auctions held pursuant to this section to provide reimbursement to any dominant air carrier from which a slot has been withdrawn under this Act for investments made by the carrier in the withdrawn slot and airport improvements at the airport where the carrier held the withdrawn slot.
Any funds remaining after providing such reimbursements shall be credited to the general fund of the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
In General.--A slot obtained under this Act or any other provision of law shall not be considered an asset for any purpose, including for collateral, for any agreement which would require forfeiture of the slot, or in any bankruptcy proceeding.
Applicability.--This section shall not apply to any agreement or any renewal provision of any agreement in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Determinations Regarding Actions Filed.-- (1) Actions filed on or before december 31, 1998.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete action on all complaints alleging predatory practices by air carriers that were filed with the Secretary on or before December 31, 1998.
Actions filed after december 31, 1998, and before the date of the enactment of this act.--Not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete action on all complaints alleging predatory practices by air carriers that were filed with the Secretary after December 31, 1998, but before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Actions filed on or after the date of the enactment of this act.--The Secretary shall make an initial finding regarding any complaint alleging a predatory practice by an air carrier that is filed with the Secretary after the date of the enactment of this Act, not later than 30 days after such complaint is filed.
Restraining Order.--Not later than 15 days after date of an initial finding under subsection (a)(3), and after notice and opportunity for a hearing, the Secretary shall enjoin, pending final determination, any action that is found to be a predatory practice.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and every 6 months thereafter, the Secretary shall transmit a report to Congress describing complaints received by the Secretary which allege predatory practices by air carriers and any action taken by the Secretary on those complaints.
Guidelines.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General of the United States, shall issue guidelines defining predatory practices and unfair competition practices under this section and under title 49, United States Code.
The Secretary shall ensure that all airport facilities are available to new entrant air carriers at fees that are comparable to the average fees paid by incumbent air carriers.
The Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether the application of the 80-percent rule contained in section 93.227(a) of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, promotes, hinders, or has no effect on airline competition.
LIMITS ON COMPETITION IN AVIATION INDUSTRY.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report on barriers to entry, predatory pricing, and other limits on competition in the aviation industry.
CLARIFICATION OF LEGAL STANDING.
Section 41713(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Protection of certain causes of action.--This subsection shall not bar any cause of action brought against an air carrier by 1 or more private parties seeking to enforce any right under the common law of any State or under any State statute, other than a statute purporting to directly prescribe fares, routes, or levels of air transportation service.''.
For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Air carrier.--The term ``air carrier'' has the meaning given the term in section 40102 of title 49, United States Code.
Dominant air carrier.--The term ``dominant air carrier'' means a person that holds 10 percent or more of the slots at a high-density airport.
High-density airport.--.The term ``high-density airport'' means each of the following airports: (A) LaGuardia Airport.
John Federal Reporter Kennedy International Airport.
Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport.
Limited incumbent air carrier.--The term ``limited incumbent air carrier'' means a person that holds or operates fewer than 12 slots at a high-density airport, not including international slots, essential air service program slots, or slots between the hours of 2200 and 0659 at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport or LaGuardia Airport.
Low-competition airport.--The term ``low-competition airport'' means an airport that the Secretary determines-- (A) is not a large hub; and (B) has substantially less service than average or substantially higher than average airfares.
New entrant air carrier.--The term ``new entrant air carrier'' means a person that does not hold a slot at a high- density airport and has not sold or given up a slot at that airport after December 16, 1985.
Person.--The term ``person'' includes a commuter operator or air carrier.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Slot.--The term ``slot'' means the operational authority to conduct one landing or takeoff operation each day during a specific hour or 30 minute period at a high-density airport.