Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6601 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part E as part F; (2) by redesignating sections 2401 and 2402 as sections 2501 and 2502, respectively; and (3) by inserting after part D the following new part: ``PART E--MASTER TEACHER PROGRAMS ``SEC.
Definitions.--In this part: ``(1) Board certified.--The term `board certified' means successful completion of all requirements to be certified by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Master teacher.--The term `master teacher' means a teacher who is certified by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards and has been teaching for not less than 3 years.
Novice teacher.--The term `novice teacher' means a teacher who has been teaching for not more than 3 years at a public elementary school or secondary school.
Program Authorized.-- ``(1) Authority.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants on a competitive basis to local educational agencies to establish master teacher programs described in subsection (d).
Distribution.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall award grants under paragraph (1) so that such grants are distributed among the local educational agencies with the highest concentration of teachers who are not certified or licensed or are provisionally certified or licensed.
Amount.--The amount of a grant awarded under paragraph (1) shall be determined based on-- ``(A) the total amount appropriated for a fiscal year under subsection (h); and ``(B) the extent of the concentration of teachers who are not certified or licensed or are provisionally certified or licensed in the local educational agency involved.
Duration.--A grant under this section shall be awarded for a period of 5 years.
Authorized Activities.--The master teacher programs described in this subsection shall provide funding assistance to teachers who seek to become board certified, including the provision of the board certification fee.
Applications.-- ``(1) In general.--A local educational agency desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Approval of application.--The Secretary shall make a determination regarding an application submitted under paragraph (1) based on a recommendation of a peer review panel, as established by the Secretary, and any other criteria that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Payments.-- ``(1) In general.--Grant payments shall be made under this section on an annual basis.
Administrative costs.--Each local educational agency that receives a grant under this section shall use not more than 2 percent of the amount awarded under the grant for administrative costs.
Denial of grant.--If the Secretary determines that a local educational agency has failed to make substantial progress during a fiscal year in increasing the percentage of teachers who are board certified, or in improving student achievement, such an agency shall not be eligible for a grant payment under this section in the next succeeding year.
Reports.--Not later than March 31, 2005, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives a report of program activities funded under this section.
Matching Requirement.--The Secretary may not award a grant to a local educational agency under this section unless the local educational agency agrees that, with respect to costs to be incurred by the agency in carrying out activities for which the grant was awarded, the agency shall provide (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions in an amount equal to 25 percent of the amount of the grant awarded to the agency.
Repayment of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of any program under this section in which assistance is provided to a teacher to pay the National Board for Professional Teaching Standard board certification fee to become board certified, assistance may only be provided if the teacher makes agreements as follows: ``(A) The teacher will enter and complete the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards board certification program to become board certified.
After completion of such program (whether or not successfully), the teacher will teach in the public school system for a period of not less than 2 years.
Breach of agreements.--A teacher receiving assistance described in paragraph (1) is liable to the local educational agency that provides such assistance for the amount of the certification fee described in paragraph (1) if such teacher-- ``(A) voluntarily withdraws or terminates the certification program before taking the examination for board certification; or ``(B) is dismissed from the certification program before taking such examination.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.