This Act may be cited as the ``International Monetary Fund Reform Act of 1998''.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, and the Committee on International Relations and the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives.
TITLE I--INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SEC.
PARTICIPATION IN QUOTA INCREASE.
The Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286-286mm) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--The United States Governor of the Fund may consent to an increase in the quota of the United States in the Fund equivalent to 10,622,500,000 Special Drawing Rights.
Subject to Appropriations.--The authority provided by subsection (a) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.''.
CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE OF FUNDS.
Limitations on Funding.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any funds appropriated or otherwise made available for an increase in the quota of the United States in the International Monetary Fund pursuant to this title shall not be available for such increase until the Secretary of the Treasury makes the certifications described in subsection (b) and (c) to the appropriate congressional committees.
Certification Regarding Transparency.--The certification described in this subsection means a certification by the Secretary of the Treasury to the appropriate congressional committees that the United States is taking all necessary and appropriate steps to-- (1) ensure that the internal processes of the IMF become open and transparent; (2) strengthen the ability of all countries, Congress, and the public to obtain timely and accurate information about the decision making process and other internal processes of the IMF; (3) obtain routine release to the public of IMF documents, including official working papers, past evaluations, all Letters of Intent, and Policy Framework Papers; (4) provide for greater accessibility, for both policymakers and members of the public, of the IMF and its staff; and (5) obtain timely and complete publication of the Article IV consultations conducted by the IMF for each member country.
Certification Regarding Future Lending Standards.--The certification described in this subsection means a certification by the Secretary of the Treasury to the appropriate congressional committees that the International Monetary Fund routinely seeks, as a standard condition for lending and other uses of the Fund's resources, that borrower countries be required to-- (1) comply with the borrower country's international trading obligations including, if applicable, with the standards of the World Trade Organization; (2) comply with appropriate international banking and financial standards and not engage in the pattern or practice of improper government-directed lending to favored industries, enterprises, parties, or institutions; and (3) have or be developing bankruptcy laws and procedures to provide for liquidation and restructuring of businesses, and make progress toward assuring nondiscriminatory treatment of domestic and foreign creditors, debtors, and other concerned persons.
Report.--Not later than October 1, 1998, and not later than March 1 of each year thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report describing the steps taken by the United States to achieve the objectives set forth in subsection (b) and progress made toward achieving such objectives.
TITLE II--NEW ARRANGEMENTS TO BORROW SEC.
NEW ARRANGEMENTS TO BORROW.
Section 17 of the Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286e-2 et seq.)
is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by striking ``and February 24, 1983'' and inserting ``February 24, 1983, and January 27, 1997''; and (B) by striking ``4,250,000,000'' and inserting ``6,712,000,000''; (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``4,250,000,000'' and inserting ``6,712,000,000''; and (3) in subsection (d)-- (A) by inserting ``or the Decision of January 27, 1997,'' after ``February 24, 1983,''; and (B) by inserting ``or the New Arrangements to Borrow, as applicable'' before the period at the end.