This Act may be cited as the ``International Sanctions Enforcement Act of 1993''.
Determination by the President.-- (1) In general.--If the President determines that a foreign person, on or after the date of the enactment of this section, has knowingly violated United Nations Security Council Resolution 748 imposing sanctions against Libya, he is authorized to impose the sanctions described in subsection (c).
Persons against which sanctions are to be imposed.-- Sanctions may be imposed pursuant to paragraph (1) on-- (A) the foreign person with respect to which the President makes the determination described in that paragraph; (B) any successor entity to that foreign person; (C) any foreign person that is a parent, subsidiary, or co-venture of that person if that parent, subsidiary, or co-venture knowingly and materially assisted in the activities which were the basis of that determination; and (D) any foreign person that is an affiliate of that person if that affiliate knowingly and materially assisted in the activities which were the basis of that determination and if that affiliate is controlled in fact by that foreign person.
Other sanctions available.--The sanctions which may be imposed for activities described in this subsection are in addition to any other sanction which may be imposed for the same activities under any other provision of law.
Consultation With and Actions by Foreign Government of Jurisdiction.-- (1) Consultations.--If the President makes a determination described in subsection (a)(1) with respect to a foreign person, the Congress urges the President to initiate consultations immediately with the government with primary jurisdiction over that foreign person with respect to the imposition of sanctions pursuant to this section.
Actions by government of jurisdiction.--In order to pursue such consultations with that government, the President may delay imposition of a sanction pursuant to this section for up to 90 days.
Following these consultations, the President shall impose a sanction unless the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government has taken specific and effective actions, including appropriate penalties, to terminate the involvement of the foreign person in the activities described in subsection (a)(1).
The President may delay the imposition of a sanction for up to an additional 90 days if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government is in the process of taking the actions described in the previous sentence.
Report to congress.--Not later than 90 days after making a determination under subsection (a)(1), the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on the status of consultations with the appropriate government under this subsection, and the basis for any determination under paragraph (2) of this subsection that such government has taken specific corrective actions.
Sanctions.--The sanctions to be imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) are, except as provided in subsection (d), that no United States person shall, either directly or indirectly, procure, import, sell, export, or otherwise provide or enter into any contract to procure, import, sell, export, or otherwise provide any goods, technology, or services to or from any person described in subsection (a)(2).
Exceptions.--(1) The sanctions of subsection (c) shall not apply-- (A) in the case of procurement by the United States Government of vital defense articles or defense services which cannot readily and reasonably be acquired in sufficient quantities from other nonsanctioned foreign persons and which are essential to satisfy current United States operational military needs; or (B) with respect to medical or other humanitarian items.
Whenever the President makes a determination under this subsection to exempt certain goods, technology, or services from the sanctions of subsection (c), the President shall submit a report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate stating the reasons for such exemption.
Termination of Sanctions.--Sanctions imposed pursuant to this section shall apply for a period of at least 12 months following the imposition of the sanctions and shall cease to apply thereafter only if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that-- (1) reliable information indicates that the foreign person with respect to which the determination was made under subsection (a)(1) has ceased to violate United Nations Security Council Resolution 748 with respect to Libya; and (2) the President has received reliable assurances from the foreign person that such person will not, in the future, violate United Nations Security Council Resolution 748 with respect to Libya.
Waiver.-- (1) Criterion for waiver.--The President may waive the application of any sanction imposed on any person pursuant to this section, after the end of the 12-month period beginning on the date on which that sanction was imposed on that person, if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that the continued imposition of the sanction would have a serious adverse effect on vital United States interests.
Notification of and report to congress.--If the President decides to exercise the waiver authority provided in paragraph (1), the President shall so notify the Congress not less than 20 days before the waiver takes effect.
Such notification shall include a report fully articulating the rationale and circumstances which led the President to exercise the waiver authority.
Administration and Enforcement.--(1) The President may delegate his authority under this section to the Secretary of the Treasury.
Consistent with the provisions of this section, the authorities of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act which relate to the administration and enforcement of that Act shall apply to the administration and enforcement of sanctions imposed under this section.
Section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1705), relating to civil and criminal penalties, shall apply to violations of sanctions imposed under this section to the same extent and in the same manner as such penalties apply to violations of licenses, orders, or regulations under that Act.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``foreign person'' includes-- (A) any individual who is neither a citizen of the United States nor an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence to the United States; (B) any corporation, partnership, association, organization or other entity which is created or organized under the laws of a foreign country or which has its principal place of business outside the United States; or (C) any agency or instrumentality of a foreign government; and (2) the term ``United States person'' means-- (A) any United States citizen or permanent resident alien; (B) juridical person organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States, including any foreign branch; (C) any person in the United States; or (D) the United States Government or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
PROTECTION OF PARTICIPANTS IN THE REWARDS PROGRAM.
Subsection 36(e) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act (22 United States Code 2708) is amended by inserting ``(1)'' immediately following ``(e)'' and adding the following new paragraph: ``(2)(A) Whenever the information which would justify a reward under subsection (a) is furnished by an alien and the Secretary of State and the Attorney General jointly determine that the protection of such alien or the alien's immediate family requires the admission of such alien or aliens to the United States, then such alien, and the alien's immediate relatives, if necessary, may be issued visas and admitted to the United States for permanent residence, without regard to the requirements of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101 et sequentes).
The total number of aliens admitted to the United States under subparagraph (A) shall not exceed 25 in any one fiscal year.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `immediate relative' has the same meaning given to such term in section 201(b)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)).''.
INCREASE IN CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR THE MISUSE OF PASSPORTS.
Section 1544 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``$2,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$50,000''; and (2) by striking ``five years'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``ten years''.
SANCTION ON FOREIGN AIR TRANSPORTATION.
Determination.--Whenever the President determines that a country is not complying with United Nations Security Council Resolution 748 with respect to Libya, he shall so certify to the Congress.
Notification of Foreign Government.--(1) The President is authorized to notify the government of a country with respect to which the President has made a determination pursuant to subsection (a) of his intention to suspend the authority of foreign air carriers owned or controlled by the government of that country to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States.
Within 10 days after the date of notification of a government under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Transportation shall take all steps necessary to suspend at the earliest possible date the authority of any foreign air carrier owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by that government to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States, notwithstanding any agreement relating to air services.
Termination of Air Service Agreements.--(1) The President may direct the Secretary of State to terminate any air service agreement between the United States and a country with respect to which the President has made a determination pursuant to subsection (a), in accordance with the provisions of that agreement.
Upon termination of an agreement under this subsection, the Secretary of Transportation shall take such steps as may be necessary to revoke at the earliest possible date the right of any foreign air carrier owned, or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the government of that country to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States.
Exceptions.--The Secretary of Transportation may provide for such exceptions from subsections (b) and (c) as the Secretary considers necessary to provide for emergencies in which the safety of an aircraft or its crew or passengers is threatened.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms ``air transportation'', ``air carrier'', ``foreign air carrier'', and ``foreign air transportation'' have the meanings such terms have under section 101 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code App.
LIMITATION ON TRANSFERS OF INFORMATIONAL MATERIALS.
Amendment to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act.-- Section 203(b)(3) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1702(b)(3)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end thereof the following: ``, except that informational materials do not include materials containing technical or commercial data of value to the economy of a foreign country whose transactions are otherwise regulated or prohibited under this section''.
Amendment to the Trading With the Enemy Act.--Section 5(b)(4) of the Trading With the Enemy Act (50 United States Code App.
5(b)(4)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end thereof the following: ``, except that informational materials do not include materials containing technical or commercial data of value to the economy of a foreign country whose transactions are otherwise regulated or prohibited under this section''.
INCREASE IN CIVIL PENALTIES.
Section 206(a) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1705(a)) is amended by striking out ``$10,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$100,000''.
Nothing in this Act restricts or limits any authority contained in or actions taken pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1701-1706), the Trading With the Enemy Act (50 United States Code App.
5(b)), or any other authority under which economic sanctions have been or may be imposed and enforced.