AUTHORIZING STATES TO DENY PUBLIC EDUCATION BENEFITS TO CERTAIN ALIENS NOT LAWFULLY PRESENT IN THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--The Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by adding after title V the following new title: ``TITLE VI--AUTHORIZING STATES TO DISQUALIFY CERTAIN ALIENS NOT LAWFULLY PRESENT IN THE UNITED STATES FROM PUBLIC EDUCATION BENEFITS ``congressional policy regarding ineligibility of aliens not lawfully present in the united states for public education benefits ``Sec.
Statement of Policy.--Because Congress views that the right to a free public education for aliens who are not lawfully present in the United States promotes violations of the immigration laws and because such a free public education for such aliens creates a significant burden on States' economies and depletes States' limited educational resources, Congress declares it to be the policy of the United States that-- ``(1) aliens who are not lawfully present in the United States are not entitled to public education benefits in the same manner as United States citizens, nationals, and lawful resident aliens; and ``(2) States should not be obligated to provide public education benefits to aliens who are not lawfully present in the United States.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as expressing any statement of Federal policy with regard to-- ``(1) aliens who are lawfully present in the United States, ``(2) benefits other than public education benefits provided under State law, or ``(3) preventing the exclusion or deportation of aliens unlawfully present in the United States.
``authority of states ``Sec.
In General.--In order to carry out the policies described in section 601, each State may provide, subject to subsection (f), with respect to an alien who is not lawfully present in the United States that-- ``(1) the alien is not eligible for public education benefits under State law; or ``(2) the alien is required, as a condition of obtaining such benefits, to pay a fee in an amount consistent with the following: ``(A) In the case of a State that requires payment of a fee of nonresidents as a condition of obtaining such benefits, the amount of such nonresident fee.
In the case of any other State, an amount specified by the State, not to exceed the average per pupil expenditures for such benefits (as determined by the State and selected by the State either for the State or for the local educational agency involved).
Individuals Not Lawfully Present in the United States.--For purposes of subsection (a), an individual shall be considered to be not lawfully present in the United States unless the individual (or, in the case of an individual who is a child, another on the child's behalf)-- ``(1) declares in writing under penalty of perjury that the individual (or child) is a citizen or national of the United States and (if required by a State) presents evidence of United States citizenship or nationality; or ``(2)(A) declares in writing under penalty of perjury that the individual (or child) is not a citizen or national of the United States but is an alien lawfully present in the United States, and ``(B) presents either-- ``(i) documentation described in section 1137(d)(2) of the Social Security Act, or ``(ii) such other documents as the State determines constitutes reasonable evidence indicating that the individual (or child) is an alien lawfully present in the United States.
Procedures for Screening.--If a State provides for immigration eligibility screening pursuant to this section for individuals who are seeking public education benefits, the State shall provide for such screening for all individuals seeking such benefits.
A State may (at its option) verify with the Service the alien's immigration status through a system for alien verification of eligibility (SAVE) described in section 1137(d)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320b-7(d)(3)).
Opportunity for Fair Hearing.--If a State denies public education benefits under this section with respect to an alien, the State shall provide the alien with an opportunity for a fair hearing to establish that the alien has been determined by the Service to be lawfully present in the United States, consistent with subsection (b) and Federal immigration law.
No Requirement to Deny Free Public Education.--No State shall be required by this section to deny public education benefits to any alien not lawfully present in the United States.
No Authority to Deny Free Public Education to Students Enrolled At Any Time During the Period Beginning September 1, 1996, and Ending July 1, 1997.--(1) A State may not deny, and may not require payment of a fee as a condition for the receipt of, public education benefits under this section with respect to a protected alien.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `protected alien' means an alien who is not lawfully present in the United States and is enrolled as a student in a public elementary or secondary school in the United States at any time during the period beginning September 1, 1996, and ending July 1, 1997.
No Impact on Immigration Status.--Nothing in this section or section 601 shall be construed as affecting the immigration status of any alien, including the conferring of any immigration benefit or change in any proceedings under this Act with respect to the alien.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``TITLE VI--AUTHORIZING STATES TO DISQUALIFY CERTAIN ALIENS NOT LAWFULLY PRESENT IN THE UNITED STATES FROM PUBLIC EDUCATION BENEFITS ``Sec.
Congressional policy regarding ineligibility of aliens not lawfully present in the United States for public education benefits.
Passed the House of Representatives September 25, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.