This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Access to Indemnity and Reimbursement Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Certain small businesses and labor organizations are at a great disadvantage in terms of expertise and resources when facing actions brought by the National Labor Relations Board or by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
The attempt to ``level the playing field'' for small businesses and labor organizations by means of the Equal Access to Justice Act has proven ineffective and has been underutilized by these small entities in their actions before the National Labor Relations Board and before the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission.
The greater expertise and resources of the National Labor Relations Board and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as compared with those of small businesses and labor organizations necessitate a standard that awards fees and costs to certain small entities when they prevail against the National Labor Relations Board or against the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to ensure that certain small businesses and labor organizations will not be deterred from seeking review of, or defending against, actions brought against them by the National Labor Relations Board or by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration because of the expense involved in securing vindication of their rights; (2) to reduce the disparity in resources and expertise between certain small businesses and labor organizations and the National Labor Relations Board and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration; and (3) to make the National Labor Relations Board and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration more accountable for their enforcement actions against certain small businesses and labor organizations by awarding fees and costs to these entities when they prevail against the National Labor Relations Board or in proceedings before the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission.
AMENDMENT TO NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS ACT.
The National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
AWARDS OF ATTORNEYS' FEES AND COSTS.
Administrative Proceedings.--An employer who, or labor organization that-- ``(1) is the prevailing party in an adversary adjudication conducted by the Board under this or any other Act; and ``(2) had not more than 100 employees and a net worth of not more than $7,000,000 at the time the adversary adjudication was initiated, shall be awarded fees and other expenses as a prevailing party under section 504 of title 5, United States Code, in accordance with the provisions of that section, but without regard to whether the position of the Board was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `adversary adjudication' has the meaning given that term in section 504(b)(1)(C) of title 5, United States Code.
Court Proceedings.--An employer who, or a labor organization that-- ``(1) is the prevailing party in a civil action, including proceedings for judicial review of agency action by the Board, brought by or against the Board, and ``(2) had not more than 100 employees and a net worth of not more than $7,000,000 at the time the civil action was filed, shall be awarded fees and other expenses as a prevailing party under section 2412(d) of title 28, United States Code, in accordance with the provisions of that section, but without regard to whether the position of the United States was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
Appeals.--Any appeal of a determination of fees pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) shall be determined without regard to whether the position of the United States was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.''.
APPLICABILITY OF NLRA AMENDMENT.
Agency Proceedings.--Subsection (a) of section 20 of the National Labor Relations Act, as added by section 3 of this Act, applies to agency proceedings commenced on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Court Proceedings.--Subsection (b) of section 20 of the National Labor Relations Act, as added by section 3 of this Act, applies to civil actions commenced on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
AMENDMENT TO OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT.
The Occupational Safety and Health Act (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 12 the following: ``SEC.
AWARDS OF ATTORNEYS' FEES AND COSTS.
Administrative Proceedings.--An employer who-- ``(1) is the prevailing party in an adversary adjudication before the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission under this or any other Act, and ``(2) had not more than 100 employees and a net worth of not more than $7,000,000 at the time the adversary adjudication was initiated, shall be awarded fees and other expenses as a prevailing party under section 504 of title 5, United States Code, in accordance with the provisions of that section, but without regard to whether the position of the Secretary of Labor was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `adversary adjudication' has the meaning given that term in section 504(b)(1)(C) of title 5, United States Code.
Court Proceedings.--An employer who-- ``(1) is the prevailing party in a civil action, including proceedings for judicial review of an action by the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission, brought by or against the Secretary or the Commission, and ``(2) had not more than 100 employees and a net worth of not more than $7,000,000 at the time the civil action was filed, shall be awarded fees and other expenses as a prevailing party under section 2412(d) of title 28, United States Code, in accordance with the provisions of that section, but without regard to whether the position of the United States was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
Appeals.--Any appeal of a determination of fees pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) shall be determined without regard to whether the position of the United States was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.''.
APPLICABILITY OF OSHA AMENDMENT.
Agency Proceedings.--Subsection (a) of section 12A of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, as added by section 5 of this Act, applies to agency proceedings commenced on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Court Proceedings.--Subsection (b) of section 12A of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, as added by section 5 of this Act, applies to civil actions commenced on or after the date of enactment of this Act.