This Act may be cited as the ``Safer Workplaces Act''.
TITLE I--PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM REPRISALS SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Safety and Health Whistleblower Protection Act''.
Section 11(c)(1) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 660(c)(1)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``including reporting any injury, illness or unsafe condition''.
Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 660(c)) is amended by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following: ``(2) No person shall discharge or in any manner discriminate against an employee for refusing to perform the employee's duties when the employee has a reasonable apprehension that performing such duties would result in serious injury or serious impairment of health to the employee or other employees.
The circumstances causing the employee's apprehension of serious injury must be of such a nature that a reasonable person would conclude that there is a danger of serious injury or serious impairment of health.
This paragraph shall only apply to an employee to the extent that the employee, if possible, communicated to the employer the danger perceived.''.
Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 660(c)) is amended by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following: ``(3) Any employee who believes that he or she has been discharged, disciplined, or otherwise discriminated against in violation of paragraph (1) or (2) may, within 180 days after the date on which such alleged violation occurs, file (or have filed by any person on the employee's behalf) a complaint with the Secretary alleging such discharge, discipline, or discrimination.
Upon receipt of such a complaint, the Secretary shall notify the person named in the complaint of the filing of the complaint.
(A) Within 90 days of the receipt of a complaint filed under paragraph (3), the Secretary shall conduct an investigation and determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe that the complaint has merit and shall notify the complainant and the person alleged to have committed the violation of paragraph (1) or (2) of the Secretary's findings.
Where the Secretary has determined that there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation has occurred, the Secretary's findings shall be accompanied by a preliminary order providing the relief prescribed by subparagraph (E).
(i) After a preliminary order is issued under subparagraph (A), the person alleged to have committed the violation involved or the complainant may, within 30 days, file objections to the findings or preliminary order, or both, and request a hearing on the record, except that the filing of such objections shall not operate to stay any reinstatement remedy contained in the preliminary order; and ``(ii) If a hearing described in clause (i) is not requested in a timely manner as provided for under such clause, the preliminary order involved shall be deemed a final order and not be subject to judicial review.
If the Secretary has not issued findings under subparagraph (A) within the 90-day period described in such subparagraph, and the employee or representative of the employee files a request for a hearing with the Secretary, the Secretary shall afford an opportunity for a hearing on the record.
If requested under subparagraph (C), a hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge and a recommended decision and order issued expeditiously.
The legal burdens of proof that prevail under section 1221 of title 5, United States Code, shall govern adjudication of violations under this subsection.
The Secretary shall issue a final order within 120 days of the issuance of the recommended decision.
In the interim, such proceedings may be terminated at any time on the basis of a settlement agreement entered into by the Secretary, the complainant, and the person alleged to have committed the violation.
If, in response to a complaint filed under paragraph (3), the Secretary determines that a violation of paragraph (1) or (2) has occurred, the Secretary shall order as appropriate-- ``(i) the person who committed such violation to correct the violation; ``(ii) the person to reinstate the complainant to the complainant's former position together with the compensation (including back pay), terms, conditions, and privileges of the position; ``(iii) compensatory damages; and ``(iv) exemplary damages.
Upon issuance of such an order, the Secretary may assess against the person against whom the order is issued a sum equal to the aggregate amount of all costs and expenses (including attorney's fees and expert witness fees) reasonably incurred, as determined by the Secretary, by the complainant for, or in connection with, the bringing of the complaint upon which the order was issued, including costs and expenses incurred upon review before a court of appeals.
In conducting an investigation or adjudication under this paragraph, the provisions of section 8(b) shall apply.
(A) Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by a final order issued under paragraph (4)(D) may obtain review of the order before the United States court of appeals for the circuit in which the violation, with respect to which the order was issued, occurred, or the circuit in which such person resided on the date of such violation.
The petition for review must be filed within 60 days from the date on which the Secretary's order was issued.
Such review shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code.
An order of the Secretary subject to review under this subsection is not subject to judicial review in a criminal or other civil proceeding.
The commencement of proceedings under this subsection shall not, unless ordered by the court, operate as a stay of the order of the Secretary.
When a person has failed to comply with a final order or an order of reinstatement issued under paragraph (4), the Secretary or the person on behalf of whom the order was issued may file a civil action in the United States district court for the district in which the violation was found to occur in order to enforce such order.
In actions brought under this subparagraph, the district court shall have jurisdiction to grant additional appropriate relief in light of the noncompliance.''.
Section 17(j) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 666(j)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, including the history of violation under section 11(c)''.
The amendments made by this title shall take effect 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS SEC.
COVERAGE OF FEDERAL, STATE AND POLITICAL SUBDIVISION EMPLOYEES.
Section 3(5) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 652(5)) is amended to read as follows: ``(5) The term `employer' means a person engaged in a business affecting commerce who has employees, including the United States and the United States Postal Service and any State or political subdivision of a State.''.
Section 17 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 666) is amended-- (1) in subsection (e)-- (A) by striking ``fine of not more than $10,000'' and inserting ``fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,''; (B) by striking ``six months'' and inserting ``10 years''; (C) by striking ``fine of not more than $20,000'' and inserting ``fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,''; (D) by striking ``one year'' and inserting ``20 years''; and (E) by inserting ``under this subsection or subsection (i)'' after ``first conviction of such person''; (2) in subsection (f), by striking ``fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months,'' and inserting ``fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or by imprisonment for not more than 2 years,''; and (3) in subsection (g), by striking ``fine of not more than $10,000, or by imprisonment for not more than six months,'' and inserting ``fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or by imprisonment for not more than 1 year,''.