This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Democracy 2000 Act''.
Congress finds as follows: (1) Among the major problems of the District of Columbia government has been the failure to clearly delineate accountability.
The statute establishing the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Authority proved necessary to enable the District to regain financial stability and management control.
The District has performed significantly better than the Congress had anticipated at the time of the passage of the Authority statute.
The necessity for a financial authority has resulted in a diffusion of responsibility between the Mayor, the Council, and the Authority pending the time when the District government would assume the home rule status quo ante.
This lack of clear lines of reporting authority, in turn, has led to some redundancy and confusion about accountability and authority.
The Authority statute requires the Authority to ``ensure the most efficient and effective delivery of services, including public safety services, by the District government'' and to ``assist the District government in * * * ensuring the appropriate and efficient delivery of services''.
With the coming of a new administration led by Mayor Anthony Williams, the Authority has taken the first step to ensure the accountability that will be necessary at the expiration of the control period by delegating day-to-day operations over city agencies previously under control of the Authority to the Mayor.
The Congress agrees that the best way to ensure clear and unambiguous authority and full accountability is for the Mayor to have full authority over city agencies so that citizens, the Authority, and the Congress can ascertain responsibility.
The transition of authority to the new administration will take nothing from the Authority's power to intervene during a control period.
The congressional intent embodied in the Authority statute contemplates full home rule by the District government when it attains the necessary stability.
Congress assumed that it would take 4 years of balanced budgets to achieve the requisite stability.
The District has exceeded congressional expectations by submitting 3 years of balanced budgets plus surpluses.
The Authority is an emergency body that should not be held past the existence of the emergency at a cost to democratic self-government.
To take account of conditions that improved beyond expectations, full self-government should return to the District one year ahead of time, in the year 2000.
RESTORATION OF MANAGEMENT AND PERSONNEL AUTHORITY OF MAYOR OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
In General.--Subtitle B of title XI of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (DC Code, sec.
47-395.1 et sequentes) is repealed.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1604(f)(2)(B) of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-34; 111 United States Statutes at Large 1099) is repealed.
SUSPENSION OF ACTIVITIES OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND MANAGEMENT ASSISTANCE AUTHORITY.
In General.--Section 209(b)(1)(B) of the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Act of 1995 (DC Code, sec.
47-392.9(b)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``4'' and inserting ``3''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 107 of such Act (DC Code, sec.
47-391.7) is amended-- (A) in subsection (a)(1), by inserting ``or any other Act'' after ``this Act''; and (B) in subsection (b), by striking ``this Act,'' and inserting ``this Act or any other Act,''.
Section 456 of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act is amended-- (A) in subsection (a)(1) (DC Code, sec.
47-231(a)), by striking ``the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Authority'' and inserting the following: ``the Mayor (or, in the case of a fiscal year which is a control year under the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Act of 1995, the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Authority)''; and (B) in subsection (b)(1) (DC Code, sec.
47-232(a)), by striking ``the Authority'' and inserting the following: ``the Mayor or the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Authority (as the case may be)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Act of 1995.