This Act may be cited as the ``Language Education for Success Act of 2007''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Between January 2000 and March 2005, an estimated 7,900,000 new immigrants (documented and undocumented) relocated to the United States, constituting the biggest wave of immigrants in American history.
English language learners account for 10.3 percent of public school enrollment and are concentrated in large and urban school districts.
Hispanic students from age 16 through age 19 who have non-proficient English language skills have a dropout rate of 59 percent.
The poverty rate for immigrants and their United States-born children under age 18 is 57 percent higher than the percentage for natives and their children.
High poverty school districts, both urban and rural, are particularly affected by teacher shortages.
The National Center for Education Statistics predicts that over 2,000,000 new teachers will be needed across the Nation over the next decade.
ADDITIONAL LOAN FORGIVENESS FOR TEACHERS OF STUDENTS OF LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY.
FFEL Loans.--Section 428J(c)(3) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1078-10(c)(3)) is amended-- (1) in the paragraph heading, by inserting ``, and teachers of students of limited english proficiency'' before the period; and (2) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by striking ``mathematics or science'' and inserting ``mathematics, science, or students of limited English proficiency''.
Direct Loans.--Section 460(c)(3) of such Act (20 United States Code 1087j(c)(3)) is amended-- (1) in the paragraph heading, by inserting ``, and teachers of students of limited english proficiency'' before the period; and (2) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by striking ``mathematics or science'' and inserting ``mathematics, science, or students of limited English proficiency''.
New Borrower Eligibility.--The amendments made by this section shall apply only with respect to teachers of students of limited English proficiency who are new borrowers (as such term is defined in 103 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1003)) on or after October 1, 1998.
STUDY AND REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT PERFORMANCE MEASURES OF LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY CHILDREN.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Commissioner of the National Center for Educational Statistics (in this Act referred to as the ``Commissioner'') shall conduct a study to obtain detailed information about the performance of recipients of funding under title III of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6801 et sequentes) to measure academic progress of limited English proficiency children and immigrant children and youth.
Specific topics.--In conducting the study required under paragraph (1), the Commissioner shall specifically examine the following questions: (A) What are the dropout rates of limited English proficiency children across the Nation, and why do these children drop?
What are the graduation completion and dropout rates of all students covered by title III of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6801 et sequentes)?
What is the academic achievement gap between Hispanic and non-Hispanic limited English proficiency children?
Is there a correlation between English proficiency and graduation rates for limited English proficiency children?
How does socioeconomic status affect dropout rates of the limited English proficiency children?
What percentage of limited English proficiency children attend adult education programs (including English as a Second Language and General Educational Development course work) after they drop out?
What percentage of students would attend those programs if they were universally available?
Deadline.--The Commissioner shall complete the study required by this subsection not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Report.--Not later than 60 days after completion of the study required by subsection (a), the Commissioner shall submit to Congress a report containing a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions based upon such study.
BEST PRACTICES OF STATES IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS FOR LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY STUDENTS.
The Secretary of Education shall compile and make public a list with descriptions of the instructional programs used in each State for achieving academic success of limited English proficiency children and immigrant students.
For such list, the Secretary shall assess the cost, advantages, and risks of the various programs.
Subpart 1 of part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 4--SPRINGBOARD CREDITS ``SEC.
Grants Authorized.--From the amounts appropriated under subsection (e), the Secretary is authorized to provide grants to institutions of higher education to provide foreign language and teacher preparation instruction to incoming first-year undergraduates in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Applications.--Any institution of higher education that seeks to obtain a grant under this chapter shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing or accompanied by such information and assurances as the Secretary may require.
Eligible Program.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this chapter, a program of an institution of higher education shall-- ``(1) provide, during the months preceding the enrollment of an incoming first-year student, a program of instruction, on the campus of that or another institution of higher education, consisting of both-- ``(A) a course in foreign language instruction of 3 credit hours, or an equivalent as determined by the institution; and ``(B) a course in teacher preparation instruction, in the education department (or comparable unit) of the institution, of 3 credit hours, or an equivalent as determined by the institution; and ``(2) provide, from the amount of the grant received by the institution, a grant to any such student selected for participation in the program of not more than $1,500 to cover the cost of tuition for enrollment in such courses.
Selection of Grant Recipients.-- ``(1) Approval and selection.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, prescribe procedures for the approval of applications and the selection of institutions of higher education for the award of grants under this chapter.
Notice of program.--Within 90 days after the date of enactment of this chapter, the Secretary shall-- ``(A) publish a concise summary the program under this chapter on the website of the Department; and ``(B) transmit such summary to each eligible institution of higher education.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this chapter $60,000,000 for fiscal year 2008 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `incoming first-year student' means an individual who has been accepted for enrollment by an institution of higher education and who has not successfully completed the first year of a program of undergraduate education at that institution.