This Act may be cited as the ``Learn to Earn Act of 2011''.
Congress finds the following: (1) One of America's strengths has always been that it is a great place to start and grow a business.
According to the 2010 Small Business Economy: A Report to the President, ``small businesses--those with fewer than 500 employees--are generally the creators of most net new jobs, as well as the employers of about half of the nation's private sector work force, and the providers of a significant share of innovations, as well as half of the nonfarm, private real gross domestic product.''.
The April 2009 World Economic Forum Report entitled ``Educating the Next Wave of Entrepreneurs'' recommends that countries transform their educational systems to integrate entrepreneurship education at all levels and across curricula in recognition that ``entrepreneurship education is essential for developing the human capital necessary for the society of the future.''.
``Educating the Next Wave of Entrepreneurs'' argues that the skills and knowledge learned through entrepreneurship education--such as problem solving, economic principles, and negotiation--are critical to success in the 21st century global economy, in which competition is fierce and markets and jobs evolve at a rapid pace.
Entrepreneurship education models incorporate lessons in financial literacy, economics, and other business topics such as marketing and accounting which can lead to increased proficiency in mathematics and English Language Arts.
When young people learn to see opportunity amid obstacles, to set and achieve high personal goals, and to apply knowledge and skills to real-world scenarios--in short, to think and act like entrepreneurs--they are armed with tools that will increase their success in college and beyond.
In this Act: (a) ESEA Terms.--The terms ``local educational agency'', ``highly qualified'', and ``secondary school'' have the meanings given such terms in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Entrepreneurship Partner Entity.--The term ``entrepreneurship partner entity'' means an entity such as a local business, a local community organization, a local municipality, a local Small Business Administration office, a local Chamber of Commerce, or another State, local, or tribal government entity that specializes in entrepreneurship, small business development, or workforce development that has entered into an agreement with a local educational agency designated an entrepreneurship community under section 4(a), as determined by the Secretary of Education.
High-Quality Entrepreneurship Education Program.--The term ``high-quality entrepreneurship education program'' means a program that teaches entrepreneurial skills and includes the following: (1) High standards in mathematics and related content areas such as economics.
Curriculum delivered by high-quality teachers who complete entrepreneurship-specific training and receive ongoing professional development among a community of peers.
Hands-on activities and project-based work, such as negotiation simulations and student business plans, designed to bring abstract concepts to life and stimulate a wide variety of local educational agency learning preferences.
A financial literacy component to provide students with the skills and knowledge needed to make informed personal finance decisions.
Interactions with entrepreneurs and small business owners who inspire students and challenge them to set high personal goals.
Partnerships between educators and business community members who volunteer as guest speakers, guest teachers, field trip hosts, mentors, business plan competition judges, or in other roles.
DESIGNATION OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP COMMUNITIES.
Designation.--Not later than 90 days after receiving an application from a local education agency, the Secretary of Education shall designate such local educational agency as an entrepreneurship community if the Secretary determines that the local educational agency satisfies the requirements described in subsection (b).
Determination.--A local educational agency satisfies the requirements of this subsection if the local educational agency is carrying out a high-quality entrepreneurship education program for secondary school students.
Application.--The Secretary shall establish an application process for the purpose of designating local educational agencies as entrepreneurship communities under subsection (a).
Such application shall include a description of the proposed high-quality entrepreneurship education program and any proposed entrepreneurship partner entities.
PREFERENCES FOR ENTREPRENEURSHIP COMMUNITIES.
In awarding competitive grants to local educational agencies under title XIV of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5) and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes) the Secretary of Education shall, to the extent practicable, give priority consideration to each local educational agency that is designated an entrepreneurship community under section 4(a).
PREFERENCES FOR ENTREPRENEURSHIP PARTNER ENTITIES.
In making competitive grants, loans, or loan guarantees related to small business development, workforce development, community development, or economic development the Administrator of the Small Business Administration, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Secretary of Energy shall give priority consideration, to the extent practicable, to a entrepreneurship partner entity.