SHORT TITLE; FINDINGS; AND PURPOSES.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Measures to Encourage Results in Teaching Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) All students deserve to be taught by well-educated, competent, and qualified teachers.
More than ever before, education has and will continue to become the ticket not only to economic success but to basic survival.
Students will not succeed in meeting the demands of a knowledge-based, 21st century society and economy if the students do not encounter more challenging work in school.
For future generations to have the opportunities to achieve success the future generations will need to have an education and a teacher workforce second to none.
No other intervention can make the difference that a knowledgeable, skillful teacher can make in the learning process.
At the same time, nothing can fully compensate for weak teaching that, despite good intentions, can result from a teacher's lack of opportunity to acquire the knowledge and skill needed to help students master the curriculum.
The Federal Government established the Dwight D. Eisenhower Professional Development Program in 1985 to ensure that teachers and other educational staff have access to sustained and high-quality professional development.
This ongoing development must include the ability to demonstrate and judge the performance of teachers and other instructional staff.
States should evaluate their teachers on the basis of demonstrated ability, including tests of subject matter knowledge, teaching knowledge, and teaching skill.
States should develop a test for their teachers and other instructional staff with respect to the subjects taught by the teachers and staff, and should administer the test every 3 to 5 years.
Evaluating and rewarding teachers with a compensation system that supports teachers who become increasingly expert in a subject area, are proficient in meeting the needs of students and schools, and demonstrate high levels of performance measured against professional teaching standards, will encourage teachers to continue to learn needed skills and broaden teachers' expertise, thereby enhancing education for all students.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To provide incentives for States to establish and administer periodic teacher testing and merit pay programs for elementary school and secondary school teachers.
To encourage States to establish merit pay programs that have a significant impact on teacher salary scales.
To encourage programs that recognize and reward the best teachers, and encourage those teachers that need to do better.
STATE INCENTIVES FOR TEACHER TESTING AND MERIT PAY.
Amendments.--Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6601 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part D as part E; (2) by redesignating sections 2401 and 2402 as sections 2501 and 2502, respectively; and (3) by inserting after part C the following: ``PART D--STATE INCENTIVES FOR TEACHER TESTING AND MERIT PAY ``SEC.
STATE INCENTIVES FOR TEACHER TESTING AND MERIT PAY.
State Awards.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, from funds described in subsection (b) that are made available for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall make an award to each State that-- ``(1) administers a test to each elementary school and secondary school teacher in the State, with respect to the subjects taught by the teacher, every 3 to 5 years; and ``(2) has an elementary school and secondary school teacher compensation system that is based on merit.
Available Funding.--The amount of funds referred to in subsection (a) that are available to carry out this section for a fiscal year is 50 percent of the amount of funds appropriated to carry out this title that are in excess of the amount so appropriated for fiscal year 1999, except that no funds shall be available to carry out this section for any fiscal year for which-- ``(1) the amount appropriated to carry out this title exceeds $600,000,000; or ``(2) each of the several States is eligible to receive an award under this section.
Award Amount.--A State shall receive an award under this section in an amount that bears the same relation to the total amount available for awards under this section for a fiscal year as the number of States that are eligible to receive such an award for the fiscal year bears to the total number of all States so eligible for the fiscal year.
Use of Funds.--Funds provided under this section may be used by States to carry out the activities described in section 2207.
Definition of State.--For the purpose of this section, the term `State' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
TEACHER TESTING AND MERIT PAY.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a State may use Federal education funds-- (1) to carry out a test of each elementary school or secondary school teacher in the State with respect to the subjects taught by the teacher; or (2) to establish a merit pay program for the teachers.
Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``elementary school'' and ``secondary school'' have the meanings given the terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).