TITLE I--REPEAL OF TAX INCREASE ON SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS SEC.
REPEAL OF TAX INCREASE ON SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS.
Section 13215 of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1993 is hereby repealed, and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be applied and administered as if such section (and the amendments made thereby) had not been enacted.
TITLE II--REDUCTIONS IN SPENDING SEC.
TERMINATION OF SPACE STATION.
The Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shall terminate the Space Station Freedom program.
After the date of enactment of this Act, no funds may be obligated for such program except as necessary to meet required contract termination costs.
TERMINATION OF PROCUREMENT OF F-16 AIRCRAFT.
The Secretary of Defense shall terminate procurement of new production F-16 aircraft for the Air Force.
After the date of the enactment of this Act, no funds may be obligated for production of such aircraft except as necessary to meet required contract termination costs.
The Secretary shall carry out this section so as to achieve savings in defense budgets during the period of fiscal year 1994 through fiscal year 1998 of not less than $1,700,000,000.
DELAY IN PROCUREMENT OF F-22 AIRCRAFT.
The Secretary of Defense shall extend current procurement schedules for procurement under the F-22 aircraft program of the Air Force so as to achieve savings in defense budgets during the period of fiscal year 1994 through fiscal year 1998 of not less than $2,200,000,000.
REDUCTION IN ATTACK SUBMARINE FORCE.
The Secretary of Defense shall, not later than the end of fiscal year 1998, reduce the number of attack submarines in active Navy forces to not more than 40.
The Secretary shall carry out this section so as to achieve savings in defense budgets during the period of fiscal year 1994 through fiscal year 1998 of not less than $2,900,000,000.
REDUCTION IN BALLISTIC MISSILE SUBMARINE FORCE.
Termination of Production of D-5 Missile.--The Secretary of Defense shall terminate procurement of Trident II (D-5) sea-launched ballistic missiles for the Navy.
After the date of the enactment of this Act, no funds may be obligated for procurement of such missiles except as necessary to meet required contract termination costs.
Reduction in Submarine Force.--The Secretary of Defense shall, not later than the end of fiscal year 1998, reduce the number of Trident ballistic missile submarines in active Navy forces to not more than 14.
Savings.--The Secretary shall carry out this section so as to achieve savings in defense budgets during the period of fiscal year 1994 through fiscal year 1998 of not less than $5,300,000,000.
DELAY IN PROCUREMENT OF TRISERVICE STAND-OFF ATTACK MISSILE.
The Secretary of Defense shall delay procurement of the Tri-Service Stand-Off Attack Missile for five years and shall, during the period of fiscal year 1994 through fiscal year 1998, continue research, development, test, and evaluation for that missile at the fiscal year 1993 level so as to achieve savings in defense budgets during that period of not less than $1,400,000,000.
ELIMINATION OF HONEY PRICE SUPPORT PROGRAM.
In General.--Sections 207 and 405A of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 United States Code 1446h and 1425a, respectively) are repealed.
Payment Limitations.--Section 1001(2) of the Food Security Act of 1985 (7 United States Code 1308(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B)(iii), by striking ``(other than honey)''; and (2) by striking subparagraph (C).
Designated Nonbasic Agricultural Commodities.--Section 201(a) of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 United States Code 1446(a)) is amended by striking ``honey,''.
Other Nonbasic Agricultural Commodities.--Section 301 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 United States Code 1447) is amended by inserting after ``nonbasic agricultural commodity'' the following: ``(other than honey)''.
Definitions.--Section 408(k) of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 United States Code 1428(k)) is amended by striking ``honey,'' each place it appears.
Powers of Commodity Credit Corporation.--Section 5(a) of the Commodity Credit Corporation Charter Act (15 United States Code 714c(a)) is amended by inserting after ``agricultural commodities'' the following: ``(other than honey)''.
Transition.--The amendments made by this section shall not affect the liability of any person under any provision of law as in effect before the application of the amendments in accordance with subsection (d).
Application of Amendments.--The amendments made by this section shall apply beginning with the crop year that begins after the date of enactment of this Act.
ELIMINATION OF BELOW-COST TIMBER SALES.
Rules Required.--Not later than six months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue rules relating to the conditions under which the Forest Service may approve of sales of trees, portions of trees, or forest products from National Forest System lands.
Content of Rules.--The rules required under subsection (a) shall-- (1) require that after the end of the one-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the total cost to the United States of carrying out each timber sale described in subsection (a) (including the advertising, planning, review, approval, and monitoring costs attributable to the sale and road building costs incurred for the sale) is not greater than the amount paid to the United States Service for the sale; and (2) establish a procedure to phase in the application of such requirement during that period.
Phase-In Period.--The rules required under subsection (a) shall provide that, during the phase-in period, the Forest Service in determining whether to approve a below-cost timber sale shall give priority to those below-cost timber sales that would have the least adverse environmental effects.
FEES CHARGED FOR GRAZING ON PUBLIC LANDS.
Increase to Fair Market Value.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Agriculture, with respect to National Forest lands in the 16 contiguous western States (except National Grasslands) administered by the United States Forest Service where domestic livestock grazing is permitted under applicable law, and the Secretary of the Interior with respect to public domain lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management where domestic livestock grazing is permitted under applicable law, shall increase domestic livestock grazing fees beginning with the grazing season which commences on March 1, 1994, so that for the grazing season commencing on March 1, 1998, and thereafter such fees are equal to fair market value, as determined by the Secretary concerned.
Annual Cap on Fee Changes.--The fee for grazing charged for any given year under this section may not increase or decrease by more than 33.3 percent from the previous year's grazing fee.
ROYALTY ON HARDROCK MINERALS.
Reservation of Royalty.--Production of locatable minerals from a claim located on lands open to mineral entry under the Mining Law of 1872 shall be subject to an annual royalty of not less than 8 percent of the gross income from such production.
Payment of Royalty.--Royalty payments shall be made according to regulations established by the Secretary of the Interior.
The Secretary of the Interior may require to be filed with the royalty payment a copy of the parts of the tax return filed with the Internal Revenue Service determined by the Secretary of the Interior to be applicable to determining gross income.
The Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service shall cooperate with the Secretary of the Interior to verify the information submitted with such royalty payment.
Failure To Pay.--(1) Upon failure to pay the royalty required by this section, the claim shall be deemed conclusively to be abandoned and shall be null and void by operation of law.
The claimant shall be prohibited from locating a new claim on the lands included in such abandoned claim for one year from the date such claim is deemed abandoned and null and void by operation of law.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the date of enactment in the case of any claim described in subsection (a) which is located after the date of enactment of this Act.
In the case of any claim located on or before such date of enactment, this section shall take effect on the later of October 1 of 1993 or such date of enactment.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) The term ``locatable minerals'' means any mineral not subject to disposition under-- (A) the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code 181 et seq.
); (B) the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1000 et sequentes); or (C) the Act of July 31, 1947 (30 United States Reports 601 et sequentes), as amended by this Act.
The term ``gross income'' means ``gross income from the property'' as defined in section 613(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code and in regulations promulgated by the Treasury Department pursuant to section 613(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Any amendments or revisions of section 613(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code or of regulations promulgated by the Treasury Department pursuant to section 613(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be deemed applicable to the definition of ``gross income'' as used in this section.
The term ``Mining Law of 1872'' means the general mining laws of the United States which generally comprise chapters 2, 12A, and 16, and sections 161 and 162 of title 30, United States Code.