COMMISSION ON STRUCTURAL ALTERNATIVES FOR THE FEDERAL COURTS OF APPEALS SECTION.
ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a Commission on Structural Alternatives for the Federal Courts of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as the ``Commission'').
Functions.--The function of the Commission shall be to-- (1) study the present division of the United States into the several judicial circuits; (2) study the structure and alignment of the Federal courts of appeals with particular reference to the ninth circuit; and (3) report to the President and the Congress its recommendations for such changes in circuit boundaries or structure as may be appropriate for the expeditious and effective disposition of the caseload of the Federal Courts of Appeal, consistent with fundamental concepts of fairness and due process.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of eleven members appointed as follows: (1) Two members appointed by the President of the United States.
Three members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate, in consultation with the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Three members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Three members appointed by the Chief Justice of the United States.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Chair.--The Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair from among its members.
Quorum.--Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but three may conduct hearings.
In General.--Members of the Commission who are officers, or full-time employees, of the United States shall receive no additional compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of duties vested in the Commission, but not exceeding the maximum amounts authorized under section 456 of title 28, United States Code.
Private Members.--Members of the Commission from private life shall receive $200 per diem for each day (including traveltime) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission, plus reimbursement for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of such duties, but not in excess of the maximum amounts authorized under section 456 of title 28, United States Code.
Executive Director.--The Commission may appoint an Executive Director who shall receive compensation at a rate not exceeding the rate prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--The Executive Director, with approval of the Commission, may appoint and fix the compensation of such additional personnel as he determines necessary, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States code, governing appointments in the competitive service or the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Compensation under this subsection shall not exceed the annual maximum rate of basic pay for a position above GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5108 of title 5, United States Code.
Experts and Consultants.--The Director may procure personal services of experts and consultants as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, at rates not to exceed the highest level payable under the General Schedule pay rates under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Services.--The Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall provide administrative services, including financial and budgeting services, for the Commission on a reimbursable basis.
The Federal Judicial Center shall provide necessary research services on a reimbursable basis.
The Commission is authorized to request from any department, agency, or independent instrumentality of the Government any information and assistance it determines necessary to carry out its functions under this title and each such department, agency, and independent instrumentality is authorized to provide such information and assistance to the extent permitted by law when requested by the Chair of the Commission.
The Commission shall transmit its report to the President and the Congress no later tha February 28, 1997.
The Commission shall terminate ninety days after the date of the submission of its report.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums, not to exceed $500,000, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this title.
Such sums as are appropriated shall remain available until expended.
Within sixty days of the transmission of the report, the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate shall act on the report.
Passed the Senate March 20, 1996.
Attest: KELLY D. JOHNSTON, Secretary.