In General.-- (1) Chapter 13 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1310 the following new section: ``Sec.
Continuing appropriations ``(a)(1) If any regular appropriation bill for a fiscal year does not become law prior to the beginning of such fiscal year, there is appropriated, out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, and out of applicable corporate or other revenues, receipts, and funds, such sums as may be necessary to continue any project or activity for which funds were provided in the preceding fiscal year-- ``(A) in the corresponding regular appropriation Act for such preceding fiscal year; or ``(B) if the corresponding regular appropriation bill for such preceding fiscal year did not become law, pursuant to this section.
Appropriations and funds made available, and authority granted, for a project or activity for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be at a rate of operations not in excess of the lower of-- ``(A) the rate of operations provided for in the regular appropriation Act providing for such project or activity for the preceding fiscal year, or ``(B) in the absence of such an Act, the rate of operations provided for such project or activity pursuant to this section for such preceding fiscal year.
Appropriations and funds made available, and authority granted, for any fiscal year pursuant to this section for a project or activity shall be available for the period beginning with the first day of such fiscal year and ending with the earlier of-- ``(A) the date on which the applicable regular appropriation bill for such fiscal year becomes law (whether or not such law provides for such project or activity), and ``(B) the last day of such fiscal year.
An appropriation or funds made available, or authority granted, for a project or activity for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be subject to the terms and conditions imposed with respect to the appropriation made, funds made available, or authority granted for such project or activity for the preceding fiscal year.
Appropriations and funds made available, and authority granted, for any project or activity for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall cover all obligations or expenditures incurred for such project or activity during the portion of such fiscal year for which this section applies to such project or activity.
Expenditures made for a project or activity for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be charged to the applicable appropriation, fund, or authorization whenever a regular appropriation bill providing for such project or activity for such period becomes law.
No appropriation is made by reason of subparagraph (B) of subsection (a)(1) for a fiscal year for any project or activity for which there is no authorization of appropriations for such fiscal year.
This section shall not apply to a project or activity during a fiscal year if any other provision of law (other than an authorization of appropriations)-- ``(1) makes an appropriation, makes funds available, or grants authority for such project or activity to continue for such period, or ``(2) specifically provides that no appropriation shall be made, no funds shall be made available, or no authority shall be granted for such project or activity to continue for such period.
For purposes of this section `regular appropriation bill' means any regular appropriation bill (within the meaning given to such term in section 307 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 638)) making appropriations, otherwise making funds available, or granting authority, for any of the following categories of projects and activities: ``(1) Agriculture, rural development, and related agencies programs.
The Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the judiciary, and related agencies.
The Department of Defense.
The government of the District of Columbia and other activities chargeable in whole or in part against the revenues of the District.
The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and related agencies.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development, and sundry independent agencies, boards, commissions, corporations, and offices.
Energy and water development.
Foreign assistance and related programs.
The Department of the Interior and related agencies.
The Department of Transportation and related agencies.
The Treasury Department, the United States Reports Postal Service, the Executive Office of the President, and certain independent agencies.
The analysis of chapter 13 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1310 the following new item: ``1311.
The amendments made by this subsection shall apply with respect to fiscal years beginning after September 30, 1995.
Point of Order Against Continuing Resolutions.-- (1) It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider or to vote on the question of agreeing to any bill or joint resolution making continuing appropriations for a fiscal year or any conference report thereon.
Paragraph (1) may be waived or suspended in the Senate by a vote of three-fifths of the Members, duly chosen and sworn.
If the ruling of the presiding officer sustains a point of order raised pursuant to paragraph (1), a vote of three- fifths of the Members duly chosen and sworn shall be required to sustain an appeal of such ruling.
Debate on any such appeal shall be limited to two hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
An appeal of any such point of order is not subject to a motion to table.