This Act may be cited as the ``High Productivity and Economic Growth Act of 2002''.
ADOPTION OF THE HIGH PRODUCTIVITY INVESTMENT DEDUCTION.
In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by inserting after section 168 the following new section: ``SEC.
HIGH PRODUCTIVITY INVESTMENT DEDUCTION.
Treatment as Expenses.--A taxpayer may elect to treat the cost of any high productivity property as an expense not chargeable to capital account.
Any cost so treated shall be allowed as a deduction in the taxable year in which the high productivity property is placed in service.
Definition of High Productivity Property.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), the term `high productivity property' means any-- ``(A) computer, ``(B) computer related peripheral equipment, ``(C) computer based machinery, ``(D) electronic diagnostic equipment, ``(E) electronic control equipment, ``(F) other electronic, electromechanical, laser or computer based equipment, ``(G) computer software, ``(H) equipment used in the manufacture of semiconductors, ``(I) high technology medical equipment, ``(J) advanced technology communications equipment, ``(K) optical fiber and photonics equipment, ``(L) advanced environmental products, ``(M) advanced life science products, or ``(N) new high productivity assets.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection: ``(A) Computer.--The term `computer' means a programmable electronically activated device which-- ``(i) is capable of accepting information, applying prescribed processes to the information, and supplying the results of those processes, and ``(ii) consists of a central processing unit containing extensive storage, logic, arithmetic and control capabilities.
Computer related peripheral equipment.--The term `computer related peripheral equipment' means any auxiliary machine or other equipment (whether on-line or off-line) which is designed to be placed under the control of the central processing unit of a computer (as determined without regard to whether such machine or equipment is an integral part of other property which is not a computer).
Computer based machinery.--The term `computer based machinery' means any machine which-- ``(i) cuts, forms, shapes, drills, bores, mixes, paints, seals, welds, or otherwise transforms material, or ``(ii) handles, conveys, assembles, or packages materials or products, by responding to electronically stored information and programmed commands.
Electronic diagnostic equipment.--The term `electronic diagnostic equipment' means equipment that uses electronic components to sense or monitor location, size, volume, surface characteristics, pressure, temperature, speed, chemical composition, or other similar characteristics.
Electronic control equipment.--The term `electronic control equipment' means equipment that electronically controls pressure, temperature, size, volume, composition purity or other similar characteristics.
High technology medical equipment.--The term `high technology medical equipment' means any electronic, electromechanical, or computer-based high technology equipment used in the screening, monitoring, observation, diagnosis, or treatment of patients in a laboratory, medical, or hospital environment.
Advanced technology communications equipment.--The term `advanced technology communications equipment' means equipment used in the transmission or reception of voice, data, video, paging, messaging, or other communications services that are delivered using packet technology.
A packet is a unit of data, or sequence of binary digits, that is routed between an origin and a destination on a packet- switched network.
Optical fiber and photonics equipment.--The term `optical fiber and photonics equipment' means optical fiber and the equipment and materials used to generate, manipulate and direct light particles over such fiber.
Advanced environmental products.--The term `advanced environmental product' means any high cell density ceramic or other device used for the control of nitrogen oxide and particulate emissions.
Advanced life sciences products.--The term `advanced life sciences product' means any polymer, ceramic or high-purity glass product used in biological research.
New high productivity assets.-- ``(i) In general.--The term `new high productivity assets' means any asset utilizing 1 or more technological or scientific processes which were not in common commercial use before January 1, 2001.
Determinations.--The Secretary shall establish procedures pursuant to which taxpayers can seek a public ruling that a particular class of assets qualifies as new high productivity assets.
The procedures shall require the Secretary to provide a determination within 90 days of receipt of a properly completed request for a public ruling.
Excluded property.--The term `high productivity property' shall not include-- ``(A) an entire car, locomotive, aircraft, ship or other vehicle solely because the vehicle is controlled in whole or part by a computer or other electronic equipment, ``(B) any equipment of a kind used primarily for entertainment or amusement of the user, and ``(C) typewriters, calculators, copiers, duplication equipment, and other similar equipment.
Election.-- An election under this section for any taxable year shall-- ``(1) be made on an asset by asset basis, and ``(2) be made on the taxpayer's return of the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Cost.--For purposes of this section, the cost of property does not include so much of the basis of such property as is determined by reference to the basis of other property held at any time by the person acquiring such property.
Antichurning rules.-- ``(A) In general.--This section shall not apply to any property acquired by the taxpayer after September 10, 2002, if-- ``(i) the property was owned or used at any time during the period beginning on January 1, 2001, and ending on September 10, 2002, by the taxpayer or a related person, ``(ii) the property was owned or used at any time during the period described in clause (i), and, as part of the transaction, the user of the property does not change, ``(iii) the taxpayer leases such property to a person (or a person related to such person) who owned or used such property at any time during the period described in clause (i), or ``(iv) the property is acquired in a transaction as part of which the user of such property does not change and the property was acquired from a person to which clause (ii) or clause (iii) applies.
Applicable cost recovery rules.--Section 168 shall apply to any property to which this section does not apply by reason of this paragraph.
Special rules.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) property shall not be treated as owned before it is placed in service, and ``(ii) whether the user of a property changes will be determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Recapture in certain cases.--The Secretary shall, by regulations, provide for the recapturing the benefit under any deduction allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any property which is not used predominantly in a trade or business at any time.
Alternative depreciation system applies.--The election under subsection (a) may not be made with respect to property which at any time during the taxable year in which such property is placed in service is-- ``(A) described in paragraph (1) of section 168A(g), or ``(B) `listed property' `not predominantly used in a qualified business use' as such terms apply for purposes of paragraph (1) of 280F(b).''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding after section 168 the following new item: ``Sec.
High productivity investment deduction.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after September 10, 2002, with respect to taxable years beginning after such date.
30 PERCENT EXPENSING FOR CERTAIN PROPERTY ACQUIRED AFTER SEPTEMBER 10, 2001, MADE PERMANENT.
Repeal of Limitations.-- (1) Acquisition limitation.--Section 168(k)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``, and before September 11, 2004'' each place it appears in subparagraphs (A)(iii) and (D)(i).
Placed in service limitation.--Subparagraph (A) of section 168(k)(2) of such Code is amended by inserting ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking ``, and'' at the end of clause (iii) and inserting a period, and by striking clause (iv).
Basis limitation for certain property.--Subparagraph (B) of section 168(k)(2) of such Code is amended by striking clause (ii) and redesignating clause (iii) as clause (ii).
Syndications.--Subparagraph (D) of section 168(k)(2) of such Code (relating to special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(iii) Syndications.--For purposes of subparagraph (A)(ii), if property-- ``(I) is treated as originally placed in service after September 10, 2001, either directly or by a lessor of such property or pursuant to subparagraph (D)(ii), and ``(II) is sold within 6 months after such property is so placed in service, such property shall be treated as originally placed in service not earlier than the date of such sale.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The heading of subsection (k) of section 168 of such Code is amended by striking ``, and Before September 11, 2004''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after September 10, 2002, in taxable years beginning after such date.
Subsection (b).--The amendment made by subsection (b) shall take effect as if included in the amendments made by section 101 of the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act of 2002.
DEPRECIATION RULES NOT MODIFIED FOR PURPOSES OF ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX.
Determination of Alternative Taxable Income.--Paragraph (1) of section 56(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to depreciation) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Termination.--This paragraph shall not apply to property placed in service after September 10, 2002, in taxable years beginning after such date.''.
Determination of Adjusted Current Earnings.--Subparagraph (A) of section 56(g)(4) of such Code (relating to depreciation) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(vi) Termination.--This subparagraph shall not apply to property placed in service after September 10, 2002, in taxable years beginning after such date.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after September 10, 2002, in taxable years beginning after such date.