This Act may be cited as the ``Homestead Steel Works National Historic Site Act''.
FINDINGS, PURPOSES, AND DEFINITIONS.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Certain sites and structures in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania symbolize in physical form the heritage of the steel industry of the United States.
A very large proportion of the buildings and other structures in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are nationally significant historical resources, including the United States Steel Homestead Works, the Carrie Furnace complex, and the Hot Metal Bridge.
Despite substantial efforts for cultural preservation and historical interpretation by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and by individuals and public and private entities in the Commonwealth, these buildings and other structures may be lost without the assistance of the Federal Government.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to ensure the preservation, interpretation, visitor enjoyment, and maintenance of the nationally significant historical and cultural sites and structures described in subsection (a) for the benefit and inspiration of present and future generations.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Historic site.--The term ``historic site'' means the Homestead Steel Works National Historic Site established by section 3.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
HOMESTEAD STEEL WORKS NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
Establishment.--There is established in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania the Homestead Steel Works National Historic Site as a unit of the National Park System.
Description.--The historic site shall be comprised of the following properties, each of which relate to the former United States Steel Homestead Works: (1) The historic location of the Battle of Homestead site in the borough of Munhall, Pennsylvania, consisting of approximately 3 acres of land, including the pumphouse and water tower and related structures, within the property bounded by the Monongahela River, the CSX railroad, Waterfront Drive, and the Damascus-Marcegaglia Steel Mill.
The historic location of the Carrie Furnace complex in the boroughs of Swissvale and Rankin, Pennsylvania, consisting of approximately 35 acres of land, including blast furnaces 6 and 7, the ore yard, the cast house, the blowing engine house, the AC power house, and related structures, within the property bounded by the proposed southwesterly right-of-way line needed to accommodate the Mon/Fayette Expressway and the relocated CSX railroad right-of-way, the Monongahela River, and a property line drawn northeast to southwest approximately 100 yards east of the AC power house.
The historic location of the Hot Metal Bridge, consisting of the Union railroad bridge and its approaches, spanning the Monongahela River and connecting the mill sites in the boroughs of Rankin and Munhall, Pennsylvania.
All other property included in the historic site by Federal law or acquired by the Secretary for inclusion in the historic site pursuant to section 4 or other Federal law.
To further the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may acquire, by donation, property for inclusion in the historic site as follows: (1) Any land or interest in land with respect to the property identified in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 3(b).
Up to 10 acres of land adjacent to or in the general proximity of the property identified in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 3(b), for the development of visitor, administrative, museum, curatorial, and maintenance facilities.
Personal property associated with, and appropriate for, the interpretation of the historic site.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the historic site in accordance with this Act and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) In general.--To further the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with any interested individual, public or private agency, organization, or institution.
Contrary purposes.--Any payment made by the Secretary pursuant to a cooperative agreement under this subsection shall be subject to an agreement that conversion, use, or disposal of the project so assisted for purposes contrary to the purpose of this Act, as determined by the Secretary, shall result in a right of the United States to reimbursement of all funds made available to such a project or the proportion of the increased value of the project attributable to such funds as determined at the time of such conversion, use, or disposal, whichever is greater.
Technical and Preservation Assistance.--The Secretary may provide technical assistance to any person for-- (1) the preservation of historic structures within the historic site; (2) the maintenance of the natural and cultural landscape of the historic site; and (3) local preservation planning for the historic site.
In General.--Not later than the last day of the third fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, in consultation with the officials described in subsection (b), prepare a general management plan for the historic site.
Officials Consulted.--The officials described in this subsection are-- (1) an appropriate official of each appropriate political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that has jurisdiction over all or a portion of the historic site; and (2) an appropriate official of the Steel Industry Heritage Corporation.
Submission of Plan to Congress.--Upon the completion of the general management plan, the Secretary shall submit a copy of the plan to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Amend the title so as to read: ``A bill to establish the Homestead Steel Works National Historic Site in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.