ADJUSTMENT OF STATUS FOR CERTAIN PERSIAN GULF EVACUEES.
In General.--The Attorney General shall adjust the status of each alien referred to in subsection (b) to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence if the alien-- (1) applies for such adjustment; (2) has been physically present in the United States for at least 1 year and is physically present in the United States on the date the application for such adjustment is filed; (3) is admissible to the United States as an immigrant, except as provided in subsection (c); and (4) pays a fee (determined by the Attorney General) for the processing of such application.
Aliens Eligible for Adjustment of Status.--The benefits provided in subsection (a) shall apply to the following aliens: (1) Waddah Zireeni, Enas Zireeni, and Anwaar Zireeni.
Salah Abu Al Jibat, Ghada Abu Al Jibat, and Tareq Abu Al Jibat.
Jehad Mustafa, Amal Mustafa, and Raed Mustafa.
Shahir Abed and Laila Abed.
Zahid Khan and Nadira Khan.
Rawhi Abu Tabanjar, Basima Abu Tabanjar, and Mohammed Abu Tabanjar.
Reuben D'Silva, Anne D'Silva, and Natasha D'Silva.
Ali Al Khaleel and Fatin Al Khaleel.
Abbas I. Bhikhapurawala, Nafisa Bhikhapurawala, and Tasnim Bhikhapurawala.
Fayez Ezzir, Abeerl Ezzir, Sharif Ezzir, and Mohammed Ezzir.
Issam Muslih, Nadia Muslih, and Duaa Muslih.
Ahmad Khaleel, Mona Khaleel, and Sally Khaleel.
Husam Al Khadrah and Kathleen Al Khadrah.
Samir M. Massoud, Faten A. Hakkani, Farah S. Massoud, and Sarah Massoud.
Furas Taha, Bernardina Lopez Taha, and Yousef Taha.
Mehmood El Eissa and Nadia El Eissa.
Akram Othman, Amani Othman, and Ali Othman.
Mohammed Al Awamli, Zainab Al Awamli, and Nizar Awamli.
Yacoub Ibrahim and Wisam Ibrahim.
Tareq Shehadah and Inas Shehadah.
Basim Al Ali and Nawal Al Ali.
Hael Basheer Attari and Hanaa Attari.
Faheem Mehmood Abdul Jaleel, Farnal Jaleel, Ala Jaleel, and Ahmed Jaleel.
Ahmed M. Mobaslat, Abeer Mobaslat, and Alaa Mobaslat.
Mohammed Al Shaib, Zahre Al Shaib, Najat Al Shaib, Reem Al Shaib, and Ramzy Al Shaib.
Awad Habali, Saosan Y.H.
Duras, Sara Habali, Yasmin Habali, Hala Habali, and Ibraheem Habali.
Maamoun Ahmad and Sanaa Hakkani.
Azmi Ahmad Mukahal, Wafa Azmi Mukahal, Yasmin Azmi Mukahal, and Ahmad Azmi Mukahal.
Nabil Al Hawash, Amaal Al Hawash, and Ishaq Al Hawash.
Sameeh El Sharif, Sahar El Sharif, and Sarah El Sharif.
Nayef Al Mohtaseb, Nidaa Al Mohtaseb, and Ibrahim Al Mohtaseb.
Iman Mallah, Rana Mallah, and Mohammed Mallah.
Mohammed Q. Al Ghalban.
Nijad Abdelrehman, Najwa Abdelrehman, and Faisal Abdelrehman.
Nizam Mehdawi, Mehmoud Mehdawi, and Sohad Mehdawi.
Samir M. Al Nasla.
Hassan Abu Zant, Farida Abu Zant, Reem Abu Zant, Jehad Abu Zant, and Fidaa Abu Zant.
Sesinando P. Fuaverdez, Cynthia Fuaverdez, Maria Cristina Fuaverdez, and Sesinando Fuaverdez II.
Thabet Said, Hanan Said, and Yasmin Said.
Hani Salem, Manal Salem, Tasnim Salem, and Suleiman Salem.
Ihsan Adwan, Hanan Adwan, Maha Adwan, Nada Adwan, Reem Adwan, and Lina Adwan.
Ziyad Al Ajjouri and Dima Al Ajjouri.
Mohammed Suleiman and Salam Suleiman.
Salwa Basta, Alexan Basta, Rehan Basta, and Sherif Basta.
Latifa Hussin, Sameer Hussin, Anas Hussin, Ahmed Hussin, Ayman Hussin, and Assma Hussin.
Fadia Shaat, Bader Shaat, Dalia Shaat, Abdul Azim Shaat, Farah Shaat, and Rawan Shaat.
Bassam Barqawi and Amal Barqawi.
Omar Federal Reporter Shawish, Najwa O. Shawish, and Ziyad O. Shawish.
Nizam Wattar and Mohamad Wattar.
Waiver of Certain Grounds for Inadmissibility.--The provisions of subsection (e) and paragraphs (4), (5), and (7)(A) of subsection (a) of section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act shall not apply to adjustment of status under this Act and the Attorney General may waive any other provision of section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (other than paragraph (2)(C) and subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), or (E) of paragraph (3)) with respect to such an adjustment for humanitarian purposes, to assure family unity, or when it is otherwise in the public interest.
Date of Approval.--Upon the approval of an application for adjustment of status under this section, the Attorney General shall create a record of the alien's admission as an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence as of the date of the alien's parole or other admission into the United States.
Offset in Number of Visas Available.--Upon each granting to an alien of the status of having been lawfully admitted for permanent residence under this section, the Secretary of State shall instruct the proper officer to reduce by 1, during the current or next following fiscal year, the total number of immigrant visas that are made available to natives of the country of the alien's birth under section 203(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act or, if applicable, the total number of immigrant visas that are made available to natives of the country of the alien's birth under section 202(e) of such Act.
Temporary Stay of Removal and Work Authorization.--The Attorney General-- (1) shall refrain from deporting or removing from the United States an alien who is eligible for adjustment of status under this section, but who is not yet lawfully admitted for permanent residence; and (2) shall authorize such an alien to engage in employment in the United States.