This Act may be cited as the ``Food Stamp Anti-Fraud Act of 1995''.
EXPANDED DEFINITION OF COUPON.
Section 3(d) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2012(d)) is amended by striking ``or type of certificate'' and inserting ``type of certificate, authorization card, cash or check issued as a coupon, or an access device, including an electronic benefits transfer card or a personal identification number,''.
DOUBLED PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING FOOD STAMP PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS.
Section 6(b)(1) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2015(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``six months upon'' and inserting ``1 year on''; and (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``1 year upon'' and inserting ``2 years on''.
AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH AUTHORIZATION PERIODS.
Section 9(a)(1) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2018(a)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Authorization periods.--The Secretary is authorized to issue regulations establishing specific time periods during which authorization to accept and redeem coupons under the food stamp program shall be valid.''.
SPECIFIC PERIOD FOR PROHIBITING PARTICIPATION OF STORES BASED ON LACK OF BUSINESS INTEGRITY.
Section 9(a)(1) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2018(a)(1)) (as amended by section 4) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Periods for participation of stores and concerns.-- The Secretary may issue regulations establishing specific time periods during which a retail food store or wholesale food concern that has an application for approval to accept and redeem coupons denied or that has an approval withdrawn on the basis of business integrity and reputation cannot submit a new application for approval.
The periods shall reflect the severity of business integrity infractions that are the basis of the denials or withdrawals.''.
INFORMATION FOR VERIFYING ELIGIBILITY FOR AUTHORIZATION.
Section 9(c) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2018(c)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by inserting ``, which may include relevant income and sales tax filing documents,'' after ``submit information''; and (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``The regulations may require retail food stores and wholesale food concerns to provide written authorization for the Secretary to verify all relevant tax filings with appropriate agencies and to obtain corroborating documentation from other sources so that the accuracy of information provided by the stores and concerns may be verified.''.
WAITING PERIOD FOR STORES THAT INITIALLY FAIL TO MEET AUTHORIZATION CRITERIA.
Section 9(d) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2018(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``A retail food store or wholesale food concern that has an application for approval to accept and redeem coupons denied because the store or concern does not meet criteria for approval established by the Secretary by regulation may not submit a new application for 6 months from the date of the denial.''.
MANDATORY CLAIMS COLLECTION METHODS.
Disclosure of Information.--Section 11(e)(8) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2020(e)(8)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``or from refunds of Federal taxes under section 3720A of title 31, United States Code''.
Other Means of Collection.--Section 13(d) of the Act (7 United States Code 2022(d)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``may be recovered'' and inserting ``shall be recovered''; and (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or a refund of Federal taxes under section 3720A of title 31, United States Code.''.
BASES FOR SUSPENSIONS AND DISQUALIFICATIONS.
Section 12(a) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2021(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Regulations issued pursuant to this Act shall provide criteria for the finding of a violation, and the suspension or disqualification of a retail food store or wholesale food concern, on the basis of evidence that may include facts established through on-site investigations, inconsistent redemption data, or evidence obtained through transaction reports under electronic benefits transfer systems.''.
DISQUALIFICATION OF STORES PENDING JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
Authority.--Section 12(a) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2021(a)) (as amended by section 9) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The regulations may establish criteria under which the authorization of a retail food store or wholesale food concern to accept and redeem coupons may be suspended at the time the store or concern is initially found to have committed a violation of a requirement of the food stamp program.
The suspension may coincide with the period of a review under section 14.
The Secretary shall not be liable for the value of any sales lost during a suspension or disqualification period.''.
Review.--Section 14(a) of the Act (7 United States Code 2023(a)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``disqualified or subjected'' and inserting ``suspended, disqualified, or subjected''; (2) in the fifth sentence, by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, except that, in the case of the suspension of a retail food store or wholesale food concern under section 12(a), the suspension shall remain in effect pending any judicial or administrative review of the proposed disqualification action, and the period of suspension shall be considered a part of any period of disqualification that is imposed''; and (3) by striking the last sentence.
DISQUALIFICATION OF RETAILERS WHO ARE DISQUALIFIED UNDER THE WIC PROGRAM.
Section 12 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2021) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Disqualification of Retailers Who Are Disqualified Under the WIC Program.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall issue regulations providing criteria for the disqualification of an approved retail food store and a wholesale food concern that is disqualified from accepting benefits under the special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children established under section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (7 United States Code 1786).
Terms.--A disqualification under paragraph (1)-- ``(A) shall be for the same period as the disqualification from the program referred to in paragraph (1); ``(B) may begin at a later date than the disqualification from the program referred to in paragraph (1); and ``(C) notwithstanding section 14, shall not be subject to judicial or administrative review.''.
PERMANENT DEBARMENT OF RETAILERS WHO INTENTIONALLY SUBMIT FALSIFIED APPLICATIONS.
Section 12 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2021) (as amended by section 11) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Falsified Applications.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall issue regulations providing for the permanent disqualification of a retail food store, or wholesale food concern, that knowingly submits an application for approval to accept and redeem coupons that contains false information about a substantive matter that was a basis for approving the application.
Review.--A disqualification under paragraph (1) shall be subject to judicial and administrative review under section 14, except that the disqualification shall remain in effect pending the review.''.
Section 15 of the Act (7 United States Code 2024) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Criminal Forfeiture.-- ``(A) In general.--Any person convicted of violating subsection (b) or (c) involving food stamp benefits having an aggregate value of not less than $5,000, shall forfeit to the United States-- ``(i) any food stamp benefits and any property constituting, or derived from, or traceable to any proceeds the person obtained directly or indirectly as a result of the violation; and ``(ii) any food stamp benefits and any property of the person used, or intended to be used, in any manner or part, to commit, or to facilitate the commission of the violation.
Sentence.--In imposing a sentence on a person under subparagraph (A), a court shall order that the person forfeit to the United States all property described in this subsection.
Procedures.--Any food stamp benefits or property subject to forfeiture under this subsection, any seizure or disposition of the benefits or property, and any administrative or judicial proceeding relating to the benefits or property, shall be governed by subsections (b), (c), (e), and (g) through (p) of section 413 of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (21 United States Code 853), if not inconsistent with this subsection.
Excluded property.--This subsection shall not apply to property referred to in subsection (g).''.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall become effective on October 1, 1995.