This Act may be cited as the ``Truth in Voting Act of 1995''.
TITLE I--CHANGES IN DISCRETIONARY SPENDING LIMITS SEC.
DEFICIT REDUCTION TRUST FUND.
Establishment.--A trust fund known as the ``Deficit Reduction Trust Fund'' (hereinafter in this title referred to as the ``Fund'') shall be established in the Treasury of the United States.
Contents.--The Fund shall consist only of amounts contained in the deficit reduction lock box provision of any appropriation Act.
Such amounts shall be transferred to the Fund as specified in subsection (c).
Transfers of Moneys to the Fund.--Within 10 days of enactment of any appropriation Act which has a deficit reduction lock box provision, there shall be transferred from the general fund to the Fund an amount equal to that amount.
Use of Moneys in the Fund.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the amounts in the Fund shall not be available, in any fiscal year, for appropriation, obligation, expenditure, or transfer.
DOWNWARD ADJUSTMENTS OF DISCRETIONARY SPENDING LIMITS.
The discretionary spending limit for new budget authority for any fiscal year set forth in section 601(a)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, as adjusted in strict conformance with section 251 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, shall be reduced by the amount of budget authority transferred to the Fund for that fiscal year under section 2(c), as calculated by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
The adjusted discretionary spending limit for outlays for that fiscal year as set forth in such section 601(a)(2) shall be reduced as a result of the reduction of such budget authority, as calculated by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
All such reductions shall occur on the same day that the amounts triggering the reductions are transferred to the Fund.
DEFICIT REDUCTION LOCK-BOX PROVISIONS OF APPROPRIATION MEASURES.
Deficit Reduction Lock-box Provisions.--Title III of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``deficit reduction lock-box provisions of appropriation bills ``Sec.
Any general appropriation bill that is being marked up by the Committee on Appropriations (or a subcommittee thereof) of either House shall contain a line item entitled `Deficit Reduction Lock-box'.
The dollar amount set forth under that heading shall be an amount equal to the section 602(b)(1) or section 302(b)(1) allocations, as the case may be, to the subcommittee of jurisdiction over the bill of the Committee on Appropriations minus the aggregate level of budget authority or outlays contained in the bill being considered.
Whenever a Member of either House of Congress offers an amendment (whether in subcommittee, committee, or on the floor) to an appropriation bill to reduce spending, that reduction shall be placed in the deficit reduction lock-box unless that Member indicates that it is to be utilized for another program, project, or activity covered by that bill.
If the amendment is agreed to and the reduction was placed in the deficit reduction lock-box, then the line item entitled `Deficit Reduction Lock-box' shall be increased by the amount of that reduction.
It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider a conference report that modifies any Deficit Reduction Lock-box provision that is beyond the scope of that provision as so committed to the conference committee.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 313 the following new item: ``Sec.
Deficit reduction lock-box provisions of appropriation measures.''.
Section 202 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Scorekeeping Assistance.--To facilitate compliance by the Committees on Appropriations with section 314, the Office shall score all general appropriation measures as passed the House of Representatives and as passed the Senate and have such scorecard published in the Congressional Record.''.
TITLE II--MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SEC.
MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
5-day Waiting Period.--(1) Clause 2(l)(6) of rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by striking ``third'' and inserting ``fifth''.
The first sentence of clause 2(a) of rule XXVIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by striking ``third'' and inserting ``fifth''.
Two-thirds Required to Approve Restrictive Rules or to Waive House Rules.--(1) Clause 4 of rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(e) It shall not be in order to consider any resolution reported from the Committee on Rules providing for the consideration of any bill or resolution otherwise subject to amendment under House Rules if that resolution limits the right of Members to offer germane amendments to such bill, unless that resolution is agreed to by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the Members voting, a quorum being present.''.
Rule XXVII of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``4.
The Rules of the House of Representatives shall not be waived except by a vote of two-thirds of the Members voting, a quorum being present.''.
Ban on King-of-the-Hill Rules.--The last sentence of clause 4(b) of rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``; nor shall it report any rule for the consideration of any measure commonly known as a `king-of-the-hill' rule''.
Ban on Self-executing Rules.--Clause 4 of rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives (as amended by subsection (b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(f) It shall not be in order to consider any order of business resolution reported from the Committee on Rules which provides that, upon the adoption of such resolution, the House shall be considered to have automatically adopted a motion (other than for the previous question), amendment, or resolution, or to have passed a bill, joint resolution, or conference report thereon.''.
Repeal of Rule XLIX.--Rule XLIX of the Rules of the House of Representatives is repealed.
Conference Committees.--(1) Clause 3 of rule XXVIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Their report shall not fund any program, project, or activity at a level higher than that contained in the bill or resolution as passed the House or as passed the Senate and committed to the conference committee or fund any program, project, or activity not contained in that bill or resolution as passed the House or as passed the Senate.''.
Rule XXVIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``7.
It shall not be in order in the House to consider a conference report if that report would violate any motion to instruct conferees that the House agreed to.''.
TITLE III--ECONOMIC AND EMPLOYMENT IMPACT STATEMENTS SEC.
ECONOMIC AND EMPLOYMENT IMPACT STATEMENTS.
Preparation.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall prepare an economic and employment impact statement, as described in subsection (b), to accompany each bill, resolution, or conference report reported by any committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate or considered on the floor of either House.
Contents.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the economic and employment impact statement required by subsection (a) shall-- (1) state the extent to which enactment of the bill, resolution, or conference report would result in increased costs to the private sector, individuals, or State and local governments; and (2) include, at a minimum, a detailed assessment of the annual impact of the bill, resolution, or conference report (projected annually over a 5-year period from its effective date, and, to the extent feasible, expressed in each case in monetary terms) on-- (A) costs to United States consumers; (B) costs to United States business; (C) national employment; (D) the ability of United States industries to compete internationally; (E) affected State and local governments, fiscal and otherwise; (F) outlays and revenues by the Federal Government as compared to outlays and revenues for the same activity in the current fiscal year (as reported by the Congressional Budget Office); and (G) impact on Gross Domestic Product.
Exception.--The economic and employment impact statement required by subsection (a) may consist of a brief summary assessment in lieu of the detailed assessment set forth in subsection (b) if preliminary analysis indicates that the aggregate effect of the bill, resolution, or conference report as measured by the criteria set forth in subparagraphs (A) through (G) of subsection (b) is less than $100,000 or 1,000 jobs in national employment.
Statement With All Legislation.--The economic and employment impact statement required by this section shall accompany each bill, resolution, or conference report before such bill, resolution, or conference report may be reported or otherwise considered on the floor of either House.
Point of Order.-- (1) Rule.--It shall not be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider on the floor any bill, resolution, or conference report, whether or not reported by any committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate, unless that bill, resolution, or conference report includes the economic and employment impact statement required by this section.
Waiver.--A point of order made under this subsection may be waived in the Senate by a two-thirds affirmative vote of Senators, duly chosen and sworn, and in the House of Representatives by a two-thirds affirmative vote of Members, duly chosen and sworn.
Executive Regulations.--Each regulation and proposed regulation promulgated by a Federal department or executive agency shall be accompanied by an economic and employment impact statement prepared, in accordance with subsection (b), by the department or agency promulgating the regulation or proposed regulation.
The economic and employment impact statement shall be published in the Federal Register together with such regulation or proposed regulation.
Provision for National Security Emergency Waiver.-- (1) Congressional economic impact statements.--The Congress may waive the requirements of subsections (a) through (d) at any time in which a declaration of war is in effect, or in response to a national security emergency at the request of the President.
Executive regulations.--The President may waive the requirements of subsection (f) at any time in which a declaration of war is in effect, or in response to a national security emergency as determined by the President in consultation with Congress.
Repeal of Senate Rule.--Paragraph 11 of rule XXVI of the Standing Rules of the Senate is repealed.
TITLE IV--APPLICABILITY OF FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT SEC.
APPLICATION OF FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT TO THE CONGRESS.
The Congress, and the instrumentalities of Congress, shall be subject to section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Freedom of Information Act'') to the same extent that Executive agencies (as defined by section 105 of title 5, United States Code) are subject to such section 552.