This Act may be cited as the ``Law Officer's Armor Vest Tax Credit Act of 1997''.
CREDIT FOR AN ARMOR VEST PURCHASE.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new section: ``SEC.
PURCHASE OF AN ARMOR VEST BY A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual who is a law enforcement officer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter an amount equal to 100 percent of the amount paid by the taxpayer for the purchase of an armor vest.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) shall not exceed $1,200 for each law enforcement officer.
Limitation to one vest.--The credit under this section shall be allowed with respect to the purchase of only one vest by the law enforcement officer within a 3-year period.
Carryforward of unused credits.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds the limitation imposed by section 26(a) for such taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under this subpart (other than this section and section 23), such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
No credit may be carried forward under this subsection to any taxable year following the third taxable year after the taxable year in which the armor vest is purchased.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, credits shall be treated as used on a first-in first-out basis.
Definitions and Special Rules.-- ``(1) Law enforcement officer.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `law enforcement officer' means any officer, agent, or employee of the United States or any State, territory, or political subdivision thereof as authorized by law or by a Government agency to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of any violation of Federal, State, territorial, or local criminal law.
Certain individuals.--Such term includes-- ``(i) a sworn correctional officer of the United States or any State, territory, or political subdivision thereof as authorized by law, and ``(ii) a private campus or educational institution security officer who has been granted special police powers under law.
Armor vest.--The term `armor vest' means-- ``(A) body armor, Type I or Type II-A, which protects against .357 Magnum jacketed soft point bullets, with nominal masses of 10.2 g (158 gr) impacting at a velocity of 381 meters (1250 feet) per second or less, and 9mm full metal jacketed bullets, with nominal masses of 8.0 g (124 gr), impacting at a velocity of 332 meters (1080 feet) per second or less; or ``(B) body armor which exceeds the specifications stated in subparagraph (A), and which the law enforcement officer's agency or department permits the officer to wear on duty.
Special rule.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) if-- ``(A) the law enforcement officer has been issued an armor vest by such officer's agency or department for such officer's indefinite personal use, or ``(B) the law enforcement officer has been offered, within the 12-month period prior to the acquisition of the armor vest, an armor vest by such officer's agency or department for such officer's indefinite personal use, but has declined to accept such offer.
Recapture for Certain Dispositions.-- ``(1) In general.--If the taxpayer disposes of property with respect to the purchase of which a credit was allowed under subsection (a) at any time within the 36-month period beginning on the date the taxpayer acquired such property, then the tax imposed under this chapter for the taxable year in which such disposition occurs shall be increased by an amount equal to the amount allowed as a credit for the purchase of such property.
Death of owner; casualty loss; involuntary conversion; etc.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to-- ``(A) a disposition of an armor vest on account of the death of any individual having a legal or equitable interest therein occurring during such 36-month period, ``(B) a disposition of an armor vest on account of the law enforcement officer losing such officer's status as a law enforcement officer, whether involuntary or not, during such 36-month period, ``(C) a disposition of an armor vest during such 36-month period if such vest is damaged, destroyed, or rendered unusable by-- ``(i) any bullet, ``(ii) theft or casualty loss, or ``(iii) compulsory or involuntary conversion (within the meaning of section 1033), or ``(D) a disposition of an armor vest during such 36-month period pursuant to a settlement in a divorce or legal separation proceeding pursuant to which the armor vest is sold.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 23 the following new item: ``Sec.
Purchase of an armor vest by a law enforcement officer.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.