NEXT GENERATION LIGHTING INITIATIVE.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Consortium.--The term ``consortium'' means the consortium selected by the Secretary under subsection (d)(1).
Initiative.--The term ``Initiative'' means the Next Generation Lighting Initiative carried out under subsection (b).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
General Authority.--The Secretary shall carry out a program, to be known as the ``Next Generation Lighting Initiative'', to support research, development, demonstration, and commercial application activities related to advanced solid-state lighting technologies based on white light emitting diodes.
Objectives.--The objectives of the Initiative shall be-- (1) to develop, by 2012, advanced solid-state lighting technologies based on white light emitting diodes that, compared to incandescent and fluorescent lighting technologies, are-- (A) longer lasting; (B) more energy-efficient; and (C) cost-competitive; (2) to develop an inorganic white light emitting diode that has an efficiency of 160 lumens per watt and a 10-year lifetime; and (3) to develop an organic white light emitting diode with an efficiency of 100 lumens per watt with a 5-year lifetime that-- (A) illuminates over a full color spectrum; (B) covers large areas over flexible surfaces; and (C) does not contain harmful pollutants (such as mercury) that are typical of fluorescent lamps.
Fundamental Research.-- (1) Consortium.--The Secretary shall carry out the fundamental research activities of the Initiative through a private consortium (which may include private firms, trade associations and institutions of higher education), which the Secretary shall select through a competitive process.
Submission of information.--Each proposed consortium shall submit to the Secretary such information as the Secretary may require, including a program plan agreed to by all participants of the consortium.
Joint venture.--The consortium shall be structured as a joint venture among the participants of the consortium.
Governing council.--The Secretary shall serve on the governing council of the consortium.
Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under paragraph (6), an applicant shall be broadly representative of United States solid-state lighting research, development, and manufacturing expertise.
Grants.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants for fundamental research to the consortium, which the consortium may disburse to researchers, including researchers that are not participants in the consortium.
Submission.--To receive a grant, the consortium shall submit to the Secretary a description of the proposed research and a list of the persons that will receive funding.
Cost-sharing.--Grants shall be matched by the consortium in accordance with subsection (h).
National laboratories.--National Laboratories may participate in the research under this section and receive funds from the consortium.
Intellectual property.--Participants in the consortium and the Federal Government shall have royalty-free nonexclusive rights to use intellectual property derived from research funded under this subsection.
Development, Demonstration, and Commercial Application.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out the development, demonstration, and commercial application activities of the Initiative through awards to private firms, trade associations, and institutions of higher education.
Preference.--In selecting awardees, the Secretary shall give preference to members of the consortium.
Plans and Assessments.-- (1) In general.--The consortium shall formulate an annual operating plan which shall include research priorities, technical milestones, and plans for technology transfer, and which shall be subject to approval by the Secretary.
Review.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall enter into an arrangement with the National Academy of Sciences to conduct periodic reviews of the Initiative.
Duties.--The Academy shall review the research priorities, technical milestones, and plans for technology transfer established under paragraph (1) and evaluate the progress toward achieving them.
Consideration of results.--The Secretary shall consider the results of the reviews in evaluating the plans submitted under paragraph (1).
Audit.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall retain an independent, commercial auditor to perform an audit of the consortium to determine the extent to which the funds authorized by this section have been expended in a manner consistent with this section.
Report.-- (A) To the secretary.--The auditor shall annually submit to the Secretary a report describing the results of the audit under paragraph (1).
To congress.--The Secretary shall transmit to Congress a copy of each report submitted under subparagraph (A), including a plan to remedy any deficiencies noted in the report.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Research and development.-- (A) In general.--For research and development programs carried out under this section, the Secretary shall require a commitment from non-Federal sources of at least 20 percent of the cost of the project.
Reduction or waiver.--The Secretary may reduce or waive the non-Federal requirement under this subsection if the Secretary determines that the research and development is of a basic or fundamental nature.
Demonstration and commercial application.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall require at least 50 percent of the costs directly and specifically related to any demonstration or commercial application project under this section to be provided from non- Federal sources.
Reduction.--The Secretary may reduce the non- Federal requirement under this subsection if the Secretary determines that the reduction is necessary and appropriate considering the technological risks involved in the project and is necessary to meet the objectives of this title.
Calculation of amount.--In calculating the amount of the non-Federal commitment under paragraph (1) or (2), the Secretary may include personnel, services, equipment, and other resources.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section-- (1) $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; and (2) $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2005 through 2013.
Termination of Initiative.--The Secretary shall terminate the Initiative not later than September 30, 2013.