AUTHORITY TO OBLIGATE DURING LAPSE IN APPROPRIATIONS.
Chapter 13 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1310 the following new section: ``Sec.
Authority to obligate during lapse in appropriations ``(a)(1) Notwithstanding section 1341 of this title, if any appropriation bill for a fiscal year does not become law prior to the beginning of such fiscal year, an officer or employee of the United States Government or of the District of Columbia government may incur obligations as may be necessary to continue any project or activity for which funds were provided in the preceding fiscal year-- ``(A) in the corresponding regular appropriation Act for such preceding fiscal year; or ``(B) if the corresponding regular appropriation bill for such preceding fiscal year did not become law, pursuant to this section.
The authority to incur obligations for a project or activity for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be at a rate of operations not in excess of the lower of-- ``(A) the rate of operations provided for in the regular appropriation Act, including any continuing resolution, for such project or activity for the preceding fiscal year; or ``(B) in the absence of such an Act, the rate of operations provided for such project or activity pursuant to this section for such preceding fiscal year.
The authority to incur obligations, for any fiscal year pursuant to this section for a project or activity shall be available for the period beginning with the first day of such fiscal year and ending with the earlier of-- ``(A) the date on which the applicable regular appropriation bill for such fiscal year becomes law (whether or not such law provides for such project or activity), or ``(B) the last day of such fiscal year.
The authority to incur obligations for a project or activity for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be subject to the terms and conditions imposed with respect to the appropriation made and funds made available or authority granted for such project or activity for the preceding fiscal year.
Expenditures made to liquidate any obligation incurred for a project or activity for any fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be paid out of the applicable appropriation fund whenever the appropriation bill providing for such project or activity becomes law.
This section shall not apply to a project or activity during a fiscal year if program authorization for the project or activity has expired.
This section shall not apply to a project or activity during a fiscal year if any other provision of law (other than an authorization of appropriations)-- ``(1) makes an appropriation, makes funds available, or grants authority for such project or activity to continue for such period, or ``(2) specifically provides that no appropriation shall be made, no funds shall be made available, or no authority shall be granted for such project or activity to continue for such period.
For purposes of this section `regular appropriation bill' means any regular appropriation bill (within the meaning given to such term in section 307 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 638)) making appropriations, otherwise making funds available, or granting authority, for any of the following categories of projects and activities: ``(1) Agriculture, rural development, and related agencies programs.
The Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the judiciary, and related agencies.
The Department of Defense.
The government of the District of Columbia and other activities chargeable in whole or in part against the revenues of the District.
The Department of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and related agencies.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development, and sundry independent agencies, boards, commissions, corporations, and offices.
Energy and water development.
Foreign assistance and related programs.
The Department of the Interior and related agencies.
The Department of Transportation and related agencies.
The Treasury Department, the United States Postal Service, the Executive Office of the President, and certain independent agencies.
Obligations incurred under the authority of this section may not be liquidated prior to the enactment of the applicable regular appropriation bill.''.
The table of sections for chapter 13 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1310 the following new item: ``1311.
Authority to obligate during lapse in appropriations.''.
The amendments made by this subsection shall apply with respect to fiscal years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.