This Act may be cited as the ``Oil Recycling Incentives Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The generation of solid and hazardous waste has grown to alarming proportions in the United States.
Each person in the United States throws away 3.6 pounds of garbage every day-- enough annually to fill a convoy of 10-ton garbage trucks 145,000 miles long, which is the equivalent of half-way to the moon or roughly 7 times around the equator.
Frequently economic incentives are not sufficient to encourage waste minimization and responsible environmental behavior, and such incentives actually may favor increased waste generation and improper behavior.
A system of economic incentives targeted at waste reduction and recycling together with responsible regulation of recycling activity can reduce both the amount and toxicity of materials entering the environment.
In particular, there is a need to encourage greater recycling of used oils.
Americans are improperly pouring on the ground or into sewers, placing in landfills, or improperly burning over 400 million gallons of such oil per year.
This is equivalent to more than 35 Exxon Valdez spills.
In addition to fouling the environment, this depletes oil resources and increases the Nation's reliance on foreign oil.
The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency requires additional statutory authority to address situations in which economic incentives to encourage waste reduction and responsible environmental behavior are not adequate.
USED OIL RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS.
In General.--Subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6921 et sequentes) is amended by redesignating sections 3015 through 3023 as sections 3016 through 3024, respectively, and by inserting after section 3014 the following new section: ``SEC.
RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS FOR USED OIL.
General Requirement.--(1) During the period beginning not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of the Oil Recycling Incentives Act and ending 10 years after such date, a producer or importer of lubricating oil each year shall recycle, using a method described in paragraph (2), an amount of used oil equal to at least that amount of oil determined by-- ``(A) multiplying the lubricating oil produced for domestic use or consumption or imported that year by such person, by ``(B) the recycling percentage established by the Administrator under subsection (b).
A producer or importer of lubricating oil may comply with this subsection-- ``(A) by recycling used oil (in compliance with the requirements of section 3014 and regulations promulgated pursuant to such section) through reintroducing the used oil into refinery production for purposes of producing petroleum products; ``(B) by purchasing re-refined oil or re-refined lubricant base stock from a facility having a permit under section 3005 for purposes of producing lubricating oil; or ``(C) by purchasing recycling credits under the recycling credit system established pursuant to subsection (c).
A producer or importer of lubricating oil shall submit to the Administrator, under regulations promulgated by the Administrator, a report on the amount of lubricating oil produced or imported in each calendar year by such person.
The report shall be submitted at least once a year, but the Administrator also may require such interim reports under this paragraph as the Administrator considers necessary.
For purposes of paragraph (1), a producer or importer shall be treated as recycling 2 units of used oil for each unit of re-refined oil or re-refined lubricant base stock purchased as provided in paragraph (2)(B).
Nothing in this section shall prohibit a producer or importer from entering into an agreement with a subsidiary or division of such producer or importer-- ``(A) for purposes of treating oil recycled by such subsidiary or division as being recycled by the producer or importer for purposes of meeting the recycling requirement of this section; or ``(B) for purposes of obtaining recycling credits created by such subsidiary or division.
For purposes of paragraph (2)(A), the amount of used oil that is recycled as provided in that paragraph shall be determined on the basis of the records of the amount of used oil received by the producer or importer.
Recycling Percentage.--The Administrator each year shall establish a recycling percentage for use under subsection (a).
The percentage applicable during the first year that the requirement established by subsection (a) is in effect shall be a percentage that is 2 percentage points higher than the recycling rate for lubricating oil that exists on the date of the enactment of this section.
Such recycling rate shall be determined by using data for 1990 or the most recent year for which data are available.
For each of the 10 years thereafter, the recycling percentage shall be an additional 2 percentage points higher than the recycling percentage of the previous year.
Such recycling percentage shall go into effect automatically and shall be published in the Federal Register.
Credit System for Recycling Used Oil.--(1) Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of the Oil Recycling Incentives Act, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations to establish a system under which (A) recyclers may create credits for used oil recycling, and (B) producers or importers of lubricating oil may purchase such recycling credits from such recyclers, for purposes of complying with subsection (a).
No person may create such credits, and no producer or importer of lubricating oil may purchase such credits, except in accordance with this subsection and the regulations promulgated under this subsection.
In developing the regulations, the Administrator shall, to the maximum extent feasible, allow for the use of records kept in the ordinary course of business or other approaches that facilitate the simple, rapid generation and exchange of credits without a case-by-case approval.
At a minimum, the regulations under paragraph (1) shall include the following requirements: ``(A) The following records shall be kept by a recycler for at least 3 years: ``(i) A record of the quantities of used oil received for recycling, together with the prices paid to transporters or owners or operators of collection centers.
A record of the quantities of recycled oil sold or otherwise distributed in commerce, and the destinations of such recycled oil.
Part of such record shall be a record of the quantities and price of re- refined oil sold to producers or importers of lubricating oil for the purpose of complying with subsection (a).
A record of the sale or other disposition of recycling credits, including the name and address of the producers and importers the credits were sold to, the price charged, and the amount of credits sold.
The recycler shall sell or otherwise distribute in commerce the recycled oil as specification used oil, off- specification or industrial specification used oil, or re- refined oil (as defined by the Administrator).
The recycler shall maintain records of the tests certifying that the oil meets the standards for one of those categories of oil or fuel, along with records of the destination of the oil or fuel by category.
Each year a producer or importer of lubricating oil shall keep records of the quantity of lubricating oil produced or imported, the recycling of used oil carried out to comply with subsection (a), the amount of re-refined oil or lubricant base stock purchased to comply with subsection (a), the amount of recycling credits purchased (including the names of recyclers from whom the credits were purchased and the dates of the purchases), the price paid for the credits, and the amount (if any) of recycling credits sold or carried over from previous years.
The regulations shall allow for a 2-year carryover of credits.
The Administrator may include such other requirements in the regulations under paragraph (1) with respect to qualifications for recyclers, importers, and producers; methods for auditing compliance with the system; and enforcement of the system; as the Administrator considers necessary or appropriate for administering the recycling credit system established under this subsection.
The Administrator shall include in the regulations under paragraph (1) a procedure by which an interested party may petition the Administrator for credits to be created under the credit system for recycling of used oil using new technology.
The Administrator shall determine, after public notice and opportunity for comment, the amount of credit that may be created by new technologies for which petitions are granted under this paragraph.
Reports.--(1) Not later than 6 years after the date of the enactment of the Oil Recycling Incentives Act, the Administrator shall submit to Congress an interim report on the implementation of this section.
The report shall include, at a minimum-- ``(A) a discussion of the effects of the requirements of this section on the lubricating oil industry, the used oil recycling industry, and on the environment; and ``(B) an evaluation of the level of the recycling percentage under subsection (b) and recommendations on whether, and at what rate, the percentage should be increased in future years above the percentage applicable under subsection (b).
Not later than 10 years after such date, the Administrator shall submit to Congress a final report on the implementation of this section.
The report shall include an updated version of the discussion and evaluation required in the interim report, as well as such other findings and recommendations with respect to the implementation of this section as the Administrator considers appropriate.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `producer' with respect to lubricating oil means any person who produces a lubricant base stock from crude oil.
Such production does not include the re-refining of used oil.
The term `importer' with respect to lubricating oil means any person who imports a lubricant base stock.
The term `lubricant base stock' means oil from which lubricating oil is made after introduction of additives.
The terms `used oil collection center', `collection center', and `generator' mean any facility or entity that collects, stores, accumulates, or otherwise generates used oil, including a service station dealer (as defined in section 101(37) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601(37)), an auto parts retailer, or municipality.
Such term does not include an individual who generates used oil by removing such oil from the engine of a light duty motor vehicle or household appliance owned or operated by such individual and used only for personal purposes.
The term `recycler' means an owner or operator of a used oil recycling facility.
The term `recycling credit' means a legal record of a recycling activity undertaken in accordance with subsection (c) that represents an amount of used oil recycled for purposes of complying with subsection (a).
The terms `used oil recycling facility' and `recycling facility' mean a facility with a permit under section 3005 that re-refines or reprocesses used oil.
Applicability.--This section applies to any person who produces or imports more than 100,000 gallons of lubricating oil a year.
Regulations.--The Administrator shall promulgate regulations to implement this section not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of the Oil Recycling Incentives Act.
If the Administrator fails to promulgate such regulations by that date, the recycling percentage under subsection (b) shall be 40 percent until such time as the regulations are promulgated.''.
Table of Contents Amendment.--The table of contents for subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (contained in section 1001) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the items relating to sections 3015 through 3023 as sections 3016 through 3024, respectively; and (2) by inserting after the item relating to section 3014 the following new item: ``Sec.
Recycling requirements for used oil.