This Act may be cited as the ``Securing America From Terrorist Entries Act'' or the ``SAFTE Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) United States border security agencies are presently overwhelmed with more than 400 million visits across our borders each year and safeguards need to be put in place to make our borders more secure.
Current border entry and exit systems are woefully inadequate and the provisions included in the USA PATRIOT Act will greatly enhance the Nation's border security so that Americans know with greater certainty who is entering and exiting the United States.
Most of the nineteen terrorists who hijacked planes and attacked the United States on September 11, 2001, are believed to have entered the United States with approved visas and had not been identified by the Immigration and Naturalization Service as being in violation of the terms of their visa.
Afghanistan harbors terrorist organizations and is host to Osama bin Laden and his al Qaeda terrorist network.
Terrorist organizations are operating in Algeria, Lebanon, Somalia, and the United Arab Emirates, and their members pose a threat to the people of the United States.
Terrorist organizations continue to secretly operate in Egypt and six of the individuals on the Federal Bureau of Investigation's most wanted terrorists list are Egyptians wanted in connection with attacks on the United States.
An Egyptian, Mohamed Atta, believed to be the organizer of the September 11, 2001, attacks, was able to enter and exit the United States several times prior to the attacks despite being on our Nation's terrorist watch list.
Nearly half of the nineteen terrorists who hijacked planes on September 11, 2001, were citizens of Saudi Arabia and entered the United States on approved visas.
Most of the suspects in the June 25, 1996, bombing on United States Air Force Khobar Towers barracks at Dhahran Air Base in Saudi Arabia are citizens of Saudi Arabia.
The United States Department of State has designated Yemen a haven for terrorists and operatives of Osama bin Laden operating in Yemen were responsible for the 1999 attack on the USS Cole which killed 17 and injured 39 United States sailors.
TEMPORARY MORATORIUM ON THE ISSUANCE OF CERTAIN ALIEN IMMIGRANT AND NONIMMIGRANT VISAS.
Terms of Moratorium.-- (1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of this section and notwithstanding any other provision of law, during the moratorium period no immigrant or nonimmigrant visa for admission to the United States may be issued to an alien-- (A) who is a citizen or national of any country listed under paragraph (2); or (B) was a citizen or national of any country listed under paragraph (2) within 15 years of the date of application for a visa.
Countries.-- (A) The provisions of this section shall apply with respect to the following countries: (i) Afghanistan.
Any country designated as a state sponsor of terrorism.
For purposes of this section, the term ``state sponsor of terrorism'' means a country the government of which the Secretary of State has determined, under section 620A(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, section 6(j)(1) of the Export Administration Act of 1979, or section 40(d) of the Arms Export Control Act, to have repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.
Limitation.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any diplomatic visa.
Multiple citizenship.-- (A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall apply to any alien who is described in such paragraph notwithstanding that the alien is, or was during the relevant period, simultaneously a citizen or national of a country that is not listed under paragraph (2).
Visa waiver program shall not apply.--Any alien who is described in paragraph (1) shall be ineligible for a waiver under section 217 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1187), regardless of whether the alien is a national of, or presents a passport issued by, a country described in subsection (a)(2) of such section.
Period of Moratorium.--The moratorium period referred to in subsection (a) shall begin 5 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall terminate 30 days after the certification under subsection (c).
Certification by Attorney General.--The certification referred to in subsection (b) is a certification by the Attorney General to the Congress that-- (1) subsections (b) and (c) of section 403 of Public Law 107-56 have been fully implemented; and (2) a system is in place that requires that all visas issues to aliens who are subject to the moratorium contain biometric data, are tamper-proof, and are machine-readable.
Exceptions Granted by Attorney General.--The Attorney General may waive the limitations of subsection (a) in the case of any alien if the Attorney General determines that the admission to the United States of such alien is in the national interest of the United States or in the interest of family unity and if the refusal of admission of such alien would result in exceptional and extremely unusual hardship to the alien's spouse, parent, or child, who is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence.
EXPANSION OF TERRORIST ACTIVITIES FOR PURPOSES OF DEPORTATION.
Amendment to INA.--Section 237(a)(4)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1227(a)(4)(B)) is amended by striking ``as defined in section 212(a)(3)(B)(iii))'' and inserting ``as described under section 212(a)(3)(B))''.
Retroactive Application of Amendment.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to-- (1) all actions taken by an alien before, on, or after such date; and (2) all aliens, without regard to the date of entry or attempted entry into the United States in removal proceedings on or after such date (except for proceedings in which there has been a final administrative decision before such date).
REQUIREMENT FOR PASSENGER MANIFESTS FOR FLIGHTS IN FOREIGN AIR TRANSPORTATION TO THE UNITED STATES.
Section 44909 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Flights in Foreign Air Transportation to the United States.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Under Secretary of Transportation for Security shall require each air carrier and foreign air carrier operating a passenger flight in foreign air transportation to the United States to provide to the Under Secretary by electronic transmission a passenger and crew manifest containing the information specified in subsection (2).
Information.--A passenger and crew manifest for a flight required under paragraph (1) shall contain the following information: ``(A) The full legal name of each passenger and crew member, and any additional name recorded for such passenger.
The date of birth and citizenship of each passenger and crew member.
The sex of each passenger and crew member.
The passport number and country of issuance of each passenger and crew member if required for travel.
The United States visa number or resident alien card number of each passenger and crew member, as applicable.
Such other information as the Under Secretary, by regulation, determines is reasonably necessary to ensure aviation safety.
Transmission of manifest.--Subject to paragraph (4), a passenger and crew manifest required for a flight under paragraph (1) shall be transmitted to the Under Secretary in advance of the aircraft landing in the United States in such manner, time, and form as the Under Secretary prescribes.
Transmission of manifests to other federal agencies.--The Under Secretary may require by regulation that a passenger and crew manifest required for a flight under paragraph (1) be transmitted directly to the head of another Federal agency.''.
INQUIRY REGARDING COUNTRY OF ORIGIN AT POINT OF ENTRY.
The Attorney General shall require by regulation that Federal border officials inquire of each individual entering the United States as to the individual's country of origin.
ELIMINATING WAIVER AUTHORITY RELATING TO IMPLEMENTATION OF MACHINE READABLE PASSPORTS.
Section 217(a)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1187(a)(3)), as amended by Public Law 107-56) is amended by striking subparagraph (B).
Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act and every 6 months thereafter, the General Accounting Office shall submit to the Congress a report, in classified and unclassified format, which evaluates the status of the following: (1) The reforms taken within the Immigration and Naturalization Service to safeguard the borders of the United States.
The ability of the Federal Government to prevent terrorists from entering the United States.
The ability of the Federal Government to locate and monitor the travel of aliens in the United States.
The degree of cooperation among the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the intelligence agencies, and other Federal, State, and local law enforcement officials.
The background check process for aliens seeking visas for admission to the United States.
The implementation of other measures to safeguard the borders of the United States and improve visa background checks.
The effectiveness of the border security in the United States.