S ON THE BUDGET.
Section 301 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 632) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Means-Tested Welfare Spending.-- ``(1) In general.--The concurrent resolution on the budget for a fiscal year shall set forth the appropriate level for aggregate means-tested welfare spending for the first fiscal year of that concurrent resolution and for at least each of the 4 ensuing fiscal years beginning on the earlier of-- ``(A) the first fiscal year that begins after the date of enactment of this subsection and after any monthly rate of unemployment during the immediately preceding fiscal year is below 6 percent; or ``(B) fiscal year 2016.
Setting level.--The level described in paragraph (1) shall not exceed the aggregate level of Federal means-tested welfare spending for fiscal year 2007, adjusted for inflation as follows: ``(A) In fiscal year 2016, the sum of $825,000,000,000.
In fiscal year 2017, the sum of $750,000,000,000.
In fiscal year 2018 and in subsequent fiscal years, the aggregate level of Federal means-tested welfare spending for fiscal year 2007, adjusted for inflation as follows: ``(i) Means-tested welfare spending relating to medical assistance programs shall be adjusted for inflation according to the price index for personal consumption expenditures for health products and services as calculated by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
All other means-tested welfare spending shall be adjusted for inflation according to the weighted price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding health products and services as calculated by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.''.
ALLOCATIONS OF MEANS-TESTED WELFARE SPENDING.
In General.--Section 302 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 633) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Means-Tested Welfare Spending Limit.-- ``(1) Further division of amounts.--For any concurrent resolution on the budget in which levels for aggregate means- tested welfare spending are set forth under section 301(j), in the House of Representatives and the Senate, the amounts allocated under subsection (a) shall be further divided to establish an allocation of-- ``(A) total new budget authority and total outlays for discretionary means-tested welfare spending in appropriation measures for the first fiscal year of that concurrent resolution; and ``(B) total new budget authority and total outlays for mandatory means-tested welfare spending for the first fiscal year of that concurrent resolution and at least each of the ensuing 4 fiscal years to all other committees of the House of Representatives and the Senate that have jurisdiction over legislation providing mandatory means-tested welfare spending.
Point of order.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, or amendment between the Houses if-- ``(i) the enactment of such bill or resolution as reported; ``(ii) the adoption and enactment of such amendment; ``(iii) the enactment of such bill or resolution in the form recommended in such conference report; or ``(iv) the enactment of such amendment between the Houses, would cause the applicable allocation of new budget authority or outlays made under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) for a fiscal year to be exceeded.
Exception.--The limits on the allocation of new budget authority or outlays made under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) shall not be in effect for a fiscal year if the average monthly unemployment rate in the preceding fiscal year exceeded 7.5 percent.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 302(b) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by striking ``under subsection (a)'' and inserting ``under subsections (a) and (h)''.
Section 310(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 641(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (3), by striking ``or'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); (3) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following: ``(4) specify the total amount by which new budget authority for such fiscal year for mandatory means-tested welfare spending contained in laws, bills, and resolutions within the jurisdiction of a committee is to be changed and direct that committee to determine and recommend changes to accomplish a change of such total amount, which amount shall be the amount by which the Congressional Budget Office baseline level of spending for aggregate mandatory means-tested welfare programs exceeds the allocation made pursuant to section 302(h)(1)(B) for such fiscal year; and''; and (4) in paragraph (5), as so redesignated, by striking ``and (3)'' and inserting ``(3), and (4)''.
TITLE IV--GRANTS TO PROMOTE SELF-SUFFICIENCY SEC.
Purpose.--The purpose of this title is to encourage States to develop policies to promote self-sufficiency and prosperity and to reduce poverty and Government dependence.
Grants.--The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE XXII--GRANTS TO STATES TO PROMOTE SELF-SUFFICIENCY AND PROSPERITY AND TO REDUCE DEPENDENCE ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary may provide grants to States to reward reductions in poverty and Government dependence and increases in self-sufficiency.
Allocation of Grants to States.--For each fiscal year for which funds are made available under subsection (e), the Secretary shall make a grant in an amount equal to $100,000,000 to each of the 3 States with the greatest percentage increases in the self-sufficiency ratio of the State for the preceding fiscal year over the self- sufficiency ratio of the State for fiscal year 2007, as compared with the changes in that ratio for each other State, subject to subsection (c).
Limitation on Eligibility for Grants.--A State shall not be eligible for a grant under this title for a fiscal year unless the self-sufficiency ratio of the State for the fiscal year is greater than the self-sufficiency ratio of the State for fiscal year 2007.
Definitions.--In this title: ``(1) The term `self-sufficient family' means a family (including a 1-person family) whose combined income, excluding receipt of means-tested welfare spending (as defined in section 3(11)(A) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974), exceeds the poverty line (within the meaning of section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, including any revision required by such section applicable to a family of the size involved).
The term `self-sufficiency ratio' means, with respect to a State and a fiscal year-- ``(A) the number of self-sufficient families residing in the State during the fiscal year that are headed by able-bodied individuals who have not attained 63 years of age; divided by ``(B) the total number of families residing in the State during the fiscal year that are headed by able- bodied individuals who have not attained 63 years of age.
The term `State' means the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For grants under this title, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $300,000,000 for fiscal year 2016 and each succeeding fiscal year.''.
TITLE V--PROHIBITION ON FUNDING OF ABORTION SEC.
PROHIBITION ON FUNDING FOR ABORTIONS.
No funds authorized or appropriated by Federal law, and none of the funds in any trust fund to which funds are authorized or appropriated by Federal law, shall be expended for any abortion.
PROHIBITION ON FUNDING FOR HEALTH BENEFITS PLANS THAT COVER ABORTION.
None of the funds authorized or appropriated by Federal law, and none of the funds in any trust fund to which funds are authorized or appropriated by Federal law, shall be expended for health benefits coverage that includes coverage of abortion.
PROHIBITION ON TAX BENEFITS RELATING TO ABORTION.
For taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this section, no credit shall be allowed under the internal revenue laws with respect to amounts paid or incurred for an abortion or with respect to amounts paid or incurred for a health benefits plan (including premium assistance) that includes coverage of abortion.
CONSTRUCTION RELATING TO SEPARATE COVERAGE.
Nothing in this title shall be construed as prohibiting any individual, entity, or State or locality from purchasing separate abortion coverage or health benefits coverage that includes abortion so long as such coverage is paid for entirely using only funds not authorized or appropriated by Federal law and such coverage shall not be purchased using matching funds required for a federally subsidized program, including a State's or locality's contribution of Medicaid matching funds.
CONSTRUCTION RELATING TO THE USE OF NON-FEDERAL FUNDS FOR HEALTH COVERAGE.
Nothing in this title shall be construed as restricting the ability of any non-Federal health benefits coverage provider from offering abortion coverage, or the ability of a State or locality to contract separately with such a provider for such coverage, so long as only funds not authorized or appropriated by Federal law are used and such coverage shall not be purchased using matching funds required for a federally subsidized program, including a State's or locality's contribution of Medicaid matching funds.
TREATMENT OF ABORTIONS RELATED TO RAPE, INCEST, OR PRESERVING THE LIFE OF THE MOTHER.
The limitations established in this title shall not apply to an abortion-- (1) if the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest; or (2) in the case where a woman suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the woman in danger of death unless an abortion is performed, including a life-endangering physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy itself.