FEDERAL RENEWABLE PORTFOLIO STANDARD.
Title VI of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
FEDERAL RENEWABLE PORTFOLIO STANDARD.
Minimum Renewable Generation Requirement.--For each calendar year beginning in calendar year 2005, each retail electric supplier shall submit to the Secretary, not later than April 1 of the following calendar year, renewable energy credits in an amount equal to the required annual percentage specified in subsection (b).
Required Annual Percentage.--For calendar years 2005 through 2025, the required annual percentage of the retail electric supplier's base amount that shall be generated from renewable energy resources shall be the percentage specified in the following table: Required annual ``Calendar Years percentage 2005 through 2006.......................... 1.0 2007 through 2008.......................... 2.2 2009 through 2010.......................... 3.4 2011 through 2012.......................... 4.6 2013 through 2014.......................... 5.8 2015 through 2016.......................... 7.0 2017 through 2018.......................... 8.5 2019 through 2020.......................... 10.0 2020 through 2021.......................... 12.0 2021 through 2022.......................... 14.0 2022 through 2023.......................... 16.0 2023 through 2024.......................... 18.0 2024 through 2025.......................... 20.0.
Submission of Credits.--(1) A retail electric supplier may satisfy the requirements of subsection (a) through the submission of renewable energy credits-- ``(A) issued to the retail electric supplier under subsection (d); ``(B) obtained by purchase or exchange under subsection (e); or ``(C) borrowed under subsection (f).
A credit may be counted toward compliance with subsection (a) only once.
Issuance of Credits.--(1) The Secretary shall establish, not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, a program to issue, monitor the sale or exchange of, and track renewable energy credits.
Under the program, an entity that generates electric energy through the use of a renewable energy resource may apply to the Secretary for the issuance of renewable energy credits.
The application shall indicate-- ``(A) the type of renewable energy resource used to produce the electricity, ``(B) the location where the electric energy was produced, and ``(C) any other information the Secretary determines appropriate.
(A) Except as provided in paragraphs (B), (C), and (D), the Secretary shall issue to an entity one renewable energy credit for each kilowatt-hour of electric energy the entity generates from the date of enactment of this section and in each subsequent calendar year through the use of a renewable energy resource at an eligible facility.
For incremental hydropower the credits shall be calculated based on the expected increase in average annual generation resulting from the efficiency improvements or capacity additions.
The number of credits shall be calculated using the same water flow information used to determine a historic average annual generation baseline for the hydroelectric facility and certified by the Secretary or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
The calculation of the credits for incremental hydropower shall not be based on any operational changes at the hydroelectric facility not directly associated with the efficiency improvements or capacity additions.
The Secretary shall issue two renewable energy credits for each kilowatt-hour of electric energy generated and supplied to the grid in that calendar year through the use of a renewable energy resource at an eligible facility located on Indian land.
For purposes of this paragraph, renewable energy generated by biomass cofired with other fuels is eligible for two credits only if the biomass was grown on the land eligible under this paragraph.
For renewable energy resources produced from a generation offset, the Secretary shall issue two renewable energy credits for each kilowatt-hour generated.
To be eligible for a renewable energy credit, the unit of electric energy generated through the use of a renewable energy resource may be sold or may be used by the generator.
If both a renewable energy resource and a nonrenewable energy resource are used to generate the electric energy, the Secretary shall issue credits based on the proportion of the renewable energy resource used.
The Secretary shall identify renewable energy credits by type and date of generation.
When a generator sells electric energy generated through the use of a renewable energy resource to a retail electric supplier under a contract subject to section 210 of this Act, the retail electric supplier is treated as the generator of the electric energy for the purposes of this section for the duration of the contract.
The Secretary may issue credits for existing facility offsets to be applied against a retail electric supplier's own required annual percentage.
The credits are not tradeable and may only be used in the calendar year generation actually occurs.
Credit Trading.--A renewable energy credit may be sold or exchanged by the entity to whom issued or by any other entity who acquires the credit.
A renewable energy credit for any year that is not used to satisfy the minimum renewable generation requirement of subsection (a) for that year may be carried forward for use within the next 4 years.
Credit Borrowing.--At any time before the end of calendar year 2005, a retail electric supplier that has reason to believe it will not have sufficient renewable energy credits to comply with subsection (a) may-- ``(1) submit a plan to the Secretary demonstrating that the retail electric supplier will earn sufficient credits within the next 3 calendar years which, when taken into account, will enable the retail electric suppliers to meet the requirements of subsection (a) for calendar year 2005 and the subsequent calendar years involved; and ``(2) upon the approval of the plan by the Secretary, apply credits that the plan demonstrates will be earned within the next 3 calendar years to meet the requirements of subsection (a) for each calendar year involved.
Credit Cost Cap.--The Secretary shall offer renewable energy credits for sale at the lesser of 3 cents per kilowatt-hour or 200 percent of the average market value of credits for the applicable compliance period.
On January 1 of each year following calendar year 2005, the Secretary shall adjust for inflation the price charged per credit for such calendar year, based on the Gross Domestic Product Implicit Price Deflator.
Enforcement.--The Secretary may bring an action in the appropriate United States district court to impose a civil penalty on a retail electric supplier that does not comply with subsection (a), unless the retail electric supplier was unable to comply with subsection (a) for reasons outside of the supplier's reasonable control (including weather-related damage, mechanical failure, lack of transmission capacity or availability, strikes, lockouts, actions of a governmental authority).
A retail electric supplier who does not submit the required number of renewable energy credits under subsection (a) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than the greater of 3 cents or 200 percent of the average market value of credits for the compliance period for each renewable energy credit not submitted.
Information Collection.--The Secretary may collect the information necessary to verify and audit-- ``(1) the annual electric energy generation and renewable energy generation of any entity applying for renewable energy credits under this section, ``(2) the validity of renewable energy credits submitted by a retail electric supplier to the Secretary, and ``(3) the quantity of electricity sales of all retail electric suppliers.
Environmental Savings Clause.--Incremental hydropower shall be subject to all applicable environmental laws and licensing and regulatory requirements.
State Savings Clause.--This section does not preclude a State from requiring additional renewable energy generation in that State, or from specifying technology mix.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Biomass.--The term `biomass' means any organic material that is available on a renewable or recurring basis, including dedicated energy crops, trees grown for energy production, wood waste and wood residues, plants (including aquatic plants, grasses, and agricultural crops), residues, fibers, animal wastes and other organic waste materials, and fats and oils, except that with respect to material removed from National Forest System lands the term includes only organic material from-- ``(A) thinnings from trees that are less than 12 inches in diameter; ``(B) slash; ``(C) brush; and ``(D) mill residues.
Eligible facility.--The term `eligible facility' means-- ``(A) a facility for the generation of electric energy from a renewable energy resource that is placed in service on or after the date of enactment of this section; or ``(B) a repowering or cofiring increment that is placed in service on or after the date of enactment of this section at a facility for the generation of electric energy from a renewable energy resource that was placed in service before that date.
Eligible renewable energy resource.--The term `renewable energy resource' means solar, wind, ocean, or geothermal energy, biomass (excluding solid waste and paper that is commonly recycled), landfill gas, a generation offset, or incremental hydropower.
Generation offset.--The term `generation offset' means reduced electricity usage metered at a site where a customer consumes energy from a renewable energy technology.
Existing facility offset.--The term `existing facility offset' means renewable energy generated from an existing facility, not classified as an eligible facility, that is owned or under contract to a retail electric supplier on the date of enactment of this section.
Incremental hydropower.--The term `incremental hydropower' means additional generation that is achieved from increased efficiency or additions of capacity after the date of enactment of this section at a hydroelectric dam that was placed in service before that date.
Indian land.--The term `Indian land' means-- ``(A) any land within the limits of any Indian reservation, pueblo, or rancheria, ``(B) any land not within the limits of any Indian reservation, pueblo, or rancheria title to which was on the date of enactment of this paragraph either held by the United States for the benefit of any Indian tribe or individual or held by any Indian tribe or individual subject to restriction by the United States against alienation, ``(C) any dependent Indian community, and ``(D) any land conveyed to any Alaska Native corporation under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.
Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaskan Native village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et seq.
), which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians.
Renewable energy.--The term `renewable energy' means electric energy generated by a renewable energy resource.
Renewable energy resource.--The term `renewable energy resource' means solar, wind, ocean, or geothermal energy, biomass (including municipal solid waste), landfill gas, a generation offset, or incremental hydropower.
Repowering or cofiring increment.--The term `repowering or cofiring increment' means the additional generation from a modification that is placed in service on or after the date of enactment of this section to expand electricity production at a facility used to generate electric energy from a renewable energy resource or to cofire biomass that was placed in service before the date of enactment of this section, or the additional generation above the average generation in the 3 years preceding the date of enactment of this section, to expand electricity production at a facility used to generate electric energy from a renewable energy resource or to cofire biomass that was placed in service before the date of enactment of this section.
Retail electric supplier.--The term `retail electric supplier' means a person that sells electric energy to electric consumers and sold not less than 1,000,000 megawatt-hours of electric energy to electric consumers for purposes other than resale during the preceding calendar year, except that such term does not include the United States, a State or any political subdivision of a State, or any agency, authority, or instrumentality of any one or more of the foregoing, or a rural electric cooperative.
Retail electric supplier's base amount.--The term `retail electric supplier's base amount' means the total amount of electric energy sold by the retail electric supplier to electric customers during the most recent calendar year for which information is available, excluding electric energy generated by-- ``(A) an eligible renewable energy resource; ``(B) municipal solid waste; or ``(C) a hydroelectric facility.
Sunset.--This section expires December 31, 2030.