This Act may be cited as the ``Trigger Lock Act of 1997''.
CHILD SAFETY LOCKS FOR FIREARMS.
Civil Prohibitions.-- (1) Prohibition against transfer of firearm without locking device attached.-- (A) Prohibition.--Effective 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, it shall be unlawful for any person, in or affecting commerce, to transfer a firearm in the United States, unless a locking device is attached to, or is an integral part of, the firearm.
Penalties.-- (i) Private transfers.--The Secretary shall impose a civil fine of $5,000 on any person, other than a licensed dealer or licensed manufacturer, who violates subparagraph (A).
Transfers by federally licensed firearms dealers.--The Secretary shall impose a civil fine of $10,000 on any licensed dealer who violates subparagraph (A), and shall suspend or revoke any license issued under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, to the dealer.
Transfers by federally licensed firearms manufacturers.--The Secretary shall impose a civil fine of $25,000 on any licensed manufacturer who violates subparagraph (A), and shall suspend or revoke any license issued under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, to the manufacturer.
Prohibition against manufacture of handgun without locking device attached.-- (A) Prohibition.--Effective 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, it shall be unlawful for any person, in or affecting commerce, to manufacture a handgun in the United States, unless a locking device that meets the minimum quality standards prescribed under subsection (e) is attached to, or is an integral part of, the firearm.
Penalties.--The Secretary shall impose a civil fine of $25,000 on any person who violates subparagraph (A), and shall suspend or revoke any license issued under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, to the manufacturer.
Prohibition against transfer of firearm by licensee without notice and warning.-- (A) Prohibition.--Effective 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, it shall be unlawful for any licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed dealer to transfer a handgun that is not accompanied by the following, which shall be printed in \3/4\-inch type: ``THE USE OF A LOCKING BOX OR LOCKING DEVICE PLACED ON THE TRIGGER GUARD OF A FIREARM IS ONLY ONE ASPECT OF RESPONSIBLE FIREARM STORAGE.
FIREARMS AND THEIR AMMUNITION SHOULD BE STORED AND SECURED IN A LOCATION THAT IS INACCESSIBLE TO CHILDREN.
``IF MISUSED, HANDGUNS CAN RESULT IN UNINTENTIONAL INJURY OR LOSS OF LIFE.
TRIGGER LOCKS LOWER THE RISK OF UNINTENTIONAL DISCHARGE, HOWEVER TRIGGER LOCKS DO NOT TOTALLY ELIMINATE THE RISK.
``FAILURE TO PROPERLY LOCK AND STORE YOUR FIREARM MAY RESULT IN CIVIL OR CRIMINAL LIABILITY UNDER STATE LAW.
FEDERAL LAW PROHIBITS THE POSSESSION OF A HANDGUN BY A MINOR IN MOST CIRCUMSTANCES.''.
Penalties.-- (i) Transfers by federally licensed firearms dealers or importers.--The Secretary shall impose a civil fine of $10,000 on any licensed dealer or licensed importer who violates subparagraph (A), and shall suspend or revoke any license issued under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, to the dealer or importer.
Transfers by federally licensed firearms manufacturers.--The Secretary shall impose a civil fine of $5,000 on any licensed manufacturer who violates subparagraph (A), and shall suspend or revoke any license issued under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, to the manufacturer.
Inapplicability to governmental entities.--Paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) shall not apply to conduct of, or authorized by, the United States or any department or agency thereof, or any State or any department, agency, or political subdivision thereof.
Judicial review.--Not later than 60 days after an individual receives notice from the Secretary of a decision to impose a fine on, or suspend or revoke a license of, the individual under this subsection, the individual may bring an action against the Secretary in any United States district court for de novo review of the decision.
Criminal Prohibition Against Adult Leaving Firearm and Ammunition With an Unsupervised Minor.-- (1) Prohibition.--Section 922 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after subsection (x) the following: ``(y)(1) It shall be unlawful for an adult to leave a loaded firearm, or an unloaded firearm and ammunition for the firearm, with a minor, unless the possession of the firearm by the minor is supervised by an adult who is not prohibited by Federal, State, or local law from possessing a firearm.
As used in paragraph (1): ``(A) The term `adult' means an individual who has attained 18 years of age.
The term `minor' means an individual who has not attained 18 years of age.''.
Penalties.--Section 924(a) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(7) Whoever knowingly violates section 922(y) shall, notwithstanding section 3571, be fined not more than $10,000, imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both.''.
Studies.-- (1) Standards for Locking Devices.-- (A) In general.--The National Institute of Justice and the Consumer Product Safety Commission shall each conduct a study to determine the feasibility of developing minimum quality standards for locking devices.
Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the National Institute of Justice and the Consumer Product Safety Commission shall each submit to the Attorney General and the Secretary of the Treasury a report that includes the results of the study required of the entity by subparagraph (A) and any recommendations for legislative or regulatory action.
Results of this section.-- (A) In general.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control shall conduct a study on the results of this section.
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall submit to the Attorney General and the Secretary of the Treasury a report that contains the findings of the study required by subparagraph (A).
Educational Programs.--For public service announcements and counter advertisements designed to educate the public on the proper storage of firearms, not more than $1,000,000 are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 1998 to each of the Attorney General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, who shall coordinate their expenditure of the sums appropriated pursuant to this subsection, and the sums are authorized to remain available until expended.
Regulations Governing Manufacture of Locking Devices.--Within 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue final regulations which prescribe minimum quality standards for locking devices.
Definitions.--As used in this section: (1) Locking device.--The term ``locking device'' means a device that-- (A) when installed and secured (with a key, electronic code, or electro-mechanically operated combination lock) on the trigger guard of a firearm, and while activated, prevents the firearm from being discharged; or (B) is incorporated into the design of, and is an integral part of, a handgun, and while activated, prevents the handgun from being discharged.
Other terms.--The terms ``State'', ``firearm'', ``handgun'', ``dealer'', ``licensed dealer'', ``manufacturer'', ``licensed manufacturer'', ``importer'', ``licensed importer'', and ``Secretary'' shall have the meanings given such terms in section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code.