Establishment of Commission.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``Pick-Sloan Tribal Commission for Comprehensive Resolution''.
Membership.-- (A) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 7 members, of whom-- (i) 1 shall be the Chairperson of the Commission; (ii) at least 1 shall have expertise in the field of Indian law and policy; (iii) at least 1 shall have expertise in the operation and history of Federal water projects; (iv) 1 shall have expertise in the area of environmental justice; (v) 1 shall be an economist; and (vi) at least 1 shall be an authority in cultural preservation.
Tribal membership.--Of the 7 members selected for the Commission, at least 3 shall be members of federally recognized Indian tribes.
Selection of commission.-- (i) In general.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Indian Affairs of the Senate and the Chairperson and Ranking Member of the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives shall-- (I) select the 7 Commission members; and (II) appoint 1 of the members to serve as Chairperson of the Commission.
Recommendations.--The affected Indian tribes may make recommendations to the Chairperson of the Committee on Indian Affairs of the Senate and the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives regarding members of the Commission.
Deadline for appointment.--All members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Term; vacancies.-- (A) Term.--A member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission-- (i) shall not affect the powers of the Commission; and (ii) shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold the initial meeting of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Nonapplicability of faca.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Commission.
Duties.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out this section, the Commission shall consult with the affected Indian tribes.
Study.--The Commission shall conduct a study of-- (A) with respect to the period beginning on the date of commencement of the Pick-Sloan Program and ending on the date on which the study is initiated-- (i) the impacts on the affected Indian tribes, directly or indirectly, caused by the Pick-Sloan Program; and (ii) measures implemented by the Federal Government to attempt to address those impacts; (B) other measures that have been proposed to address the impacts on the affected Indian tribes caused by the Pick-Sloan Program; (C) the results of any other studies regarding those impacts and potential solutions to the impacts, including any studies conducted by the Joint Tribal Advisory Committee relating to the Pick-Sloan Program; and (D) comparisons involving other situations in which Federal hydroelectric projects or federally licensed hydroelectric projects have resulted in the taking or occupation of Indian land and the compensation, or other measures, Indian tribes have been or are being provided in those situations.
Hearings.-- (A) In general.--In carrying out paragraph (2), the Commission shall hold at least 3 hearings to receive information from Federal agencies, Indian tribes, and other interested parties regarding the resolution of Pick-Sloan Program impacts.
Public participation.--A hearing under this paragraph shall be open to the public.
Records.--For each hearing under this paragraph, the Commission shall-- (i) compile a record consisting of transcripts, written testimony, studies, and other information presented at the hearing; and (ii) include the record in the report of the Commission required under paragraph (5), as an appendix in electronic format.
Comprehensive resolution.-- (A) In general.--Based on the results of the study under paragraph (2), and hearings under paragraph (3), the Commission shall develop a proposal to comprehensively resolve the impacts to the affected Indian tribes resulting from the Pick-Sloan Program.
Inclusions.--The proposal under subparagraph (A) shall include-- (i) a comprehensive proposal for a program to provide full and final compensation to the affected Indian tribes; (ii) a description of the measures referred to in paragraph (2) that-- (I) have not been implemented; (II) could be implemented; or (III) should be implemented in a more effective manner; (iii) relevant measures that could be accomplished administratively; (iv) relevant measures that would require legislation to be implemented; and (v) any other measures necessary to comprehensively resolve the impacts of the Pick-Sloan Program on the affected Indian tribes.
Report.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), not later than 18 months after the date on which the first meeting of the Commission takes place, the Commission shall submit to the President and Congress a report that contains-- (i) a detailed statement of the study findings and conclusions of the Commission; and (ii) the proposal of the Commission for such legislation and administrative actions as the Commission considers to be appropriate to resolve the impacts on the affected Indian tribes caused by the Pick-Sloan Program.
Extension.--The deadline described in subparagraph (A) may be extended for a period of not more than 180 days if the Commission submits to the Committee on Indian Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives a request for the extension that-- (i) is received by the Committees before the deadline described in subparagraph (A); and (ii) includes a description of the reasons why the extension is needed.
Website.-- (A) In general.--The Commission shall maintain a website for the period beginning on the date on which the first meeting of the Commission takes place and ending on the date that is 180 days after the date of termination of the Commission.
Requirements.--The Commission shall use the website-- (i) to describe the activities of the Commission; (ii) to provide access to information studied by the Commission; (iii) to provide notice of, and make available all information presented at, hearings of the Commission; and (iv) to post the report (including all appendices to that report) of the Commission required under paragraph (5).
Archiving of website content.--At the time at which the website of the Commission is terminated, all content on the website shall be-- (i) collected on compact disk, digital video disk, or other appropriate digital media; and (ii) included in the report to be submitted under paragraph (5).
Powers.-- (1) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, meet and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers to be advisable to carry out this Act.
Information from federal agencies.-- (A) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from a Federal agency such information as the Commission considers to be necessary to carry out this Act.
Provision of information.--On request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of an applicable Federal agency shall provide the information to the Commission.
Postal services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Commission Personnel Matters.-- (1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Commission shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for an employee of an agency under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the home or regular place of business of the member in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Staff.-- (A) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws (including regulations), appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as are necessary to enable the Commission to perform the duties of the Commission.
Confirmation of executive director.--The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.-- (i) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates.
Maximum rate of pay.--The rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel shall not exceed the rate payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Detail of federal government employees.-- (i) In general.--An employee of the Federal Government may be detailed to serve as staff for the Commission without reimbursement.
Civil service status.--The detail of the employee shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Human resources support.--The Commission may request the Secretary of Defense to provide, and the Secretary of Defense shall provide, through human resource departments under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Defense, on a reimbursable basis, operational support for activities of the Commission.
Contract authority.--The Commission may, to such extent and using such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, enter into contracts to enable the Commission to discharge the duties of the Commission under this Act.
Volunteer services.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the Commission may accept and use such voluntary and uncompensated services as the Commission determines to be necessary.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services in accordance with section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals that do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of that title.
Termination of Commission.--The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits the report of the Commission under subsection (b)(5).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act for each of fiscal years 2010 and 2011, to remain available until expended.
Transfer of Funds in Lieu of Appropriation.-- (1) In general.--For any fiscal year, or at any time during a fiscal year, in which insufficient amounts are available to fund activities of the Commission, the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of the Army may transfer to the Commission such unobligated amounts as are available to the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of the Army for use by the Commission in carrying out this Act.
Availability.--Amounts transferred to the Commission under paragraph (1) shall remain available until the earlier of-- (A) the date of termination of the Commission; or (B) the date on which amounts that are sufficient to carry out this Act are made available.
Nothing in this Act diminishes, changes, or otherwise affects-- (1) the water rights of the affected Indian tribes; (2) any other right (including treaty rights) of the affected Indian tribes; (3) the status of Indian reservation land or the boundaries of any reservation of an Indian tribe; or (4) any Congressional authorization of appropriations for the benefit of the affected Indian tribes.