This Act may be cited as the ``Food Stamp Quality Control System Act of 1993''.
FOOD STAMP QUALITY CONTROL SYSTEM.
Collection and Disposition of Claims.--The fifth sentence of section 13(a)(1) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2022(a)(1)) is amended by striking ``(after a determination on any request for a waiver for good cause related to the claim has been made by the Secretary)''.
Administrative and Judicial Review.--Section 14(a) of such Act (7 United States Code 2023(a)) is amended-- (1) in the sixth sentence, by inserting after ``pursuant to section 16(c)'' the following: ``(including determinations as to whether there is good cause for not imposing all or part of the penalty)''; (2) by inserting after the sixth sentence the following new sentence: ``In deciding whether to uphold all or part of a penalty (including whether there is good cause for not imposing all or part of the penalty), the judges shall conduct a thorough review of the issues and take into account all relevant evidence.
''; (3) by inserting after the eighth sentence (after the amendment made by paragraph (2)) the following new sentence: ``The deliberative process privilege shall not be the basis for the withholding of documents by the Secretary or the State agency.
''; and (4) by striking the last sentence.
Administrative Cost Sharing and Quality Control.--Subsection (c) of section 16 of such Act (7 United States Code 2025(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c)(1) As used in this subsection: ``(A) The term `good cause' shall include, but not be limited to-- ``(i) uncontrollable, significant caseload fluctuations that substantially disrupt food stamp program administration; ``(ii) natural disasters that substantially disrupt food stamp program administration; ``(iii) Federal or State program changes that substantially disrupt food stamp program administration; ``(iv) strikes that substantially disrupt food stamp program administration; ``(v) uncontrollable client-caused errors; ``(vi) demographic factors, such as literacy, homelessness, unemployment, poverty, and the rural composition of the population, that contribute substantially to an excessive error rate and depart substantially from national averages for the factors; ``(vii) State program improvements reasonably designed to reduce error rates in the longer term, but that uncontrollably cause short-term increases in the error rate; and ``(viii) other circumstances beyond the control of a State agency.
The term `national average overpayment error rate' means, in the case a fiscal year, the ratio of-- ``(i) the total value of allotments issued by all State agencies in the fiscal year that are-- ``(I) issued to households that fail to meet basic program eligibility requirements; or ``(II) overissued to eligible households; to ``(ii) the total value of all allotments issued by all State agencies in the fiscal year.
The term `national average underpayment rate' means, in the case of a fiscal year, the ratio of-- ``(i) the total value of all allotments underissued by all State agencies to recipient households in the fiscal year; to ``(ii) the total value of all allotments issued by all State agencies in the fiscal year.
(i) The term `overpayment error rate' means-- ``(I) the percentage of the value of all allotments issued in a fiscal year by a State agency that are-- ``(aa) issued to households that fail to meet basic program eligibility requirements; or ``(bb) overissued to eligible households, ``(II) reduced by the amount by which the national average underpayment error rate for the fiscal year exceeds the underpayment error rate of the State agency for the fiscal year.
At the request of a State agency, the Secretary shall apply the reduction required under clause (i)(II) in determining the overpayment error rate of the State agency for either of the 2 following fiscal years instead of in determining the overpayment error rate of the State agency for the fiscal year to which the reduction would otherwise apply.
The term `payment error rate' means the sum of the overpayment error rate and the underpayment error rate.
The term `underpayment error rate' means the ratio of the value of allotments underissued to recipient households to the total value of allotments issued in a fiscal year by a State agency.
The program authorized under this Act shall include a system that enhances payment accuracy by establishing fiscal incentives that require State agencies with high error rates to share in the cost of payment errors and provide enhanced administrative funding to State agencies with the lowest error rates.
(A) Under the system, subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall adjust the federally funded share of a State agency of administrative costs pursuant to subsection (a), other than the costs already shared in excess of 50 percent under the proviso in the first sentence of subsection (a) or under subsection (g), by increasing the share of all the administrative costs by 1 percentage point to a maximum of 60 percent of all the administrative costs for each full \1/ 10\ of a percentage point by which the payment error rate is less than 6 percent.
Only a State agency whose rate of invalid decisions in denying eligibility is less than a nationwide percentage that the Secretary determines to be reasonable shall be entitled to the adjustment prescribed in subparagraph (A).
The Secretary shall foster management improvements by State agencies pursuant to subsection (b) by requiring a State agency, other than a State agency that receives an adjustment under paragraph (3), to develop and implement corrective action plans to reduce payment errors.
Subject to paragraph (6), if the overpayment error rate of a State agency for a fiscal year exceeds the national average overpayment error rate for the fiscal year, other than for good cause shown, the State agency shall pay to the Secretary a penalty for the fiscal year in an amount obtained by multiplying-- ``(A) the value of all allotments issued by the State agency in the fiscal year; times ``(B) the lesser of-- ``(I) the ratio of-- ``(i) the amount by which the overpayment error rate of the State agency for the fiscal year exceeds the national average overpayment error rate for the fiscal year; to ``(ii) the national average overpayment error rate for the fiscal year; or ``(II) 1; times ``(C) the amount by which the overpayment error rate of the State agency for the fiscal year exceeds the national average overpayment error rate for the fiscal year.
The amount determined under paragraph (5) shall be reduced by the product obtained by multiplying-- ``(A) the ratio of-- ``(i) the amount by which the overpayment error rate of the State agency for the fiscal year exceeds the national average overpayment error rate for the fiscal year; to ``(ii) the overpayment error rate of the State agency for the fiscal year; times ``(B) the overpayments recovered by the State agency in the fiscal year.
A State agency may pay a penalty established pursuant to paragraphs (5) and (6) in quarterly payments over a period not to exceed 30 months, in amounts sufficient to pay the penalty with interest by the end of the period.
The amount of liability shall not be affected by corrective action taken under paragraph (4).
The following errors may be measured for management purposes but shall not be included in the overpayment or underpayment error rate: ``(A) Any error resulting from the application of new regulations promulgated under this Act during the 120-day period beginning on the date of the implementation of the regulations.
Any error resulting from the use by a State agency of correctly processed information concerning a household or individual received from a Federal agency or from an action based on policy information approved or disseminated, in writing, by the Secretary.
Any case found by a quality control review to have involved, but later found in a fair hearing not to have involved, an overpayment, underpayment, or payment to an ineligible recipient.
(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), in determining whether a payment is an erroneous payment, the Secretary and the State agency shall apply all relevant provisions of the State plan approved under section 11.
(i) Except as provided in clause (i), if a provision of a State plan approved under section 11 is inconsistent with a provision of Federal law or regulations, and the Secretary has notified the State agency of the inconsistency in writing, the provision of Federal law or regulations shall control.
Clause (i) shall not apply with respect to a payment of the State agency if-- ``(I) it is necessary for the State to enact a law in order to remove an inconsistency described in clause (i), the Secretary has advised the State agency that the State will be allowed a reasonable period during which to enact the law, and the payment was made during the period; or ``(II) the State agency made the payment in compliance with a court order.
If the Secretary, directly or indirectly, receives from a State agency all or part of the amount of a penalty imposed under paragraph (5) and all or part of the penalty is finally determined not to have been due, the Secretary shall promptly refund to the State agency the amount determined not to have been due, with interest which shall accrue from the date of receipt at the rate described in section 13(a)(1).
(A) For purposes of this subsection-- ``(i) each State error rate shall be determined on the basis of a review of a single statistical sample of food stamp cases of each State agency for the fiscal year (without sub- sampling, re-reviews, or statistical regression analyses); and ``(ii) national average error rates shall be derived from State error rates determined in accordance with clause (i).
The review shall be conducted-- ``(i) by State agency personnel under the direction of the Secretary pursuant to regulations adopted by the Secretary; or ``(ii) if a State agency elects for any particular review, by the Secretary.
No penalty shall be collected under paragraph (5) if the width of the 95 percent confidence interval of any error rate on which the error rate is based exceeds 50 percent of the point estimate of the error rate, unless the State to which a particular error rate pertains agreed in writing to a sample size that precludes meeting the requirements of this subparagraph.
An error rate, incentive payment, and penalty claim for a fiscal year shall be determined by the Secretary and communicated to a State agency not later than 9 months after the end of the fiscal year.
If the Secretary asserts a financial claim against a State agency under paragraph (5), the State may seek administrative and judicial review of the action pursuant to section 14.''.
STUDY OF QUALITY CONTROL STATISTICAL SYSTEM.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Agriculture and State agencies that administer the food stamp program established under the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2011 et sequentes) shall jointly undertake a study of measurement error, and of geographical and temporal uniformity of measurements, in the food stamp program quality control error-rate estimation system.
Experiments.--As part of the study, the Secretary and the State agencies shall jointly conduct controlled experiments under which various reviewers review identical cases, with the objective of determining the degree of uniformity in quality control error-rate measurements and the extent to which different levels of investment of resources in the review process affect measurement error.
Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary and State agencies shall report the results and recommendations of the study to the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate.
Recommendations.--The report shall include recommendations as to what measures would best reduce measurement error and increase uniformity of quality control error-rate measurements at a reasonable cost.
In General.--No provision of this Act or an amendment made by this Act shall become effective unless the cost of the provision or amendment is fully offset in each fiscal year through fiscal year 1995.
Price Support Programs.--No agricultural price support, production adjustment, or income support program administered by the Secretary of Agriculture or the Commodity Credit Corporation may be reduced to achieve the offset.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act shall become effective on the date of enactment of this Act.
Food Stamp Quality Control System.--The amendments made by section 2 shall be effective as of October 1, 1991.