This Act may be cited as the ``World Trade Center Worker and Contractor Protection Act''.
INDEMNIFICATION, LIABILITY LIMITATION, AND FACILITATION OF INSURANCE PROCUREMENT FOR CONTRACTORS FOR THE RESPONSE TO THE WORLD TRADE CENTER ATTACKS.
In General.--Regardless of any other provisions of law or any contract, the United States Government shall, subject to the limitations contained in this section, indemnify Contractors as defined herein against claims as defined in this section.
Coordination With Insurance.--Indemnification under this section shall apply only to the extent that a claim is not otherwise covered and compensable by insurance procured for the risks involved in the response to the World Trade Center attacks.
However, all or part of the indemnification under this section may, pursuant to the terms of insurance procured after the effective date of this Act, be payable before such insurance is applicable.
Limitation in Case of Willful Misconduct or Lack of Good Faith.--When a claim arises from willful misconduct or lack of good faith, intended to cause injury to persons or damage to property, on the part of any of the Contractors' principal officials, the Contractor shall not be indemnified.
Control of Claims Management.--The Contractor shall, to the extent that such claim is reasonably expected to involve indemnification under this section-- (1) promptly notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of any claim against the Contractor that may reasonably be expected to involve indemnification under this section; (2) immediately furnish to the United States Government copies of all pertinent papers Contractor receives; (3) furnish evidence or proof of any claim covered by this section in the manner and form the United States Government requires; and (4) comply with the United States Government's directions and execute any authorizations required in connection with settlement or defense of claims or actions.
Procedure.--The United States Government may direct, control, or assist in settling or defending any claim to the extent that such claim involves indemnification under this section.
Payment Authority.--This section constitutes budget authority in advance of appropriations Acts and represents the obligation of the United States Government to provide for the payment of amounts for indemnification under this section.
Limitation on Liability and Indemnity.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law or contract, the total aggregate liability of Contractors for claims shall not exceed $350,000,000.
Insurance coverage shall not increase this limit of liability and shall reduce the indemnity commitment provided by this section.
Insurance coverage procured for Contractors after the effective date of this Act may, by its terms, be payable for claims at liability coverage levels below the total aggregate liability limit.
This limit of liability shall not preclude a Contractor from being paid or reimbursed for work performed, services provided, or materials and equipment utilized or consumed.
Litigation Management.--Any claims for damages against a Contractor that may result in Federal indemnification as provided in this section shall be brought under section 408(b) of the Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization Act (49 United States Code 40101 note), as amended by section 201(b)(2) of the Aviation and Transportation Security Act (Public Law 107-71), and shall be subject to the following limits: (1) No punitive damages may be awarded except in case of willful misconduct, nor shall any party be liable for interest prior to the judgment.
No punitive damages may be awarded against the United States Government.
Each Contractor against whom a claim is brought shall be liable only for the amount of damages allocated to such Contractor in direct proportion to the percentage of responsibility of the Contractor for causing the harm to the plaintiff.
Exclusion.--Nothing in this section shall in any way limit the liability of any person who-- (1) attempts to commit, knowingly participates in, aids and abets, or commits any act of terrorism, or any criminal act related to or resulting from such act of terrorism; or (2) participates in a conspiracy to commit any such act of terrorism or any such criminal act.
Right of Subrogation.--The United States shall have the right of subrogation with respect to any claim paid by the United States that results in federal indemnification as provided in this section.
Such right of subrogation shall not be applied against a Contractor.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The term ``response to the World Trade Center attacks'' means all acts or failures to act by Contractors or volunteers in connection with their work at the World Trade Center site on the rescue and evacuation, recovery of bodies, clean up, environmental remediation, removal of debris, transportation of debris, control of pollutants, securing of public and private property, and protection of the public health, safety and welfare; provided that such term shall not include efforts to build or rebuild new buildings or other activities on the site of the World Trade Center attacks occurring subsequent to the foregoing acts or failures to act.
The term ``Contractor'' means any person or entity involved in providing work, labor, equipment, materials, or services in connection with the response to the World Trade Center attacks, including-- (A) contractors, subcontractors at any tier, construction managers, engineers, design professionals, and their parents, affiliates, officers, directors, partners, and employees; and (B) the persons or entities, including States or political subdivisions thereof, contracting for such work, labor, equipment, materials or services.
The term ``Contractor's principal officials'' means directors, officers, managers, superintendents, or other representatives supervising or directing-- (A) all or substantially all of the Contractor's business; (B) all or substantially all of the Contractor's operations at any one plant or separate location in which work in response to the World Trade Center attack is being performed; or (C) a separate and complete major industrial operation in which work in response to the World Trade Center attack is being performed.
The term ``claims'' or ``claim'' shall mean claims, actions, losses, settlements or damages (including reasonable expenses of litigation and defense thereof) arising out of or resulting from the response to the World Trade Center attacks, whether arising prior to or subsequent to the enactment of this legislation, for death, personal injury, or loss of, damage to, or loss of use of property.
Severability.--If any provision of this section, or the application hereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this section, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.