SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Mississippi Valley National Historical Park Act of 2001''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Mississippi Valley National Historical Park, Blytheville, Arkansas.
Transfer of jurisdiction, Eaker Air Force Base, for historical park.
Acquisition of Chickasawba Mound for inclusion in historical park.
Administration of historical park.
Congress finds the following: (1) The central and lower Mississippi Valley region contained the highest population levels and the most complex Native American societies north of Mexico before the arrival of European peoples in the 16th century.
In addition, the Mississippi Valley has also hosted Spanish, French, English, and ultimately American societies at different times in the last 450 years.
Blytheville, Arkansas, is centrally located in the Mississippi Valley region.
Former Eaker Air Force Base, which is located outside of Blytheville, Arkansas, in the central Mississippi Valley region, is the site of 14 archaeological sites associated with Native Americans.
Because of its value in illustrating and interpreting the heritage of the United States, the largest of these archaeological sites, was recognized by the National Park Service as a National Historic Landmark in 1996.
Another archaeological site outside of Blytheville, Arkansas, the Chickasawba Mound, was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1984 because of its historic and archaeological resources.
These previous actions by the Department of the Interior recognize that these archaeological sites are likely to benefit, educate, and inspire present and future generations of Americans, but no unified heritage park for the central Mississippi Valley region exists within the National Park Service.
Blytheville, Arkansas, also possesses many other regionally and nationally significant natural, seismic, cultural, and recreational resources associated with the heritage of the central Mississippi Valley region.
The sites and resources associated with the heritage of the central Mississippi Valley region require recognition through the establishment of a national historical park for the central Mississippi Valley region as a unit of the National Park System.
As a result of the closing of Eaker Air Force Base in Blytheville, Arkansas, pursuant to the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990, Federal land and facilities are readily available for the establishment of a national historical park for the central Mississippi Valley region to protect the archaeological sites located on the former military installation, as well as to preserve, maintain, and interpret the natural, seismic, cultural, and recreational heritage of the central Mississippi Valley region for the benefit, education, and inspiration of present and future generations of Americans.
MISSISSIPPI VALLEY NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK, BLYTHEVILLE, ARKANSAS.
Establishment.--In order to preserve for the benefit and inspiration of the people of the United States as a national historical park certain properties in Blytheville, Arkansas, and its vicinity associated with the archaeological, natural, seismic, cultural, and recreational heritage of the Mississippi Valley region, there is established as a unit of the National Park System the Mississippi Valley National Historical Park in the State of Arkansas.
Boundaries.--The historical park shall consist of approximately 570 acres, including the real property transferred to the National Park Service at former Eaker Air Force Base under section 4 and the parcel of real property containing the archaeological site known as the Chickasawba Mound and authorized for acquisition under section 5.
The boundaries of the historical park shall also include all property authorized to be acquired for inclusion in the park by any law enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TRANSFER OF JURISDICTION, EAKER AIR FORCE BASE, FOR HISTORICAL PARK.
Transfer of Archaeological Sites.--The Secretary of Defense shall transfer, without reimbursement, to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior the parcels of real property (including improvements thereon) located at former Eaker Air Force Base, Blytheville, Arkansas, consisting of the archaeological sites depicted on the map entitled ``Arkansas Aeroplex Archaeological Sites''.
Visitor and Administrative Sites.-- (1) Transfer required.--To preserve the historical character and landscape of the main features of the historical park, the Secretary of Defense also shall transfer, without reimbursement, to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior an additional parcel of real property at former Eaker Air Force Base for the development of visitor, administrative, museum, curatorial, and maintenance facilities for the historical park.
Acreage limitation.--The parcel transferred under this subsection may not exceed 15 acres.
Selection.--The parcel to be transferred under this subsection shall be jointly selected by the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of the Interior.
Use of Land.--The Secretary of the Interior shall use the real property transferred under this section as part of the historical park.
Legal Description.--The exact acreage and legal description of the real property to be transferred under this section shall be determined by a survey satisfactory to the Secretary of Defense.
The cost of the survey shall be borne by the Secretary of the Interior.
ACQUISITION OF CHICKASAWBA MOUND FOR INCLUSION IN HISTORICAL PARK.
The Secretary of the Interior may acquire for inclusion in the historical park, by donation or exchange, the archaeological site known as the Chickasawba Mound, which was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1984.
ADMINISTRATION OF HISTORICAL PARK.
Applicable Laws.--The Secretary of the Interior shall administer the historical park in accordance with this Act and the laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (commonly known as the National Park Service Organic Act; 16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (commonly known as the Historic Sites, Buildings, and Antiquities Act; 16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) Authorized.--The Secretary of the Interior may consult and enter into cooperative agreements with interested entities and individuals to provide for the preservation, development, interpretation, and use of the historical park.
Conditions.--Any payment made by the Secretary pursuant to such a cooperative agreement shall be subject to an agreement that conversion, use, or disposal of the project assisted under the cooperative agreement for purposes contrary to the purposes of the historical park, as determined by the Secretary, shall result in a right of the United States to reimbursement of all funds made available to such project or the proportion of the increased value of the project attributable to such finds as determined at the time of such conversion, use, or disposal, whichever is greater.
Acquisition of Real Property.--Subject to sections 4 and 5, the Secretary of the Interior may acquire, within the boundaries of the historical park, real property with appropriated or donated funds, by donation, or by exchange for inclusion in the historical park.