This Act may be cited as the ``Consumer Banking Services Costs Assessment Act of 2001''.
CONSUMER BANKING COSTS ASSESSMENT.
In General.--Section 1002 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 United States Code 1811 note) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
SURVEY OF BANK FEES AND SERVICES.
Annual Survey Required.--The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall obtain annually a sample, which is representative by type and size of the institution and geographic location, of the following retail banking services and products provided by insured depository institutions and insured credit unions (along with related fees and minimum balances): ``(1) Checking and other transaction accounts.
Negotiable order of withdrawal and savings accounts.
Automated teller machine transactions.
Minimum Survey Requirement.--The annual survey described in subsection (a) shall meet the following minimum requirements: ``(1) Checking and other transaction accounts.--Data on checking and transaction accounts shall include, at a minimum, the following: ``(A) Monthly and annual fees and minimum balances to avoid such fees.
Fees imposed for using a teller or other institution employee.
Stop payment order fees.
Deposit items returned fees.
Availability of no-cost or low-cost accounts for consumers who maintain low balances.
Negotiable order of withdrawal accounts and savings accounts.--Data on negotiable order of withdrawal accounts and savings accounts shall include, at a minimum, the following: ``(A) Monthly and annual fees and minimum balances to avoid such fees.
Rate at which interest is paid to consumers.
Check processing fees for negotiable order of withdrawal accounts.
Check printing fees for negotiable order of withdrawal accounts.
Fees imposed for using a teller or other institution employee.
Stop payment order fees for negotiable order of withdrawal accounts.
Nonsufficient fund fees for negotiable order of withdrawal accounts.
Overdraft fees for negotiable order of withdrawal accounts.
Deposit items returned fees.
Availability of no-cost or low-cost accounts for consumers who maintain low balances.
Automated teller transactions.--Data on automated teller machine transactions shall include, at a minimum, the following: ``(A) Annual and monthly fees.
Fees charged to customers for withdrawals, deposits, transfers between accounts, balance inquiries through institution-owned machines.
Fees charged to customers for withdrawals, deposits, transfers between accounts, balance inquiries through machines owned by others.
Fees charged to noncustomers for withdrawals, deposits, transfers between accounts, balance inquiries through institution-owned machines.
Other electronic transactions.--Data on other electronic transactions shall include, at a minimum, the following: ``(A) Wire transfer fees.
Fees related to payments made over the Internet or through other electronic means.
Credit card charges and fees.--Data related to credit cards shall include, at a minimum, the following: ``(A) Application fees.
Annual and monthly fees.
Rates of interest charged for purchases and cash advances, when an account is not in default.
Rates of interest charged for purchases and cash advances, when an account is in default.
Average annual finance charges paid by customers.
Cash advance and convenience check fees.
Foreign currency conversion fees.
Other fees and charges.--Data on any other fees and charges that the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System determines to be appropriate to meet the purposes of this section.
Annual Report to Congress Required.-- ``(1) Preparation.--The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall prepare a report of the results of each survey conducted pursuant to subsections (a) and (b).
Contents of the report.--In addition to the data required to be collected pursuant to subsections (a) and (b), each report prepared pursuant to paragraph (1) shall include a description of any discernible trend, in the Nation as a whole, in each of the 50 States, and in each metropolitan statistical area (as defined by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget), in the cost and availability of the retail banking services, including those described in subsections (a) and (b) (including related fees and minimum balances), that delineates differences between institutions on the basis of the type of institution, the size of the institution and any engagement of the institution in multistate activity.
Submission to congress.--The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall submit an annual report to the Congress not later than June 1, 2002, and not later than June 1 of each subsequent year.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the term `insured depository institution' has the meaning given such term in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, and the term `insured credit union' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of the Federal Credit Union Act.''.
Repeal of Sunset Provision.--Section 108 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 is hereby repealed.
Nonapplicability of Other Provision of Law.--Section 3003(a)(1) of the Federal Reports Elimination and Sunset Act of 1995 (31 United States Code 1113 note) shall not apply to any report required to be submitted under section 1002(b) of Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989.