This Act may be cited as the ``Patient Safety and Health Care Whistleblower Protection Act of 1998''.
PROHIBITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION OR RETALIATION.
In General.--No person shall retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any health care worker because the worker (or any person acting on behalf of the worker) in good faith-- (1) engaged in any disclosure of information relating to the care, services, or conditions of a health care entity; (2) advocated on behalf of a patient or patients with respect to the care, services, or conditions of a health care entity; or (3) initiated, cooperated, or otherwise participated in any investigation or proceeding of any governmental entity relating to the care, services, or conditions of a health care entity.
Attempts.--No person shall retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any health care worker because the health care worker has attempted or has an intention to engage in an action described in subsection (a).
Restrictions on Reporting Prohibited.--No person shall by contract, policy, or procedure prohibit or restrict any health care worker from engaging in any action for which a protection against discrimination or retaliation is provided under subsection (a).
Confidential Information.--This section does not protect disclosures that would violate Federal or State law or diminish or impair the rights of any person to the continued protection of confidentiality of communications provided by State or Federal law.
Good Faith Action.--A health care worker with respect to the conduct described in subsection (a)(1) shall be considered to be acting in good faith if the health care worker reasonably believes that-- (1) the information is true; and (2) the information disclosed by the health care worker-- (A) evidences a violation of any law, rule, or regulation, or of a generally recognized professional or clinical standard; or (B) relates to care, services, or conditions which potentially endangers one or more patients or workers or the public.
CONFIDENTIALITY OF COMPLAINTS TO GOVERNMENT AGENCIES.
The identity of a health care worker who complains in good faith to a government agency or department about the quality of care, services, or conditions of a health care entity shall remain confidential and shall not be disclosed by any person except upon the knowing written consent of the health care worker and except in the case in which there is imminent danger to health or public safety or an imminent violation of criminal law.
Private Cause of Action.-- (1) Any health care worker who believes that he or she has been retaliated or discriminated against in violation of section 2 may file a civil action in any Federal or State court of competent jurisdiction against the person believed to have violated section 2.
If the court determines that a violation of section 2 has occurred, the court shall award such damages which result from the unlawful act or acts, including compensatory damages, reinstatement, reimbursement of any wages, salary, employment benefits, or other compensation denied or lost to such employee by reason of the violation, as well as punitive damages, attorneys' fees, and costs (including expert witness fees).
The court shall award interest on the amount of damages awarded at the prevailing rate.
The court may issue temporary, preliminary, and permanent injunctive relief restraining violations of this law, including the restraint of any withholding of the payment of wages, salary, employment benefits, or other compensation, plus interest, found by the court to be due and the restraint of any other change in the terms and conditions of employment and may award such other equitable relief as may be appropriate, including employment, reinstatement, and promotion.
An action may be brought under this subsection not later than 2 years after the date of the last event constituting the alleged violation for which the action is brought.
Civil Penalty.--Any person who violates a provision of section 2 shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for each violation.
In determining the amount of any penalty under this subsection, the appropriateness of such penalty to the size of the business of the person charged and the gravity of the violation shall be considered.
The amount of any penalty under this subsection, when finally determined, may be-- (1) deducted from any sums owing by the United States to the person charged; or (2) ordered by the court, in an action brought for a violation of section 2 brought by the health care worker (or workers) who suffered retaliation or discrimination.
Criminal Penalty.--Any person who willfully and repeatedly violates a provision of section 2 and such violation is related to-- (1) a pattern or practice of such violations, (2) quality of care, services, or conditions which would likely lead to serious injury or death for patients or health care workers, or (3) retaliation against a health care worker which could lead to serious injury or death, shall be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, imprisoned for not more than 1 year, or both.
On Complainant.--In any civil action brought under this Act, the complainant shall have the initial burden of making a prima facie showing that any behavior described in subsections (a) through (c) of section 2 was a contributing factor in the adverse action or inaction alleged in the complaint.
A prima facie case shall be established if the complainant can show that-- (1) the respondent knew of the complainant's protected activities at the time that the alleged unfavorable action or inaction was taken; and (2) the discriminatory action occurred within a period of time such that a reasonable person could conclude that an activity protected by section 2(a) or 2(b) was a contributing factor in the discriminatory treatment.
On Respondent.--Once the complainant establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the respondent to demonstrate, by clear and convincing evidence, that it would have taken the same adverse action or inaction in the absence of such behavior.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Health care entity.--The term ``health care entity'' includes a health care facility (such as a hospital, clinic, nursing facility, or other provider of health care services) or a health care carrier (such as an insurance plan or health maintenance organization).
Such term also includes those State, Federal, or local agencies whose responsibilities include oversight of health care or health care entities.
Health care worker.--The term ``health care worker'' includes a worker directly employed by a health care entity as well as an employee of a subcontractor or independent contractor that provides supplies or services to a health care entity.
Such term also includes a nurse, nurse's aide, laboratory technician, physician, intern, resident, clerical employee, laundry staff, kitchen staff, maintenance worker, and a current or former worker or contractor.
Discrimination or retaliation.--The term ``discrimination or retaliation'' includes a threat, intimidation, or any adverse change in a health care worker's wages, benefits, or terms or conditions of employment.
In the case of a health care worker who is not an employee of the health care entity, such term includes any adverse action taken against the worker or the worker's employer, including the cancellation of or refusal to renew a contract with the health care worker or the employer.
Care, services, or conditions.--The term ``care, services, or conditions'' includes, with respect to a health care entity, all aspects of the care or treatment of patients by the health care entity (whether on an inpatient or outpatient basis), any health care related services provided directly or indirectly to a patient of the entity, the provision or use of any supplies or equipment utilized in connection with the provision of such health care services, the coverage or provision of benefits under a health insurance policy or by a health maintenance organization, the processing of claims under a health insurance policy, and any conditions that exist in any facility of the entity which affect or may affect the quality or safety of the health care services provided to patients.
Person.--The term ``person'' includes an institution, Federal, State, or local governmental entity, or any other public or private entity.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Labor.
In General.--Each health care entity shall post and keep posted, in conspicuous places on the premises of the health care entity where notices to employees and applicants for employment are customarily posted, a notice, to be prepared or approved by the Secretary, setting forth excerpts from, or summaries of, the pertinent provisions of this Act and information pertaining to the filing of a charge under section 2.
Penalty.--Any employer that willfully violates this section may be assessed by the Secretary a civil penalty not to exceed $100 for each separate offense.
Nothing in this Act preempts any other law, and nothing in this Act shall be construed or interpreted to impair or diminish in any way the authority of any State to enact and enforce any law which provides equivalent or greater protections for health care workers or the disclosure of unsafe practices or conditions in the health care industry.
This Act shall apply to acts of retaliation or discrimination occurring on or after the first day of the first month that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.