This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Health Office Act of 1994''.
PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Part A of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``public health service office of women's health ``Sec.
Establishment of Office.--There is established an Office of Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Office') within the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health.
Assistant Secretary.--There shall be in the Department of Health and Human Services a Deputy Assistant Secretary for Women's Health, who shall be the head of the Office.
The Secretary, acting through such Deputy Assistant Secretary, shall carry out this section.
Duties.--The Secretary, acting through the Office, shall, with respect to the health concerns of women-- ``(1) establish short-range and long-range goals and objectives and coordinate all other activities within the Department of Health and Human Services that relate to disease prevention, health promotion, service delivery, and research concerning women; ``(2) advise the Assistant Secretary for Health concerning scientific, legal, ethical, and policy issues relating to women's health; ``(3) monitor Public Health Service agency and regional activities regarding women's health, and coordinate activities of such agency Offices of Women's Health; ``(4) establish a women's health resource center to facilitate the exchange of information regarding matters relating to health information and health promotion, preventive health services, and education in the appropriate use of health care, to facilitate access to such information, to assist in the analysis of issues and problems relating to such matters, and to provide technical assistance with respect to the exchange of such information (including facilitating the development of materials for such technical assistance); and ``(5) coordinate efforts to promote women's health programs and policies in the voluntary and corporate sectors.
Reports.--Not later than January 31, 1995, and January 31 of each second year thereafter, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report describing the activities carried out under this section during the preceding 2 fiscal years.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1996.''.
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Part A of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) (as amended by section 2) is further amended by adding at the end the following section: ``centers for disease control and prevention office of women's health ``Sec.
Establishment.--There is established within the Office of the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention an office to be known as the Office of Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Office').
The Office shall be headed by a director who shall be appointed by the Director of the Centers.
Purpose.--The Director of the Office shall-- ``(1) determine the current level of the Centers activity regarding women's health conditions, across age, biological, and sociocultural contexts, in all aspects of the Centers work, including prevention programs, public and professional education, services, and treatment; ``(2) establish short-range and long-range goals and objectives for women's health and coordinate all other activities within the Centers that relate to prevention, research, education and training, service delivery, and policy development; ``(3) identify projects in women's health that should be conducted or supported by the National Centers; ``(4) consult with health professionals, non-governmental organizations, consumer organizations, women's health professionals, and other individuals and groups, as appropriate, on the policy of the Centers with regard to women; and ``(5) coordinate agency activities on women's health with the Public Health Service Office of Women's Health established under section 310A.
Coordinating Committee.-- ``(1) Establishment.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Director of the Office shall establish a committee to be known as the Coordinating Committee on Research on Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this subsection as the `Coordinating Committee').
Composition.--The Coordinating Committee shall be composed of the Directors of the National Centers.
Chairperson.--The Director of the Office shall serve as the chairperson of the Coordinating Committee.
Duties.--With respect to women's health, the Coordinating Committee shall assist the Director of the Office in-- ``(A) identifying the need for programs and activities that focus on women's health; ``(B) identifying needs regarding the coordination of activities, including intramural and extramural multidisciplinary activities; and ``(C) making recommendations to the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention concerning findings made under subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Reports.--Not later than January 31, 1995, and January 31 of each second year thereafter, the Director shall prepare and submit to the Director of the Public Health Service Office of Women's Health, a report describing the activities carried out under this section during the preceding 2 fiscal years.
Definition.--As used in this section the term `women's health conditions', with respect to women of all age, ethnic, and racial groups, means all diseases, disorders, and conditions-- ``(1) unique to, more serious, or more prevalent in women; and ``(2) for which the factors of medical risk or type of medical intervention are different for women, or for which it is unknown whether such factors or types are different for women.''.
AGENCY FOR HEALTH CARE POLICY AND RESEARCH OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Part C of title IX of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 299c et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 927 as section 928; and (2) by inserting after section 926 the following section: ``SEC.
OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Establishment.--There is established within the Office of the Director of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research an office to be known as the Office of Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Office').
The Office shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by the Director of the Agency.
Purpose.--The Director of the Office shall-- ``(1) determine the current Agency level of activity regarding women's health, across age, biological, and sociocultural contexts, in all aspects of Agency work, including drafting clinical practice guidelines, and conducting research into patient outcomes, delivery of health care services, and access to health care; ``(2) establish short-range and long-range goals and objectives for research important to women's health and coordinate all other activities within the Agency that relate to health services and medical effectiveness research; ``(3) identify projects in women's health that should be conducted or supported by the Agency; ``(4) consult with health professionals, non-governmental organizations, consumer organizations, women's health professionals, and other individuals and groups, as appropriate, on Agency policy with regard to women; and ``(5) coordinate agency activities on women's health with the Public Health Service Office of Women's Health established under section 310A.
Coordinating Committee.-- ``(1) Establishment.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Director of the Office shall establish a committee to be known as the Coordinating Committee on Research on Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this subsection as the `Coordinating Committee').
Composition.--The Coordinating Committee shall be composed of the Directors of the Offices.
Chairperson.--The Director of the Office shall serve as the chairperson of the Coordinating Committee.
Duties.--With respect to research on women's health, the Coordinating Committee shall assist the Director of the Office in-- ``(A) identifying the need for such research, and making an estimate each fiscal year of the funds needed to adequately support the research; ``(B) identifying needs regarding the coordination of research activities, including intramural and extramural multidisciplinary activities; and ``(C) making recommendations to the Director of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research concerning findings made under subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Reports.--Not later than January 31, 1995, and January 31 of each second year thereafter, the Director shall prepare and submit to the Director of the Public Health Service Office of Women's Health, a report describing the activities carried out under this section during the preceding 2 fiscal years.''.
HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Title VII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 901 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``office of women's health ``Sec.
Establishment.--There is established within the Office of the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration an office to be known as the Office of Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Office').
The Office shall be headed by a director who shall be appointed by the Director of the Administration.
Purpose.--The Director of the Office shall-- ``(1) determine the current agency level of activity regarding women's health across age, biological, and sociocultural contexts; ``(2) establish short-range and long-range goals and objectives for women's health and coordinate all other activities within the agency that relate to health care provider training, health service delivery, research, and demonstration projects; ``(3) identify projects in women's health that should be conducted or supported by the Bureaus; ``(4) consult with health professionals, non-governmental organizations, consumer organizations, women's health professionals, and other individuals and groups, as appropriate, on agency policy with regard to women; and ``(5) coordinate agency activities on women's health with the Public Health Service Office of Women's Health established under section 310A of the Public Health Service Act.
Coordinating Committee.-- ``(1) Establishment.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Director of the Office shall establish a committee to be known as the Coordinating Committee on Research on Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this subsection as the `Coordinating Committee').
Composition.--The Coordinating Committee shall be composed of the Directors of the Bureaus.
Chairperson.--The Director of the Office shall serve as the Chairperson of the Coordinating Committee.
Duties.--With respect to research on women's health, the Coordinating Committee shall assist the Director of the Office in-- ``(A) identifying the need for programs and activities that focus on women's health; ``(B) identifying needs regarding the coordination of activities, including intramural and extramural multidisciplinary activities; and ``(C) making recommendations to the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention concerning findings made under subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Reports.--Not later than January 31, 1995, and January 31 of each second year thereafter, the Director of the Office shall prepare and submit to the Director of the Public Health Service Office of Women's Health, a report describing the activities carried out under this section during the preceding 2 fiscal years.''.
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Chapter IX of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 391 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
OFFICE OF WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Establishment.--There is established within the Office of the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration an office to be known as the Office of Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Office').
The Office shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by the Commissioner of the Administration.
Purpose.--The Director of the Office shall-- ``(1) determine current Commission levels of activity regarding women's participation in clinical trials the study of gender differences in the testing of drugs, medical devices, and biological products, across, age, sociocultural, and, where deemed appropriate, biological contexts; ``(2) establish short-range and long-range goals and objectives for adequate inclusion of women in all Commission protocols and policies; ``(3) provide guidance or criteria for drug and device manufacturers to use in determining the extent and sufficiency of female representation in clinical trials; ``(4) consult with pharmaceutical manufacturers, health professionals with expertise in women's issues, consumer organizations, and women's health professionals on Commission policy with regard to women; ``(5) make annual estimates of funds needed to monitor clinical trials in accordance with needs that are identified; and ``(6) coordinate Commission activities on women's health with the Public Health Service Office of Women's Health established under section 310A of the Public Health Service Act.
Coordinating Committee.-- ``(1) Establishment.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Director of the Office shall establish a committee to be known as the Coordinating Committee on Women's Health (hereafter referred to in this subsection as the `Coordinating Committee').
Composition.--The Coordinating Committee shall be composed of the Directors of the Food and Drug Administration Centers.
Chairperson.--The Director of the Office shall serve as the Chairperson of the Coordinating Committee.
Duties.--With respect to studies on women's health, the Coordinating Committee shall assist the Director of the Office in-- ``(A) identifying the need for further studies in specific areas of women's health that fall within the mission of the Commission, and developing strategies to foster such studies; ``(B) identifying needs regarding the coordination of Commission activities, including intramural and extramural studies; ``(C) maintaining the Commission's focus in areas of importance to women; ``(D) supporting the development of methodologies to determine the circumstances in which obtaining data specific to women (including data relating to the age of women and the membership of women in ethnic or racial groups) is an appropriate function of clinical trials of treatments and therapies; ``(E) supporting the development and expansion of clinical trials of treatments and therapies for which obtaining such data has been determined to be an appropriate function; and ``(F) encouraging the Food and Drug Administration Centers to conduct and support such studies, including such clinical trials.
Reports.--Not later than January 31, 1995, and January 31 of each second year thereafter, the Director shall prepare and submit to the Director of the Public Health Service Office of Women's Health, a report describing the activities carried out under this section during the preceding 2 fiscal years.