This Act may be cited as the ``Mississippi Sioux Tribes Judgment Fund Distribution Act of 1996''.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Covered indian tribe.--The term ``covered Indian tribe'' means an Indian tribe listed in section 4(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Tribal governing body.--The term ``tribal governing body'' means the duly elected governing body of a covered Indian tribe.
DISTRIBUTION TO, AND USE OF CERTAIN FUNDS BY, THE SISSETON AND WAHPETON TRIBES OF SIOUX INDIANS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including Public Law 92-555 (25 United States Code 1300d et sequentes), any funds made available by appropriations under Public Law 90-352 to the Sisseton and Wahpeton Tribes of Sioux Indians to pay a judgment in favor of the Tribes in Indian Claims Commission dockets numbered 142 and 359, including interest, after payment of attorney fees and other expenses, that, as of the date of enactment of this Act, have not been distributed, shall be distributed and used in accordance with this Act.
DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS TO TRIBES.
In General.--Subject to section 5, as soon as practicable after the date that is 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall distribute an aggregate amount, equal to the funds described in section 3 reduced by $1,469,831.50, as follows: (1) 28.9276 percent of such amount shall be distributed to the tribal governing body of the Devils Lake Sioux Tribe of North Dakota.
57.3145 percent of such amount shall be distributed to the tribal governing body of the Sisseton and Wahpeton Sioux Tribe of South Dakota.
13.7579 percent of such amount shall be distributed to the tribal governing body of the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Reservation in Montana, as designated under subsection (b).
Tribal Governing Body of Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of Fort Peck Reservation.--For purposes of making distributions of funds pursuant to this Act, the Sisseton and Wahpeton Sioux Council of the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes shall act as the governing body of the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Reservation.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBAL TRUST FUNDS.
In General.--As a condition to receiving funds distributed under section 4, each tribal governing body referred to in section 4(a) shall establish a trust fund for the benefit of the covered Indian tribe under the jurisdiction of that tribal governing body, consisting of-- (1) amounts deposited into the trust fund; and (2) any interest that accrues from investments made from amounts deposited into the trust fund.
Trustee.--Each tribal governing body that establishes a trust fund under this section shall-- (1) serve as the trustee of the trust fund; and (2) administer the trust fund in accordance with section 6.
USE OF DISTRIBUTED FUNDS.
Prohibition.--No funds distributed to a covered Indian tribe under section 4 may be used to make per capita payments to members of the covered Indian tribe.
Purposes.--The funds distributed under section 4 may be used by a tribal governing body referred to in section 4(a) only for the purpose of making investments or expenditures that the tribal governing body determines to be reasonably related to-- (1) economic development that is beneficial to the covered Indian tribe; (2) the development of resources of the covered Indian tribe; or (3) the development of a program that is beneficial to members of the covered Indian tribe, including educational and social welfare programs.
Audits.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct an annual audit to determine whether each tribal governing body referred to in section 4(a) is managing the trust fund established by the tribal governing body under section 5 in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Action by the secretary.-- (A) In general.--If, on the basis of an audit conducted under paragraph (1), the Secretary determines that a covered Indian tribe is not managing the trust fund established by the tribal governing body under section 5 in accordance with the requirements of this section, the Secretary shall require the covered Indian tribe to take remedial action to achieve compliance.
Appointment of independent trustee.--If, after a reasonable period of time specified by the Secretary, a covered Indian tribe does not take remedial action under subparagraph (A), the Secretary, in consultation with the tribal governing body of the covered Indian tribe, shall appoint an independent trustee to manage the trust fund established by the tribal governing body under section 5.
EFFECT OF PAYMENTS TO COVERED INDIAN TRIBES ON BENEFITS.
In General.--A payment made to a covered Indian tribe or an individual under this Act shall not-- (1) for purposes of determining the eligibility for a Federal service or program of a covered Indian tribe, household, or individual, be treated as income or resources; or (2) otherwise result in the reduction or denial of any service or program to which, pursuant to Federal law (including the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 301 et sequentes)), the covered Indian tribe, household, or individual would otherwise be entitled.
Tax Treatment.--A payment made to a covered Indian tribe or individual under this Act shall not be subject to any Federal or State income tax.
DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS TO LINEAL DESCENDANTS.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, of the funds described in section 3, the Secretary shall, in the manner prescribed in section 202(c) of Public Law 92-555 (25 United States Code 1300d- 4(c)), distribute an amount equal to $1,469,831.50 to the lineal descendants of the Sisseton and Wahpeton Tribes of Sioux Indians.