TITLE I--BOOT CAMP GRANTS SEC.
In General.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance (referred to in this title as the ``Director'') may make grants available to States, for use by States and units of local government in the States, for the purpose of establishing boot camp prisons.
Priority.--Priority shall be given to applications from States which will use funds to establish a boot camp prison by utilizing surplus property of the Federal Government, including military bases that are no longer in use.
Eligibility.--To be eligible for Federal funding, a boot camp prison operated by a State shall provide-- (1) an organized program of manual labor and discipline designed to build character, instill a sense of maturity, promote a positive self-image for offenders and foster a sense of respect for authority; (2) training or vocational education which provides inmates with the tools necessary to confront life tasks in a responsible manner and to find employment after release; (3) treatment and counseling to all inmates who are addicted to drugs or alcohol; (4) a corrective, therapeutic environment designed to help modify the offender's criminal thought and behavioral patterns so that offenders are less likely to reoffend and more likely to behave purposefully and productively as responsible citizens; (5) an agreement that specifies procedures to ensure that boot camp prison inmates are in compliance with the requirements of the boot camp and that inmates in noncompliance are resentenced by the court to traditional prisons; and (6) a community adjustment phase that begins after an inmate has successfully completed a boot camp prison term which includes the obligations and restrictions of special or normal probation or parole, substance abuse treatment, and other special conditions as needed or ordered by a sentencing judge.
In General.--(1) To request a grant under this title, the chief executive of a State shall submit an application to the Director in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Such application shall include assurances that Federal funds received under this title shall be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under this title.
State Office.--The office designated under section 507 of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3757)-- (1) shall prepare the application as required by the Director; and (2) shall administer grant funds received under this title, including review of spending, processing, progress, financial reporting, technical assistance, grant adjustments, accounting, auditing, and fund disbursement.
104. REVIEW OF STATE APPLICATIONS.
In General.--The Bureau shall make a grant under this title to carry out the projects described in the application submitted by such applicant under section 103 upon determining that-- (1) the application is consistent with the requirements of this section; and (2) before the approval of the application, the Bureau has made an affirmative finding in writing that the proposed project has been reviewed in accordance with this title.
Approval.--Each application submitted under section 103 shall be considered approved, in whole or in part, by the Bureau not later than 45 days after first received unless the Bureau informs the applicant of specific reasons for disapproval.
ALLOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
Demonstration Projects.--Of the total amount of funds made available under this title, the Director may use not more than 5 percent of such funds for demonstration projects that are of national significance.
State Distribution.--Of the funds remaining after the distribution under subsection (a), there shall be allocated to each of the participating States an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount of funds made available under this title as the number of offenders (eligible for boot camp placement) of such State bears to the number of eligible offenders in all the participating States.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of a grant made under this title may not exceed 75 percent of the total costs of establishing and maintaining the boot camp described in the application submitted under section 103(a) for the fiscal year for which the boot camp receives Federal assistance.
Unused Funds.--If the Director determines, on the basis of information available during any fiscal year, that a portion of the funds allocated to a State for such fiscal year will not be used, the Director shall have discretion to award such remaining funds to other participating States for projects related to the establishment, evaluation, or effectiveness of prison boot camps.
Each State that receives a grant under this title shall submit to the Director an evaluation not later than March 1 of each year in accordance with guidelines issued by the Director and in consultation with the National Institute of Justice.
Such evaluations must include a report on the rates of recidivism among boot camp participants as well as an analysis of the boot camp's effectiveness within the entire prison system of a State.
There are authorized to be appropriated $500,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996 to carry out this title.
TITLE II--BOOT CAMP OPTION FOR NONVIOLENT DRUG OFFENDERS SEC.
SPECIAL SENTENCING RULE FOR CERTAIN CASES.
Section 404 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 844) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``special sentencing rule for certain cases ``(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the case of a defendant who is convicted of an offense under this section that did not involve violence, the court may sentence that defendant to incarceration in an intensive confinement center (commonly called a boot camp prison), and any mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment otherwise required by this section shall not apply.
However, at any time during that incarceration, the appropriate authorities at the intensive confinement center may inform the court that the defendant is in substantial noncompliance with the requirements of the center, and the court may resentence the defendant to a term that is not less than the sentence required without regard to this subsection.