This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Traumatic Brain Injury Treatment Act of 2007''.
SCREENING, REHABILITATION, AND TREATMENT FOR TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY.
Screening, Rehabilitation, and Treatment for Traumatic Brain Injury.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER IX--TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY ``Sec.
Screening for traumatic brain injuries ``(a) Screening Program.--The Secretary shall establish a program to screen veterans who are eligible for hospital care, medical services, and nursing home care under section 1710(e)(1)(D) of this title for symptoms of traumatic brain injury.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report containing the following information: ``(1) The number of veterans screened under the program during the year preceding such report.
The prevalence of traumatic brain injury symptoms among the veterans screened under the program.
Recommendations for improving care and services to veterans exhibiting symptoms of traumatic brain injury.
Comprehensive program for long-term traumatic brain injury rehabilitation ``(a) Comprehensive Program.--The Secretary shall develop and carry out a comprehensive program of long-term care for post-acute traumatic brain injury rehabilitation that includes residential, community, and home-based components utilizing interdisciplinary treatment teams.
Location of Program.--The Secretary shall carry out the program developed under subsection (a) in four geographically dispersed polytrauma network sites designated by the Secretary.
Eligibility.--A veteran is eligible for care under the program developed under subsection (a) if the veteran is otherwise eligible for care under this chapter and-- ``(1) served on active duty in a theater of combat operations (as determined by the Secretary in consultation with the Secretary of Defense) during a period of war after the Persian Gulf War, or in combat against a hostile force during a period of hostilities (as defined in section 1712A(a)(2)(B) of this title) after November 11, 1998; ``(2) is diagnosed as suffering from moderate to severe traumatic brain injury; and ``(3) is unable to manage routine activities of daily living without supervision or assistance.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report containing the following information: ``(1) A description of the operation of the program.
The number of veterans provided care under the program during the year preceding such report.
The annual cost of operating the program.
Traumatic brain injury transition offices ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a traumatic brain injury transition office at each Department polytrauma network site for the purposes of coordinating the provision of health-care and services to veterans who suffer from moderate to severe traumatic brain injuries and are in need of health-care and services not immediately offered by the Department.
Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary, through each such office established under subsection (a), shall have the authority to arrange for the provision of health-care and services through cooperative agreements with appropriate public or private entities that have established long-term neurobehavioral rehabilitation and recovery programs.
Traumatic brain injury registry ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish and maintain a registry to be known as the `Traumatic Brain Injury Veterans' Health Registry' (in this section referred to as the `Registry').
Description.--The Registry shall include the following information: ``(1) A list containing the name of each individual who served as a member of the Armed Forces in Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom who exhibits symptoms associated with traumatic brain injury and who-- ``(A) applies for care and services from the Department under this chapter; or ``(B) files a claim for compensation under chapter 11 of this title on the basis of any disability which may be associated with such service; and ``(2) any relevant medical data relating to the health status of an individual described in paragraph (1) and any other information the Secretary considers relevant and appropriate with respect to such an individual if the individual-- ``(A) grants permission to the Secretary to include such information in the Registry; or ``(B) is deceased at the time such individual is listed in the Registry.
Notification.--The Secretary shall notify individuals listed in the Registry of significant developments in research on the health consequences of military service in the Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom theaters of operations.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of contents at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``subchapter ix--traumatic brain injury ``1791.
Screening for traumatic brain injuries.
Comprehensive program for long-term traumatic brain injury rehabilitation.
Traumatic brain injury transition offices.
Traumatic brain injury registry.''.
Effective Date.--The Secretary shall implement the requirements of subchapter IX of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.