PRESERVATION AND RESTORATION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AT HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES.
Title V of the Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-333; 1110 United States Statutes at Large 4153) is amended by striking section 507 and inserting the following: ``SEC.
PRESERVATION AND RESTORATION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AT HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are-- ``(1) to identify historic buildings and structures at historically black colleges and universities that are in need of preservation and restoration; and ``(2) to provide grants to historically black colleges and universities to preserve and restore those buildings and structures.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Historically black college or university.--The term `historically black college or university' has the meaning given the term `part B institution' in section 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1061).
Historic building or structure.--The term `historic building or structure' means a building or structure listed, or eligible to be listed, on the National Register of Historic Places.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a program to provide for the preservation and restoration of historic buildings and structures at historically black colleges and universities.
Assessment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, through the National Trust for Historic Preservation, shall-- ``(1) assess all historic buildings and structures located at historically black colleges and universities; ``(2) obtain an independent estimate of the complete cost of restoring, renovating, or rehabilitating the historic buildings or structures (including the cost of compliance with applicable laws (including regulations) relating to handicapped access to the buildings or structures); and ``(3) determine the fiscal capacity of each historically black college or university to complete the restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation of the historic buildings and structures, including the ability of the historically black college or university to provide the non-Federal share under subsection (f)(1).
Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--Not less often than once each fiscal year, the Secretary shall award not less than 15 grants to historically black colleges and universities to pay the Federal share of the cost of restoring, renovating, or rehabilitating historic buildings and structures located on the campuses of historically black colleges and universities.
Amount.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount of a grant under paragraph (1) shall be equal to the difference between-- ``(i) the amount required to restore, renovate, or rehabilitate the historic building or structure; and ``(ii) unless the non-Federal share is waived under subsection (f)(2), the amount of the non-Federal share required under subsection (f)(1).
Limitation.--The amount of a grant determined under subparagraph (A) shall not exceed the cost of completing the restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation of a historic building or structure.
Considerations.--In awarding grants under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider, based on the assessment under subsection (d), the relative severity of the threat to the historic value and status of the historic building or structure, including-- ``(A) the extent of the physical deterioration of the historic building or structure because of lack of use or inadequate maintenance; ``(B) the demand for use of the historic building or structure, or the land on which the historic building or structure is located, because of-- ``(i) encroachment from the surrounding community; or ``(ii) the need to expand the campus of the historically black college or university; and ``(C) the extent of the lack of resources necessary to assess the need for, and to pay the cost of, restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation of historic buildings or structures located on the campus of the historically black college or university.
Conditions.--As a condition of the receipt of a grant for a historic building or structure under paragraph (1), a grant recipient shall agree-- ``(A) that, for a period of time specified by the Secretary-- ``(i) no alteration shall be made to the historic building or structure without the approval of the Secretary; ``(ii) reasonable public access to the historic building or structure restored, renovated, or rehabilitated using grant funds shall be permitted by the grant recipient for interpretive and educational purposes; and ``(iii) the grant recipient shall not receive any other funds under the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et seq.
); and ``(B) to provide the non-Federal share required under subsection (f)(1) unless the requirement is waived under subsection (f)(2).
Cost Sharing.-- ``(1) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost of a project to restore, renovate, or rehabilitate a historic building or structure under this section shall be 30 percent.
Waiver.-- ``(A) In general.--In a case in which the historically black college or university does not have an endowment or has an endowment of less than $50,000,000, the Secretary shall waive the non-Federal share required under paragraph (1).
Applicability.--Subparagraph (A) shall apply to any grant provided to a historically black college or university under this section after November 12, 1996.
Funding.-- ``(1) In general.--Of funds of the Historic Preservation Fund established by section 108 of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470h), $60,000,000 shall be made available to the Secretary to carry out this section for fiscal year 2003 and each fiscal year thereafter.
Allocation.--Of amounts made available under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall make a grant to each historically black college or university, in order of priority based on the assessment under subsection (d), in an amount determined under subsection (e)(2).