That this Act may be cited as the ``Assets for Independence Act Amendments of 2000''.
MATCHING CONTRIBUTIONS UNAVAILABLE FOR EMERGENCY WITHDRAWALS.
Section 404(5)(A)(v) of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended by striking ``, or enabling the eligible individual to make an emergency withdrawal''.
Section 404(7)(A) of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``or'' at the end thereof; (2) in clause (ii), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iii) an entity that-- ``(I) is-- ``(aa) a credit union designated as a low-income credit union by the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA); or ``(bb) an organization designated as a community development financial institution by the Secretary of the Treasury (or the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund); and ``(II) can demonstrate a collaborative relationship with a local community-based organization whose activities are designed to address poverty in the community and the needs of community members for economic independence and stability.''.
Section 404(8)(B)(i) of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended by striking ``100'' and inserting ``120''.
INCREASED SET-ASIDE FOR ECONOMIC LITERACY TRAINING AND ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
Section 407(c)(3) of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended-- (1) by striking ``9.5'' and inserting ``15''; and (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Of the total amount specified in this paragraph, not more than 7.5 percent shall be used for administrative functions under paragraph (1)(C), including program management, reporting requirements, recruitment and enrollment of individuals, and monitoring.
The remainder of the total amount specified in this paragraph (not including the amount specified for use for the purposes described in paragraph (1)(D)) shall be used for nonadministrative functions described in paragraph (1)(A), including case management, budgeting, economic literacy, and credit counseling.
If the cost of nonadministrative functions described in paragraph (1)(A) is less than 5.5 percent of the total amount specified in this paragraph, such excess funds may be used for administrative functions.''.
Section 408(a)(1) of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended by striking ``does not exceed'' and inserting ``is equal to or less than 200 percent of the poverty line (as determined by the Office of Management and Budget) or''.
REVISED ANNUAL PROGRESS REPORT DEADLINE.
In General.--Section 412(c) of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended by striking ``calendar'' and inserting ``project''.
Transitional Deadline.--Notwithstanding the amendment made by subsection (a), the submission of the initial report of a qualified entity under section 412(c) shall not be required prior to the date that is 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
REVISED INTERIM EVALUATION REPORT DEADLINE.
In General.--Section 414(d)(1) of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended by striking ``calendar'' and inserting ``project''.
Transitional Deadline.--Notwithstanding the amendment made by subsection (a), the submission of the initial interim report of the Secretary under section 412(c) shall not be required prior to the date that is 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
INCREASED APPROPRIATIONS FOR EVALUATION EXPENSES.
Subsection (e) of section 414 of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Evaluation Expenses.--Of the amount appropriated under section 416 for a fiscal year, the Secretary may expend not more than $500,000 for such fiscal year to carry out the objectives of this section.''.
NO REDUCTION IN BENEFITS.
Section 415 of the Assets for Independence Act (42 United States Code 604 note) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
NO REDUCTION IN BENEFITS.
``Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law (other than the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) that requires consideration of 1 or more financial circumstances of an individual, for the purpose of determining eligibility to receive, or the amount of, any assistance or benefit authorized by such law to be provided to or for the benefit of such individual, funds (including interest accruing) in an individual development account under this Act shall be disregarded for such purpose with respect to any period during which such individual maintains or makes contributions into such an account.