Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The placement of commercial telecommunications, radio, or television towers near homes can greatly reduce the value of such homes, destroy the views from such homes, and reduce substantially the desire to live in such homes.
States and localities should be able to exercise control over the siting and modification of such towers through the use of zoning, planned growth, and other controls relating to the protection of the environment and public safety.
There are alternatives to the construction of towers to meet telecommunications and broadcast needs, including the co- location of antennae on existing towers or structures, towerless PCS-Over-Cable telephone service, satellite television systems, low-Earth orbit satellite communication networks, and other alternative technologies.
There are alternative methods of designing towers to meet telecommunications and broadcast needs, including the use of small towers that do not require blinking aircraft safety lights, break skylines, or protrude above tree canopies and that are camouflaged or disguised to blend with their surroundings, or both.
On August 19, 1997, the Federal Communications Commission issued a proposed rule, MM Docket No.
97-182, which would preempt the application of State and local zoning and land use ordinances regarding the placement of broadcast transmission facilities.
It is in the interest of the Nation that the Commission not adopt this rule.
It is in the interest of the Nation that the memoranda opinions and orders and proposed rules of the Commission with respect to application of certain ordinances to the placement of such towers (WT Docket No.
97-192, ET Docket No.
93-62, RM- 8577, and FCC 97-303, 62 F.R.
47960) be modified in order to permit State and local governments to exercise their zoning and land use authorities, and their power to protect public health and safety, to regulate the placement of telecommunications or broadcast towers and to place the burden of proof in civil actions, and in actions before the Commission relating to the placement of such towers, on the person or entity that seeks to place, construct, or modify such towers.
PCS-Over-Cable or satellite telecommunications systems, including low-Earth orbit satellites, offer a significant opportunity to provide so-called ``911'' emergency telephone service throughout much of the United States.
According to the Comptroller General, the Commission does not consider itself a health agency and turns to health and radiation experts outside the Commission for guidance on the issue of health effects of radio frequency exposure.
The Federal Aviation Administration does not have the authority to regulate the siting of personal wireless telephone or broadcast transmission towers near airports or high-volume air traffic areas such as corridors of airspace or commonly used flyways.
The Commission's proposed rules to preempt State and local zoning and land-use restrictions for the siting of such towers will have a serious negative impact on aviation safety, airport capacity and investment, and the efficient use of navigable airspace.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To repeal certain limitations on State and local authority regarding the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service towers and related facilities as such limitations arise under section 332(c)(7) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 332(c)(7)).
To permit State and local governments-- (A) in cases where the placement, construction, or modification of personal wireless service telephone and broadcast towers and other facilities is inconsistent with State and local requirements or decisions, to require the use of alternative telecommunication or broadcast technologies when such alternative technologies are available; and (B) to regulate the placement of such towers so that their location or modification will not interfere with the safe and efficient use of public airspace or otherwise compromise or endanger public safety.
STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITY OVER PLACEMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND MODIFICATION OF BROADCAST TRANSMISSION AND OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
Repeal of Limitations on Regulation of Personal Wireless Facilities.--Section 332(c)(7)(B) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 332(c)(7)(B)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``thereof--'' and all that follows through the end and inserting ``thereof shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services.
''; (2) by striking clause (iv); (3) by redesignating clause (v) as clause (iv); and (4) in clause (iv), as so redesignated-- (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``30 days after such action or failure to act'' and inserting ``30 days after exhaustion of any administrative remedies with respect to such action or failure to act''; and (B) by striking the third sentence and inserting the following: ``In any such action in which a person seeking to place, construct, or modify a tower facility is a party, such person shall bear the burden of proof.''.
Prohibition on Adoption of Rule Regarding Preemption of State and Local Authority Over Broadcast Transmission Facilities.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Federal Communications Commission may not adopt as a final rule the proposed rule set forth in ``Preemption of State and Local Zoning and Land Use Restrictions on Siting, Placement and Construction of Broadcast Station Transmission Facilities'', MM Docket No.
97-182, released August 19, 1997.
Authority Over Placement, Construction, and Modification of Other Transmission Towers.--Part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITY OVER PLACEMENT, CONSTRUCTION, AND MODIFICATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND BROADCAST TOWERS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no provision of this Act may be interpreted to authorize any person to place, construct, or modify a broadcast tower or telecommunications tower in a manner that is inconsistent with State or local law, or contrary to an official decision of the appropriate State or local government entity having authority to approve, license, modify, or deny an application to place, construct, or modify a tower, if alternate technology is capable of delivering the broadcast or telecommunications signals without the use of a tower.
Authority Regarding Production of Safety Studies.--No provision of this Act may be interpreted to prohibit a State or local government from-- ``(1) requiring a person seeking authority to locate telecommunications facilities or broadcast transmission facilities within the jurisdiction of such government to produce-- ``(A) environmental studies, engineering reports, or other documentation of the compliance of such facilities with radio frequency exposure limits established by the Commission; and ``(B) documentation of the compliance of such facilities with applicable Federal, State, and local aviation safety standards or aviation obstruction standards regarding objects effecting navigable airspace; or ``(2) refusing to grant authority to such person to locate such facilities within the jurisdiction of such government if such person fails to produce any studies, reports, or documentation required under paragraph (1).