This Act may be cited as the ``United Nations Accountability Act of 1997''.
PROHIBITION OF PAYMENT OF ARREARAGES TO UNITED NATIONS.
Until a certification by the President of reforms in the United Nations under section 3 is transmitted to the Congress and the certification is approved by the Congress through enactment of a joint resolution in accordance with section 4, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, funds appropriated or otherwise made available for any fiscal year under ``Contributions to International Organizations'', ``Contributions for International Peacekeeping'', or any other account shall not be available for the payment of any assessed contribution of the United States for prior years to the United Nations.
CERTIFICATION BY THE PRESIDENT OF UNITED NATIONS REFORMS.
The certification referred to in section 2 is a certification (with supporting documentation) by the President to the Congress that the United Nations has implemented all of the following reforms: (1) Assessed payment reformulation.-- (A) The assessed payment of the United States to the United Nations for each year has been lowered to 20 percent of the budget of the United Nations, or (B) The United Nations has reformulated each member state's assessed level to reflect each state's share of the total world gross national product.
Code of conduct.--The United Nations has implemented a code of conduct for all employees of the United Nations.
The code of conduct shall specify that no United Nations official, including the Secretary General, shall be permitted to engage in business activities outside the United Nations, or provide any relative with access to United Nations procurement contracts, or take bribes, directly or indirectly, from individuals or corporations doing business with the United Nations or from United Nations member states or their representatives.
Inspector general of the united nations.--The Office of Inspector General of the United Nations has been strengthened as follows: (A) The United Nations has a truly independent office of inspector general to conduct and supervise objective audits, inspections, and investigations relating to programs and operations of the United Nations.
The office shall be financed under a separate line item in the budget of the United Nations and shall function independently of the Secretary General.
The United Nations has an inspector general who is selected and elected by the General Assembly for a term of 3 years and whose appointment was made principally on the basis of the appointee's integrity and demonstrated ability in accounting, auditing, financial analysis, law, management analysis, public administration, or investigation.
The inspector general may be removed only for cause by the Secretary General with the approval of the General Assembly.
The inspector general is authorized to-- (i) make investigations and reports relating to the administration of the programs and operations of the United Nations; (ii) have access to all relevant records, documents, and other available materials relating to those programs and operations; and (iii) have direct and prompt access to any official of the United Nations.
The United Nations has fully implemented, and made available to all member states, procedures designed to protect the identity of, and prevent reprisals against, any employee of the United Nations making a complaint or disclosing information to, or cooperating in any investigation or inspection by, the inspector general.
The United Nations has fully implemented procedures designed to ensure compliance with recommendations of the inspector general.
The United Nations has required the inspector general to issue an annual report and has ensured that the annual report and all other relevant reports of the inspector general are made available to the member governments of the United Nations General Assembly without modification.
The United Nations is committed to providing sufficient budgetary resources to ensure the effective operation of the office of the inspector general.
Employee protection.--The existing United Nations grievance system has been thoroughly reformed to permit United Nations employees to hire outside counsel for taking their grievances up the United Nations grievance ladder to the top United Nations grievance appeals level.
It should also be made amply clear for civil lawyers and judges in each member state that United Nations officials' immunity from civil process applies only to actions performed in the strict fulfillment of United Nations official duties and never to abuses in violation of an extensive United Nations code of conduct, United Nations employees having the right and option in such cases any time to exit the United Nations grievance process and sue in a civil court.
Procurement reforms.-- (A) The United Nations has implemented a system requiring at least 30 days prior notification for the submission of all qualified bid proposals on all United Nations procurement opportunities of more than $100,000 and a public announcement of the award of any contract of more than $100,000 (except in justified and documented emergencies).
To the extent practicable, notifications and announcements under subparagraph (A) are made in the Commerce Business Daily.
The procurement regulations of the United Nations prohibit punitive actions such as the suspension of contract eligibility for contractors who challenge contract awards or complain about delayed payments.
Whistleblower protection.--The United Nations has implemented whistleblower protection for employees of the United Nations that-- (A) protects employees who allege or report instances of fraud or mismanagement, and (B) the independent Office of the Inspector General has reviewed the policies and regulations under subparagraph (A) and determined, in writing, that they offer adequate safeguards against retaliation for such employees, and that the United Nations employee grievance system outlined in paragraph (4)(C)(ii) has been reformed and the reforms implemented.
No growth budget.--The United Nations has adopted a calendar year 2000-2001 biennial budget that requires no nominal growth, in dollars, in expenditures.
Downsizing.--The United Nations has continued to downsize the number of authorized employment positions, including a reduction of not less than 10 percent in the number of full-time permanent authorized employment positions from the number of such positions authorized on January 1, 1997.
Acceptable downsizing may not include early detachment from United Nations service with full pay until retirement age is reached, nor may it include the hiring of consultants to replace employees detached early with full pay or those replaced by temporary employees on short-term contracts.
Salaries.--The United Nations has imposed a freeze on salaries of employees of the United Nations which allows only for annual increases not greater than any annual increase in the United States consumer price index.
Representation on advisory committee on administrative and budget questions.--The 8 member states which are the highest contributors to the budget of the United Nations shall be permanent members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budget Questions.
Access to documents.--Require access by any member state of the United Nations Budget Committee (also known as the Fifth Committee) to any document concerning any United Nations program that involves expenditures.
Annual reauthorization of peace-keeping missions.--The United Nations requires an annual review and reauthorization of any peacekeeping missions by the United Nations Security Council.
Reimbursement for united states department of defense peacekeeping expenditures.--The United Nations has reimbursed the United States Department of Defense for voluntary contributions to United Nations peacekeeping missions and the United Nations and the United States have entered into an agreement that calls for United Nations reimbursement for any future voluntary contributions by the United States Department of Defense, whether they be financial, logistical, or material.
United states arrearages.--The United Nations and the United States have mutually determined an amount that will satisfy any and all arrearages of the United States in assessed contributions for prior years.
Nominations to security council.--All member states of the United Nations belong to a regional group that allows each member state to be nominated to the Security Council.
United nations taxes.--The United Nations has abandoned any effort to establish an international tax or any other international fee or assessment imposed by the United Nations (other than the assessed contributions of member states of the United Nations and associated organs).
Noninterference with religious belief, culture, or tradition.--Neither the United Nations nor any affiliated agency or entity is engaged in any program or activity that threatens to interfere with the religion, moral values, culture, or traditions of any person or group, except insofar as is strictly necessary for the protection of fundamental and internationally recognized human rights.
CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL OF PRESIDENTIAL CERTIFICATION.
Terms of the Resolution.--For purposes of section 2, the term ``joint resolution'' means only a joint resolution which is enacted within the 30-legislative day period beginning on the date on which the President transmits the certification (and supporting documentation) to the Congress under this Act, and-- (1) which does not have a preamble; (2) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress approves the certification of the President regarding reforms in the United Nations.
''; and (3) the title of which is as follows: ``Joint resolution approving the certification of the President regarding reforms in the United Nations.''.
Referral.--A resolution described in subsection (a) that is introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on International Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
A resolution described in subsection (a) introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
Discharge.--If the committee to which a resolution described in subsection (a) is referred has not reported such resolution (or an identical resolution) by the end of the 15 legislative-day period beginning on the date on which the President transmits the certification to the Congress under section 2, such committee shall be, at the end of such period, discharged from further consideration of such resolution, and such resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Consideration.--(1) On or after the third legislative day after the date on which the committee to which such a resolution is referred has reported, or has been discharged (under subsection (c)) from further consideration of, such a resolution, it is in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the resolution.
A Member may make the motion only on the legislative day after the legislative day on which the Member announces to the House concerned the Member's intention to make the motion, except that, in the case of the House of Representatives, the motion may be made without such prior announcement if the motion is made by direction of the committee to which the resolution was referred.
All points of order against the resolution (and against consideration of the resolution) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution is agreed to, the respective House shall immediately proceed to consideration of the joint resolution without intervening motion, order, or other business, and the resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate on the resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 2 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
An amendment to the resolution is not in order.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
A motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on a resolution described in subsection (a) and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the resolution shall occur.
Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a resolution described in subsection (a) shall be decided without debate.
Consideration by Other House.--(1) If, before the passage by one House of a resolution of that House described in subsection (a), that House receives from the other House a resolution described in subsection (a), then the following procedures shall apply: (A) The resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee and may not be considered in the House receiving it except in the case of final passage as provided in subparagraph (B)(ii).
With respect to a resolution described in subsection (a) of the House receiving the resolution-- (i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no resolution had been received from the other House; but (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the resolution of the other House.
Upon disposition of the resolution received from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider the resolution that originated in the receiving House.
Rules of the Senate and House.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a resolution described in subsection (a), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Legislative Day Defined.--For the purposes of this section, the term ``legislative day'' means any calendar day other than a day on which either House is not in session.