This Act may be cited as the ``National Alzheimer's Project Act''.
OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL ALZHEIMER'S PROJECT.
Establishment of Office.--There is established in the Office of the Secretary of Health and Human Services the Office of the National Alzheimer's Project (referred to in this Act as the ``Office'').
Purpose of the Office.--The Office shall-- (1) accelerate the development of treatments that would prevent, halt, or reverse the course of Alzheimer's; (2) be responsible for the creation and maintenance of an integrated national plan to overcome Alzheimer's; (3) help to coordinate the health care and treatment of citizens with Alzheimer's; (4) ensure the inclusion of ethnic and racial populations at higher risk for Alzheimer's or least likely to receive care, in clinical, research, and service efforts with the purpose of decreasing health disparities in Alzheimer's; (5) coordinate with international bodies to integrate and inform the fight against Alzheimer's globally; and (6) provide information and coordination of Alzheimer's research and services across all Federal agencies.
Director of the Office.-- (1) Appointment.--The President shall appoint a Director of the Office.
Duties of the director.-- (A) In general.--The Director of the Office shall-- (i) oversee the creation and updating of the national plan described in subparagraph (B); (ii) use discretionary authority to evaluate all Federal programs around Alzheimer's, including budget requests and approvals; and (iii) prepare and submit to the President the annual budget estimate for the Office.
National plan.--The Director of the Office shall carry out an annual assessment of the Nation's progress in preparing for the escalating burden of Alzheimer's, including both implementation steps and recommendations for priority actions based on the assessment.
Service by director.--The Director of the Office shall serve on the advisory board of the Office of Science and Technology to promote research efforts into mechanisms to slow and stop the development of Alzheimer's for those at risk of developing the disease.
Advisory Council.-- (1) In general.--There is established in the Office an Advisory Council on Alzheimer's Research and Treatment (referred to in this Act as the ``Advisory Council'').
Membership.-- (A) Federal members.--The Advisory Council shall be comprised of the following experts: (i) A designee of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
A designee of the Administration on Aging.
A designee of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
A designee of the Indian Health Service.
A designee of the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health.
A designee of the National Science Foundation.
A designee of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Non-federal members.--In addition to the members outlined in subparagraph (A), the Advisory Council shall include 12 expert members from outside the Federal Government, which shall include-- (i) 2 Alzheimer patient advocates; (ii) 2 Alzheimer caregivers; (iii) 2 health care providers; (iv) 2 representatives of State health departments; (v) 2 researchers with Alzheimer-related expertise in basic, translational, clinical, or drug development science; and (vi) 2 voluntary health association representatives, including a national Alzheimer's disease organization that funds research and has demonstrated experience in care and patient services, and a State-based advocacy organization that provides services to families and professionals, including information and referral, support groups, care consultation, education, and safety services.
Meetings.--The Advisory Council shall meet quarterly and such meetings shall be open to the public.
Advice.--The Advisory Council shall advise the Director of the Office.
Annual report.--The Advisory Council shall provide to the Director of the Office-- (A) recommendations for information to be included in the annual report to Congress by the Office; and (B) an annually updated national plan.
Annual Report.--The Director of the Office shall submit to Congress-- (1) an annual report that includes an evaluation of all nationally and federally funded efforts in Alzheimer's research, clinical care, institutional, and home- and community-based programs and their outcomes; and (2) an annually updated national plan.
Sunset.--The Office shall expire on December 31, 2025.