This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Rural and Small Railroad Preservation Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) a well-developed system of transportation and infrastructure is critical to the economic well being, health, and welfare of the United States; (2) a national emergency exists that threatens the survival of essential rail transportation infrastructure, especially infrastructure serving rural areas of the country; (3) a failure to address the growing crisis will result in rail line abandonments which will add to highway costs and congestion, thus increasing highway traffic that will lead to a degradation of safety, increase environmental damage, and further economically disadvantage rural areas of the country; (4) traditional funding techniques are unable to keep pace with the rail infrastructure investment needs in rural areas, including the requirement to upgrade track and bridges, to ensure safety, and to accommodate 286,000 pound freight cars; (5) the requirement that railroads pay a 4.3-cent diesel fuel excise tax into the general fund of the Treasury, while similar taxes on competing modes of transportation improve the infrastructures for those competing modes, is inequitable; and (6) a temporary Federal program utilizing the proceeds of the 4.3-cent railroad fuel tax to address the national emergency and preserve freight rail service is in the national interest as long as the 4.3-cent diesel tax on railroads is in existence.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Transportation shall establish a program to preserve, rehabilitate, and improve rail tracks and bridges of Class II and III freight railroads to ensure that such railroads can be operated safely and can accommodate 286,000 pound rail cars.
Allocation of Funds.-- (1) Eligible recipients.--The Secretary shall allocate funds made available to carry out this section to entities making applications to the Secretary for such funds, including State and local governments, government-sponsored authorities and corporations, and Class II and III railroads.
Criteria.--In allocating funds made available to carry out this section, the Secretary shall give priority to applications that-- (A) propose the rehabilitation or improvement of track and bridges to a condition sufficient to accommodate 286,000 pound rail cars at speeds of at least 25 mph; or (B) are designated by a State Department of Transportation as-- (i) preserving an essential link in the State's transportation network; (ii) providing a cost efficient alternative to a highway connection or highway project; or (iii) enhancing safety.
Equitable distribution.--In allocating funds to carry out this section, the Secretary shall ensure the equitable distribution of funds to a diversity of geographic regions.
Use of Funds.-- (1) Types of projects.--Funds available under this section may be used only for capital rehabilitation and improvement projects to Class II and III rail freight lines to-- (A) upgrade track and bridges to accommodate 286,000 pound freight cars; or (B) promote essential service and enhance safety.
Types of funding.--The Secretary may make direct grants for the purposes stated in paragraph (1), and may make grants to supplement direct loans and loan guarantees under title V of the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976 (45 United States Code 821 et sequentes) to provide for such benefits as a holiday on early payments, lowering rates of interest, or paying credit risk premiums or premium risk subsidy amounts in whole or in part.
Railroad Trust Fund.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Railroad Trust Fund', consisting of any amount appropriated or credited to the Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to the Railroad Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the taxes received in the Treasury under clause (ii) of section 4041(a)(1)(C) (relating to rate of tax on trains).
Expenditures.--Amounts in the Railroad Trust Fund shall be available, as provided by appropriation Acts, for making expenditures under the Emergency Rural and Small Railroad Preservation Act, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this section.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to amounts received after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Administration.--The Secretary shall give priority to projects that are economically viable, and shall require a non-Federal matching contribution of at least 10 percent.
The Secretary shall make grants available no later than 90 days following the availability of appropriations for each fiscal year.
Study.--Section 22301(d) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``, and of projects carried out with assistance under the Emergency Rural and Small Railroad Preservation Act,'' after ``under this section''.