This Act may be cited as the ``Civilian Technology Corporation Act of 1993''.
In General.--There shall be established a Civilian Technology Corporation.
The Corporation shall be operated for the purpose of providing financial support for precommercial research and development into technologies that are significant to the technology base of the United States.
Corporation not an Establishment of the United States.--The Corporation shall not be an agency or establishment of the United States.
Privacy Act.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), the Corporation shall be treated as an agency for the purposes of section 552a of title 5, United States Code.
The board of directors of the Corporation first appointed shall be the incorporators and shall take all necessary actions to establish the Corporation, including the filing of articles of incorporation.
DIRECTORS, OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES.
Board of Directors.-- (1) Appointment and number.--The Corporation shall have a Board consisting of 9 individuals appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Qualifications.--The directors of the Corporation shall have the following qualifications: (A) Not more than 5 directors shall be members of the same political party.
The directors shall have technical, business, or scientific expertise in civil research and development or expertise in the area of economics.
Each director shall be a United States Citizen.
No conflict of interest.--A director may not participate in the deliberations on, or vote on, a matter regarding an application, claim, or other matter pending before the Corporation, if, to his knowledge, he, his spouse, minor child, parent, sibling, partner, or organization, other than the Corporation, in which he is serving as an officer, director, trustee, partner, or employee, or any person with whom he is negotiating or has any arrangement concerning prospective employment, has a financial interest in the matter.
A director who violates this paragraph shall be subject to removal from the Board, but such a violation shall not impair, nullify, or otherwise affect the validity of any otherwise lawful action by the Corporation in which such director participated.
Compensation.--The compensation of the Board shall be determined by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Terms and vacancies.--Members of the Board shall serve terms of 5 years, and may serve a maximum of two terms.
Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the manner set forth in paragraph (1).
No federal employees.--An individual who is a member of the Congress, or an officer or employee of the United States, may not serve on the Board.
Chairperson and vice-chairperson.--The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Board shall be selected by the President.
The position of Chairperson shall be a full-time position and the individual who serves as Chairperson may not serve in any other salaried position.
Bylaws.--The Board is empowered to adopt and amend bylaws governing the operation of the Corporation.
Such bylaws shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the articles of incorporation of the Corporation.
Officers and Employees.-- (1) Appointment.--The Board shall appoint a chief executive officer, who shall have the authority to appoint such other officers and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act and the functions of the Corporation.
Qualifications.--Officers and employees of the Corporation shall have technical, business, or administrative expertise in civil research and development or expertise in the area of economics.
No conflict of interest.--An officer or employee may not participate in a matter regarding an application, claim, or other matter pending before the Corporation, if, to his knowledge, he, his spouse, minor child, partner, or organization, other than the Corporation, in which he is serving as an officer, director, trustee, partner, or employee, or any person with whom he is negotiating or has any arrangement concerning prospective employment, has a financial interest in the matter.
An officer or employee who violates this paragraph shall be subject to termination, but such a violation shall not impair, nullify, or otherwise affect the validity of any otherwise lawful action by the Corporation in which such officer or employee participated.
Compensation.--The rates of compensation for all officers and employees shall be fixed by the chief executive officer.
Tenure.--Officers and employees shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
The Corporation shall have the power to do the following: (1) Have succession in the name of the Corporation.
Adopt, alter, and use a corporate seal.
Sue and be sued in the name of the Corporation.
Make and carry out contracts.
Exercise such other incidental powers not inconsistent with this Act that are necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes and functions of the Corporation, including the usual powers conferred upon a corporation by the District of Columbia Business Corporation Act.
CIVILIAN TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FUND.
Establishment of Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States the Civilian Technology Development Fund.
The Fund shall be administered by the Corporation in order to carry out the purposes of this Act.
The Fund shall consist of the amounts appropriated under subsection (b).
Authorization of Appropriation.--There is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000,000 to be deposited into the Fund and to remain available until expended.
Expenditures From the Fund.-- (1) In general.--Amounts in the Fund shall be made available without fiscal year limitation to the Corporation for the purposes of providing financial support, through direct investment, loans, licenses, equity positions, and joint venture partnerships, to United States based consortia, private United States businesses with promising research agendas, and educational institutions participating in joint research projects with private United States businesses, for precommercial research and development in technologies that are significant to the technology base of the United States.
In providing such financial support, the Corporation shall-- (A) invest in areas where the social rate of return is expected to be high but where individual firms or consortia are unlikely to invest because the economic rate of return is expected to be low; (B) invest in precommercial areas where the social rate of return on investments is expected to be higher than the expected rate of return in the private sector, including research and development projects that appear to have the potential to enhance productivity and long- term economic growth; (C) invest exclusively in projects that were initiated by industry and that include industry participation; and (D) except as provided in paragraph (2)(B), invest in a project only if the Corporation shall be obligated to contribute not more than 50 percent of the cost of such project.
Board approval.-- (A) In general.--No expenditures shall be made under this subsection unless approved by a majority vote of the Board following a consideration of the factors referred to in paragraph (1).
Increased contribution.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(D), the Corporation may contribute more than 50 percent of the cost of a project if the Board approves such a contribution by a two-thirds vote.
Investment of Excess Funds.--If the Corporation determines that the amount of money in the Fund exceeds the current requirements of the Corporation, the Corporation may direct the Secretary of the Treasury to invest such amounts as the Corporation deems advisable, for such period as the Corporation directs, in obligations of the United States, in obligations guaranteed by the United States Government, or in such other obligations or securities of the United States as the Secretary of the Treasury deems appropriate.
CONSULTATION WITH FEDERAL AGENCIES AND DEPARTMENTS, AND WITH PRIVATE PARTIES.
Consultation With Federal Agencies.--In carrying out this Act, the Board and the Corporation shall consult frequently with the following Federal agencies and departments: the Office of Management and Budget, the Department of Energy, the Department of Defense, the National Science Foundation, and the Office of Science and Technology Policy.
Consultation With Private Parties.--In carrying out this Act, the Board and the Corporation shall solicit comments from private parties, including representatives of both industry and labor organizations.
REVIEW OF CORPORATION BY BLUE RIBBON PANEL.
Appointment of Panel.--Not later than 90 days after the President and the Congress have received the report under section 10(b), the President, the Senate, and the House of Representatives shall jointly appoint a panel to carry out the review referred to in subsection (b).
The President shall appoint 3 members of the panel, the Senate shall appoint 3 members of the panel, and the House of Representatives shall appoint 3 members of the panel.
Review by Panel.--Not later than 9 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the panel shall conduct a review of the performance of the Corporation to determine whether the Corporation-- (1) has had an overall positive effect on the ability of the ability of United States industry to commercialize and adopt new technologies; (2) has invested in projects that exhibited a high potential social rate of return if successful; (3) has elicited strong, continuing support in the private sector, particularly as reflected in the willingness of firms to fund cooperative research and development projects carried out under the sponsorship of the Corporation; and (4) should be terminated.
Report.--Upon completion of the review referred to in subsection (b), the panel shall submit a report to the President, the Congress, and the Corporation.
If the panel determines that the Corporation should be terminated, the report shall include a recommended termination date.
AUDIT BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
The Comptroller General of the United States is authorized to audit the financial transactions of the Corporation, including the operations of the Fund.
For the purposes of carrying out such an audit, the Comptroller General shall have access to all books, records, and property belonging to, or in the possession of, the Corporation or a person or entity which has entered into a financial relationship with the Corporation, which pertain to the Corporation and which are necessary to carry out the audit.
The Comptroller General shall make a report of each such audit to the Congress and the President.
Initial Report.--The Corporation shall, after the completion of the 4th year after the date of enactment of this Act, submit a report to the President and the Congress concerning the activities of the Corporation in carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Such report shall include a description of the activities, expenditures, and investments of the Corporation, an analysis of the social rate of return of projects in which the Corporation participated, and projections of future activities, expenditures, and investments.
Prereview Report.--The Corporation shall, not later than 8 years after the date of enactment of this Act, submit a report to the President and the Congress.
Such report shall contain the type of information referred to in subsection (a).
Hearings.--The Board may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, receive such evidence, and publish or otherwise distribute so much of its proceedings and reports as it may deem advisable.
Office Space and Equipment.--The Board may acquire, furnish, and equip such office space as it determines necessary.
Mails.--The Board is authorized to use the United States mails in the same manner and upon the same conditions as Federal departments and agencies.
Necessary Expenses.--The Board may incur such necessary expenses and exercise such powers as are consistent and reasonably required to perform its functions.
Records.--To the extent permitted by law, all appropriate records and papers of the Board shall be made available for public inspection.
Aid From Federal Agencies.--Upon the request of the Board, the head of a Federal department or agency is authorized to-- (1) furnish to the Board such information as the Board deems necessary for carrying out its functions and as is available to the agency; and (2) detail for temporary duty, on a reimbursable basis, such personnel as the Board deems necessary to carry out its functions.
Meetings.-- (1) Number.--The Board shall meet quarterly each year, and may meet additional times at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
Open to public.--All meetings of the Board held to conduct official business of the Corporation shall be open to the public following reasonable public notice, except that the Board may close a meeting to the public if the Board determines by a majority vote, at a meeting open to the public, that it is necessary to close such meeting.
Jurisdiction.-- (1) In general.--Whenever the Corporation is a party to any civil action under this Act, such action shall be deemed to arise under the laws of the United States.
No attachment or execution may be issued against the Corporation, or any property thereof, prior to entry of final judgment.
Citizenship of corporation.--The Corporation shall be deemed to be a citizen only of the District of Columbia for the purpose of determining the original jurisdiction of the district courts of the United States in civil actions to which the Corporation is a party.
District of Columbia Laws Relating to Leases and Contracts.-- Leases and contracts entered into by the Corporation, regardless of the place where such leases or contracts may be executed, shall be governed by the laws of the District of Columbia.
Business Activity and Qualification; District of Columbia as Principal Office and Place of Business for Process.--The Corporation shall be deemed to be qualified to do business in each State in which it performs any activity authorized under this Act.
The Corporation shall accept service of process addressed by certified mail to the secretary of the Corporation at its principal office and place of business in Washington, District of Columbia.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Board'' means the board of directors of the Civilian Technology Corporation.
The term ``Corporation'' means the Civilian Technology Corporation established under sections 2 and 3.
The term ``Fund'' means the Civilian Technology Development Fund established by section 6.
The term ``panel'' means the panel established by section 8.