The Congress finds that-- (1) in the 1990s and beyond, capital, technology, and services are and will be easily transferred anywhere in the world without due regard for national boundaries and governmental policies, especially those pertaining to fundamental labor, environmental, and agricultural standards; (2) multinational corporations now play a major role in the conduct of international trade and investment among all nations, yet multinational corporations are not accountable in important ways to any national governments or international organizations and are not bound by any universal international agreements or standards of conduct; (3) increasingly, multinational corporations are crucial agents of commerce and investment between developed and developing countries, wielding great influence over whatever national standards exist in respective countries pertaining to socially responsible investment; (4) some multinational corporations, including some based in the United States, have adopted voluntary codes of conduct governing all aspects of their operations with a view toward promoting socially responsible investment; and (5) there already exist some promising precedents of corporate codes of conduct for multinational corporations which, if widely adhered to and enforced, could facilitate socially responsible business operations worldwide and reduce pressures to enhance competitiveness by ignoring fundamental labor, environmental, and agricultural standards where they exist.
Responsibility of Secretary of State.--The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Commerce, the heads of appropriate Federal departments and agencies, labor representatives, representatives of businesses with operations abroad, and appropriate nonprofit organizations, shall establish guidelines which United States nationals should use in conducting business operations anywhere in the territory of any foreign country.
Contents of Guidelines.--The guidelines established under subsection (a) shall, at a minimum, be based on the principles contained in the following: (1) The ``Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises'' of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The ``Tripartite Declaration of Principles Concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy'' of the International Labor Organization.
The child labor standards established by the International Labor Organization.
The standards regarding prison labor that are contained in Article XX of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The so-called ``MacBride Principles'', ``Sullivan Principles'', and ``Slepak Principles''.
The so-called ``Minnesota Principles'' or ``Caux Principles''.
As used in paragraph (4), the term ``General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade'' refers to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade annexed to the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization that was entered into on April 15, 1994.
Effective Date.--The guidelines established under subsection (a) shall be published in the Federal Register and shall take effect 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Submission of Statements.--Not later than 1 year after the effective date described in section 2(c), and not later than the end of each 1-year period thereafter, each United States national that conducts business operations, directly or through a foreign subsidiary or contractor, in any foreign country shall submit a statement to the Secretary of State, in such form as the Secretary of State shall prescribe, indicating whether or not such national, in conducting such business operations, is complying with the guidelines.
Registration.-- (1) Requirement.--The Secretary of State shall require United States nationals subject to the requirement of subsection (a) to file with the Secretary a registration with respect to their business operations in foreign countries.
Such registration shall include the name of the business operations in each foreign country, and the location and chief officers of such business operations.
No fee shall be required for registration under this subsection.
Effective date.--The registration requirement of paragraph (1) shall take effect 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Hearings.--The Secretary of State shall conduct public hearings at least once each year on the compliance with the guidelines of United States nationals subject to the requirement of subsection (a).
The Secretary shall provide interested persons with an opportunity to testify at such hearings.
Annual Report.--The Secretary of State shall submit a report to the Congress describing the level of compliance with the guidelines by United States nationals subject to the requirement of subsection (a).
This report shall be submitted not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act and not later than the end of each 1-year period occurring thereafter.
Support.--Departments and agencies of the United States may intercede with a foreign government or foreign national regarding export marketing activity in a foreign country on behalf of a United States national subject to the requirement of section 3(a) only if that United States national complies with the guidelines.
Type of Contact.--The term ``intercede with a foreign government or foreign national'' includes any contact by an officer or employee of the United States with officials of any foreign government or foreign national involving or contemplating any effort to assist in selling a good, service, or technology in a foreign country.
Such term does not include multilateral or bilateral government-to-government trade negotiations intended to resolve trade issues which may affect United States nationals who do not comply with the guidelines.
Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall take effect 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the terms ``comply with the guidelines'', ``complying with the guidelines'' and ``compliance with the guidelines'' mean-- (A) implementing the guidelines established under section 2(a) by taking good faith measures with respect to each such guideline; and (B) reporting accurately to the Department of State on the measures taken to implement those principles; (2) the term ``business operations'' refers to a for-profit activity, but does not include a small business concern as defined under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632); and (3) the term ``United States national'' means-- (A) a citizen or national of the United States or a permanent resident of the United States; and (B) a corporation, partnership, and other business association organized under the laws of the United States, any State or territory thereof, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
The Secretary of State may issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.