This Act may be cited as the ``Education Childcare Partnership Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Each day an estimated 13,000,000 children spend some part of their day in child care.
54 percent of mothers with children between the ages of 0 and 3 years are in the work force.
Labor force participation rises to 63 percent for mothers with children under 6 years of age.
Every day 3 out of 5 preschoolers go to child care centers or homes while their parents work.
The number of single-parent households and 2-parent households in which the single parent or both parents work is increasing significantly.
The availability of child care that is reliable, convenient, and affordable helps parents to reach and maintain self-sufficiency and is essential to making the transition from welfare to work.
Only an estimated 1 out of 10 eligible families receive assistance in paying for child care from Federal funds.
Full-day child care can cost between $4,000 and $9,000 per year.
In many instances, high quality child care services cost little more than mediocre child care services.
An investment of only an additional 10 percent has been found to have a significant impact on the quality of child care services.
Children placed in poor quality child care settings have been found to have delayed language and reading skills, as well as increased aggressive behavior toward other children and adults.
School based child care may utilize existing resources such as art supplies, sports equipment, musical instruments, and playgrounds to provide quality programs.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS REGARDING LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCIES THAT CARRY OUT QUALIFIED SCHOOL-BASED CHILD CARE PROGRAMS.
It is the sense of the Congress that local education agencies that carry out qualified school-based child care programs should seek to become accredited child care centers and seek to hire credentialed child care professionals.
GRANTS TO STATES FOR SCHOOL-BASED CHILD CARE.
Part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 601-619) is amended by inserting after section 418 the following: ``SEC.
GRANTS TO STATES FOR SCHOOL-BASED CHILD CARE.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--A State desiring to receive a grant under this section shall submit to the Secretary, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulation require, an application that-- ``(A) includes an assurance that the State will use any grant made to the State under this section to provide funds to local education agencies for the purpose of establishing qualified school-based child care programs; ``(B) includes an assurance that a local education agency that receives funds provided to the State under this section will comply with subsection (e)(1); ``(C) includes evidence that parents, schools, employers, State and local government agencies, and child care agencies, including resource and referral agencies, have collaborated in the preparation of the application; or ``(D) includes a State plan that-- ``(i) meets the requirements of section 658E(c)(2) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990, with respect to grant funds provided to the State under this section; and ``(ii) is designed to be implemented during a 2-year period; and ``(F) contains such additional information as the Secretary shall by regulation require.
Approval.--The Secretary shall approve an application that meets the requirements of paragraph (1).
Entitlement.--A State whose application submitted under subsection (a) for a 2-year period is approved by the Secretary shall be entitled to receive from the Secretary a grant for each year in the period, in an amount determined under subsection (c), in lieu of any other grant to which the State may be entitled under this section.
Amount of Grant.-- ``(1) Allotments to states.--After making the reservation described in subsection (d) of this section, the total amount available for grants under this section for a fiscal year shall be allotted among the States with applications approved under subsection (a) of this section, in the manner provided for in section 418(a)(2)(B).
Redistribution.--Section 418(a)(2)(D) shall apply to amounts allotted under paragraph (1) of this subsection.
Indian Tribes.--The Secretary shall reserve not less than 1 percent, and not more than 2 percent, of the aggregate amount appropriated to carry out this section for each fiscal year for payments to Indian tribes and tribal organizations.
Use of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--A State to which a grant is made under this section shall provide the grant funds to local education agencies, which shall use the grant only-- ``(A) to operate, directly or by contract or agreement, qualified school-based child care programs that serve children eligible for assistance under the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990, but do not necessarily limit their enrollment to such children; ``(B) to hire and train persons to provide child care services in school-based child care programs; ``(C) to construct, expand, or rehabilitate facilities for use as school-based child care programs; or ``(D) to cover costs of administering the grant, except that not more than 1 percent of the grant funds provided to any such agency may be used to cover such costs.
Coordination with programs under the child care and development block grant act of 1990.--A State to which a grant is made under this section shall ensure that the grant funds are expended in coordination with the programs established by the State under the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990.
Maintenance of effort.--A State to which a grant is made under this section shall use the grant funds to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, and local funds provided for programs that serve the health and developmental needs of children.
Availability of funds.--Amounts provided to a State under this section shall be available for use by the State without fiscal year limitation.
Appropriation.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated for grants under this section $250,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Local education agency.--The term `local education agency' has the meaning given such term in the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Qualified school-based child care program.--The term `qualified school-based child care program' means a program-- ``(A) the principal use of which is to provide all- day care for children who have not attained 7 years of age, and, at State option; ``(B) which is located either in a school structure or on the grounds of a school; ``(C) which meets all applicable requirements of State and local laws and regulations, including those relating to the licensing of facilities in which child care assistance is to be provided as a child care facility; and ``(D) the costs of the child care programs of which are determined on a sliding fee scale (within the meaning of section 658P(12) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990).
State.--The term `State' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.