This Act may be cited as the ``Same Insurance as Congress Act of 1998''.
PROVISIONS TO MAKE FEHBP COVERAGE AVAILABLE TO INDIVIDUALS AND SMALL EMPLOYERS.
In General.--Chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Expanded access to coverage ``(a) In General.--A contract may not be made or a plan approved unless the carrier agrees to offer to eligible individuals, throughout each term for which the contract or approval remains effective, the same benefits (subject to the same maximums, limitations, exclusions, and other similar terms or conditions and the same guidelines as are applied by the Office of Personnel Management) as would be offered under such contract or plan to employees and annuitants and their family members.
Eligible Individuals.--An individual shall be eligible to enroll under a plan or contract under this chapter pursuant to subsection (a) if such individual-- ``(1) is not eligible to be enrolled in a group health plan (as such term is defined in section 2791(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-1(a)); ``(2) is not eligible for benefits under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes), for medical assistance under a State medicaid plan under title XIX of such Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes), or child health assistance under a State children's health insurance program under title XXI of such Act (42 United States Code 1397aa et sequentes); and ``(3) meets such other requirements as the Office, by regulation, may impose.
Enrollment.--The Office shall provide for the implementation of procedures to provide for an annual open enrollment period during which individuals may enroll with a plan or contract for coverage under this section.
Premiums.--Premiums for coverage under this section shall be established by the carriers in conformance with such requirements as the Office shall by regulation prescribe, including provisions to ensure conformance with generally accepted standards and practices associated with community rating.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as providing or requiring that the premiums so established shall be the same as the premiums established for coverage offered under this chapter other than under this section.
Contributions and Benefits.--In no event shall the enactment of this section result in-- ``(1) any increase in the level of individual contributions by employees or annuitants as required under section 8906 or under any other provision of this chapter, including copayments or deductibles; ``(2) the payment by the Government of any premiums associated with coverage under this section; ``(3) any decrease in the types of benefits offered under this chapter; or ``(4) any other change that would adversely affect the coverage afforded under this chapter to employees and annuitants and their family members.
Exclusion of Certain Carriers.-- ``(1) In general.--A carrier may file an application with the Office setting forth reasons why such carrier, or a plan provided by such carrier, should be excluded from the requirements of this section.
Consideration of factors.--In reviewing an application under paragraph (1), the Office may consider such factors as-- ``(A) any bona fide enrollment restrictions which would make the application of this section inappropriate, including those common to plans which are limited to individuals having a past or current employment relationship with a particular agency or other authority of the Government; ``(B) whether compliance with this section would jeopardize the financial solvency of the plan or carrier, or otherwise compromise its ability to offer health benefits under the preceding provisions of this chapter; and ``(C) the anticipated duration of the requested exclusion and what efforts the plan or carrier proposes to take in order to be able to comply with this section.
Application of Section.--Except as the Office may by regulation prescribe, any reference to this chapter (or any requirement of this chapter), made in any provision of law, shall not be considered to include this section (or any requirement of this section).
Termination.--This section shall terminate on the date that is 10 years after the date of enactment of this section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such is amended by adding at the end the following: ``8915.
Expanded access to coverage.