This Act may be cited as the ``International Infectious Diseases Control Act of 2001''.
In this Act: (1) AIDS.--The term ``AIDS'' means the acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
Executive agency.--The term ``Executive agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 105 of title 5, United States Code.
Global fund.--The term ``global fund'' means the global fund to fight HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis established consistent with section 4.
HIV.--The term ``HIV'' means the human immunodeficiency virus, the pathogen that causes AIDS.
HIV/AIDS.--The term ``HIV/AIDS'' means, with respect to an individual, an individual who is infected with HIV or living with AIDS.
Secretary general.--The term ``Secretary General'' means the Secretary General of the United Nations.
World bank.--The term ``World Bank'' means the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria disproportionately affect the world's poorest countries and together will cost the lives of 6,000,000 people this year alone.
According to the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/ AIDS (UNAIDS), more than 58,000,000 people worldwide have already been infected with HIV/AIDS, a fatal disease that is devastating the health, economies, and social structures in dozens of countries in Africa, and increasingly in Asia, the Caribbean, and Eastern Europe.
AIDS has wiped out decades of progress in improving the lives of families in the developing world.
As the leading cause of death in Africa, AIDS has killed 17,000,000 and will claim the lives of one quarter of the population, mostly productive adults, in the next decade.
In addition, 13,000,000 children have been orphaned by AIDS--a number that will rise to 40,000,000 by 2010.
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 8,000,000 people each year become sick with tuberculosis, one of the most dangerous contagious diseases, easily transmitted through the air from those infected.
Globally, tuberculosis kills at least 2,000,000 each year, is the leading killer of women between 15 and 44 years old, and is the most common cause of death in Africa in those with HIV/AIDS.
More than 40 percent of tuberculosis cases in the United States result from importation of tuberculosis from foreign-borne persons.
Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis spreads because of inadequate control programs and inappropriate use of anti-tuberculosis drugs--mostly in the developing world.
Without a concerted international effort to increase the implementation of WHO-approved control strategies, the United States risks importation of this particularly dangerous form of tuberculosis.
Malaria is a third disease that saps the social and economic strength tropical developing countries.
Malaria affects more than 500,000,000 people each year and undermines not only the health and productivity of the world's poorest countries; malaria kills at least 1,000,000 each year, about 3,000 each day.
In Africa, malaria kills a child every 40 seconds.
Beyond the human toll, the economic impact of AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis on regional economies is severe.
According to UNAIDS, HIV/AIDS alone will reduce gross domestic product (GDP) of South Africa by 17 percent, or $22,000,000,000 over the next 10 years, and WHO estimates that sub-Saharan Africa's GDP would be 32 percent, or $100,000,000,000 higher now if malaria had been conquered 35 years ago.
The current short term economic loss and direct cost of malaria is estimated to be up to $12,000,000,000 each year.
The UNAIDS program estimates it will cost $3,000,000,000 for basic AIDS prevention and care services in sub-Saharan Africa alone, and at least $2,000,000,000 more if anti-retroviral drugs are provided widely.
But in Africa, only $500,000,000 is currently available from all donors, lending agencies, and African governments themselves.
For tuberculosis control, WHO estimates that a total of $1,000,000,000 per year will be necessary to effectively fight the tuberculosis epidemic, which will be spent to identify at least 70 percent of the cases and curing 85 percent of them.
WHO indicates that an increase of $400,000,000 per year could make this goal a reality.
The Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, has called for a global fund to halt and reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis.
The Secretary General proposed a multibillion dollar ``war chest'' financed jointly by donor governments and private contributors and, equally important, called on leaders from developing nations to give a much higher priority in their budgets to development of comprehensive health systems.
The Secretary General has outlined the following five objectives for the fight against AIDS: (A) To ensure that people everywhere know what to do to prevent infection.
To prevent the transmission from mother to child.
To provide care and treatment to those infected.
To provide care to those affected by AIDS, especially orphans.
To deliver scientific breakthroughs, especially vaccines.
Prevention of new infections is key, although treatment and care for those infected by HIV/AIDS is an increasingly critical component of the global response.
Improving health systems, providing home-based care, treating AIDS-associated diseases like tuberculosis, providing for family support and orphan care, and making anti-retroviral drugs against HIV available will reduce social and economic damage to families and communities.
Responding to the call from the Secretary General, the African heads of state meeting at the African Summit on HIV/ AIDS, tuberculosis, and other infectious diseases in Abuja, Nigeria, April 25-27, committed to increasing to at least 15 percent the proportion of their budgets allocated to the health sector.
Expanded United States financial support for new broad based international partnerships to control HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis can help leverage substantial increases in global commitments to narrow the gap between need and currently available resources.
The World Bank and WHO have demonstrated that investment in global public health activities to reduce HIV/ AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis not only is a humanitarian imperative, it also helps bolster the economic and social development necessary to build political and trade alliances.
Further, containment of international disease threats has beneficial ramifications for Americans who are increasingly susceptible to global infectious disease threats.
The purposes of this Act are to provide for United States participation in a global effort to-- (1) mitigate the effects, and control the spread, of HIV/ AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis by supporting programs for the prevention of new infections and for the care and treatment of individuals infected with those diseases in countries seriously affected, especially programs that provide care for children orphaned by the HIV/AIDS epidemic; and (2) provide the resources and leadership to control AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis through support of programs that emphasize-- (A) a science-based integrated approach that includes prevention of new infections and the treatment and care of infected individuals; (B) public-private partnerships; and (C) good governance.
GLOBAL FUND TO FIGHT HIV/AIDS, MALARIA, AND TUBERCULOSIS.
Efforts To Reach Agreement for Establishment of Global Fund.-- (1) In general.--The President, in consultation with the Secretary General and the heads of relevant Executive agencies, shall work with foreign governments, the United Nations and its relevant specialized agencies, the World Bank, and the private sector to reach an agreement for the establishment of a global fund to fight HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis, to carry out the purposes of section 4 (1) and (2).
Delegation of authority.--The President shall exercise the authority of this subsection through the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, except that, with respect to the World Bank, the President shall exercise such authority through the Secretary of the Treasury.
Description of global fund.--The global fund should-- (1) be a public-private partnership that includes participation of, and seeks contributions from, governments, foundations, the private sector, civil society, the United Nations system, nongovernmental organizations, and other parties; (2) pursue an integrated approach that includes the prevention of new infections and the treatment and care of infected individuals; (3) focus on promotion of ``best practices'' in the prevention of new infections by funding a core group of programs that have been proven effective and then funding additional programs; (4) promote scientific and medical accountability by requiring proposals to be reviewed and approved by medical and public health experts; and (5) respect intellectual property rights as an important incentive in the development of new drugs.
Composition.--The global fund should be composed as follows: (1) Board of trustees.--The global fund should be governed by a board of trustees, which should be composed of representatives of donors, recipients of funding, multilateral agencies, and such other parties as may be authorized by the agreement establishing the global fund.
Technical advisory group.--The board of trustees of the global fund should establish a technical advisory group, consisting of persons with demonstrated knowledge and experience in the fields of public health, epidemiology, health care delivery, health economics, and biomedical research, to advise the board of trustees with respect to funding proposals and other matters.
Secretariat and other bodies.--Other bodies, such as a small secretariat, should be established to support the work of the board of trustees of the global fund.
Program Objectives.-- (1) Grant authority.-- (A) In general.--In carrying out the purposes of section 4 (1) and (2), the global fund, acting through its board of trustees with guidance from the technical advisory group, should provide only grants, including grants for technical assistance to support measures to build local capacity in national and local government, civil society, and the private sector, with respect to the prevention of new infections and the care and treatment of individuals infected with disease.
Eligibility for grants.--Governments and nongovernmental organizations shall be eligible to receive grants from the global fund.
Emphasis should be given to facilitating the funding of nongovernmental organizations, including both faith-based and secular groups working in communities, except that national authorities should set the overall plan and agenda for dealing with public health and infectious diseases in their countries.
Activities supported.-- (A) In general.--Activities supported under paragraph (1) should include efforts to lead and implement effective and affordable HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis programs, including programs focused on prevention and health education and treatment and care services, including access to affordable drugs.
Emphasis on strong political leadership.-- Emphasis should be given to ensuring strong political leadership in recipient countries, through the development and implementation of effective strategies against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria; development of well managed, transparently administered health systems; and monitoring and evaluation of programs supported by the global fund.
Initial priority on combating hiv/aids.--In view of the globalization of the AIDS epidemic, initial priority should be given to programs to combat HIV/ AIDS.
Such programs should include the promotion of ``best practices'' in the prevention of new infections, including education that emphasizes risk avoidance such as abstinence, measures to stop mother-to-child transmission, and efforts to provide for the support and education of AIDS orphans and the families, communities, and institutions most affected by HIV/ AIDS.
Reports to Congress.-- (1) Annual reports by the president.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for the duration of the global fund, the President shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the global fund, including its structure, objectives, contributions, funded projects, and assessment of its effectiveness.
Appropriate committees defined.--In paragraph (1), the term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' means the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
United States Financial Participation.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition to any other funds authorized for multilateral or bilateral programs related to HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, or economic development, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Department of State $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2003 for payment to the global fund.
Reprogramming of fiscal year 2001 funds.--Funds made available for fiscal year 2001 under section 141 of the Global AIDS and Tuberculosis Relief Act of 2000 (as in effect immediately before the date of enactment of this Act)-- (A) are authorized to remain available until expended; and (B) shall be transferred to, merged with, and made available for the same purposes as, funds made available for fiscal year 2002 under paragraph (1).
Certification requirement.-- (A) In general.--Before the initial obligation or expenditure of funds appropriated under paragraph (1) or reprogrammed under paragraph (2), the President shall certify that adequate procedures and standards have been established to ensure accountability for and monitoring of the use of funds contributed to the global fund, including the cost of administering the global fund.
Transmittal of certification.--The certification required by subparagraph (A), and the bases for that certification, shall be submitted by the President to Congress.
Statutory construction.--Nothing in this Act may be construed to substitute for, or reduce resource levels otherwise appropriated by Congress for, bilateral and multilateral HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis programs.
Subtitle B of title I of the Global AIDS and Tuberculosis Relief Act of 2000 (22 United States Code 6821 et sequentes) is hereby repealed.