This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on Securing the United States in the 21st Century Act of 2008''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on Securing the United States in the 21st Century'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall-- (1) conduct a comprehensive review of the global security environment that identifies the strategic interests and objectives of the United States for the security environment the United States may confront during the next two decades and beyond; (2) develop a national security strategy appropriate for that future security environment and for the Nation's character; (3) develop a detailed plan to achieve the national security strategy by-- (A) defining security goals for the United States; (B) describing the internal and external policy instruments required to best utilize the resources of the United States; (C) identifying steps for implementation of the national security strategy including the organization, coordination, planning, management arrangements, and procedures necessary for implementation; and (D) reviewing budgetary and resource allocations for departments and agencies and recommending changes to such allocations; (4) recommend additional changes to the national security system as necessary including agency, institutional, and other structural reforms; and (5) submit to the President and Congress reports pursuant to section 8 containing detailed statements of the Commission findings, conclusions, and recommendations for corrective measures as determined by a majority of the members of the Commission.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 13 members, to be appointed as follows: (1) One member, who shall serve as chairperson, shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the majority leader of the Senate.
One member, who shall serve as vice-chairperson, shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the minority leader of the Senate.
One member shall be appointed by the Secretary of Defense.
One member shall be appointed by the Secretary of State.
One member shall be appointed by the Director of National Intelligence.
Two members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
Two members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Two members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Prohibited Appointments.-- (1) An individual appointed to the Commission may not be an officer or employee of the Federal Government or any State or local government.
If a member of the Commission becomes an officer or employee of the Federal Government or any State or local government, the member may continue to serve as a member for not longer than the 60-day period beginning on the date that member becomes such an officer or employee.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than seven members appointed to the Commission may be of the same political party.
Considerations for Appointment.--Individuals appointed to the Commission should be prominent citizens of the United States, with national recognition and significant depth of experience in professions such as governmental service, law enforcement, the armed services, law, public administration, intelligence gathering, commerce, or foreign affairs.
Period of Appointment.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy shall not affect the power and duties of the Commission but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Deadline for Appointment.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Quorum.--Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--The Commission shall meet and commence its duties not later than 15 days after the deadline for appointment of members under section 4(g).
Regular meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of its chairperson or a majority of its members.
Basic Pay.--Members shall each be paid at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which that member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in performance of services for the Commission.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
In General.-- (1) Appointment.--The chairperson, in consultation with the vice-chairperson, in accordance with rules agreed upon by the Commission, may appoint a staff director and such other personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service.
Compensation.--The staff director and other personnel shall be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that no rate of pay fixed under this paragraph may exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which that staff member is engaged in work for the Commission.
Detail of Government Employees.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Nonapplicability of the Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Commission.
Contracting.--The Commission may enter into contracts to enable the Commission to discharge its duties under this Act.
Obtaining Official Information.-- (1) Securing information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States, information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Handling information.--Information shall only be received, handled, stored, and disseminated by members of the Commission and its staff consistent with all applicable statutes and regulations.
Security Clearance for Commission Members and Staff.--The appropriate Federal agencies or departments shall cooperate with the Commission in expeditiously providing to the Commission members and staff appropriate security clearances to the extent possible pursuant to existing procedures and requirements, except that no person shall be provided with access to classified information under this Act without the appropriate security clearances.
Administrative Support Services.-- (1) General services administration.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Other departments and agencies.--In addition to the assistance referred to in paragraph (1), Federal departments and agencies may provide to the Commission such services as such departments and agencies determine advisable and as authorized by law.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon the order of the chairperson.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Interim Reports.--The Commission may submit to the President and Congress interim reports as the Commission considers appropriate.
Final Report.--The Commission shall prepare and submit a final report to the President and Congress not later than 1 year after the Commission's initial meeting.
Public Disclosure.--The Commission shall make public copies of the reports required under subsections (a) and (b).
In General.--The Commission shall terminate 60 days after submitting its final report.
Administrative Activities Before Termination.--During the 60- day period referred to in subsection (a) the Commission may conclude its activities, including providing testimony to committees of Congress concerning its reports and disseminating the final report.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 for the fiscal year 2008 to carry out this Act.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.