This Act may be cited as the ``Higher Education Investment Act of 1995''.
CREDIT FOR INTEREST ON EDUCATION LOANS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
INTEREST ON EDUCATION LOANS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 20 percent of the interest paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year on any qualified education loan.
Maximum Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the credit allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed $500 ($1,000 in the case of 2 or more individuals with qualified higher education expenses paid by any qualified education loan).
Limitation based on modified adjusted gross income.-- ``(A) In general.--If the modified adjusted gross income of the taxpayer for the taxable year exceeds $40,000 ($60,000 in the case of a joint return), the amount which would (but for this paragraph) be allowable as a credit under this section shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount which bears the same ratio to the amount which would be so allowable as such excess bears to $15,000.
Modified adjusted gross income.--The term `modified adjusted gross income' means adjusted gross income determined-- ``(i) without regard to sections 135, 911, 931, and 933, and ``(ii) after application of sections 86, 219, and 469.
Inflation adjustment.--In the case of any taxable year beginning after 1996, the $40,000 and $60,000 amounts referred to in subparagraph (A) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(ii) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (1)(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, except that subparagraph (B) of subsection (1)(f)(3) shall be applied by substituting `1995' for `1992'.
Rounding.--If any amount as adjusted under subparagraph (C) is not a multiple of $50, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $50 (or, if such amount is a multiple of $25, such amount shall be rounded to the next highest multiple of $50).
Limitation on Taxpayers Eligible for Credit.--No credit shall be allowed by this section to an individual for the taxable year if a deduction under section 151 with respect to such individual is allowed to another taxpayer for the taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year begins.
Limit on Period Credit Allowed.-- ``(1) Taxpayer and taxpayer's spouse.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a credit shall be allowed under this section only with respect to interest paid on any qualified education loan during the first 60 months (whether or not consecutive) in which interest payments are required.
For purposes of this paragraph, any loan and all refinancings of such loan shall be treated as 1 loan.
Dependent.--If the qualified education loan was used to pay education expenses of an individual other than the taxpayer or the taxpayer's spouse, a credit shall be allowed under this section for any taxable year with respect to such loan only if-- ``(A) a deduction under section 151 with respect to such individual is allowed to the taxpayer for such taxable year, and ``(B) such individual is at least a half-time student with respect to such taxable year.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified education loan.--The term `qualified education loan' means any indebtedness incurred to pay qualified higher education expenses-- ``(A) which are incurred on behalf of the taxpayer, the taxpayer's spouse, or a dependent of the taxpayer, ``(B) which are paid or incurred within a reasonable period of time before or after the indebtedness is incurred, and ``(C) which are attributable to education furnished during a period during which the recipient was at least a half-time student.
Such term includes indebtedness used to refinance indebtedness which qualifies as a qualified education loan.
The term `qualified education loan' shall not include any indebtedness owed to a person who is related (within the meaning of section 267(b) or 707(b)(1)) to the taxpayer.
Qualified higher education expenses.--The term `qualified higher education expenses' means the cost of attendance (as defined in section 472 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, 20 United States Code 1087ll, as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act) of the taxpayer, the taxpayer's spouse, or a dependent of the taxpayer at an eligible educational institution.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `eligible educational institution' has the same meaning given such term by section 135(c)(3), except that such term shall also include an institution conducting an internship or residency program leading to a degree or certificate awarded by an institution of higher education, a hospital, or a health care facility which offers postgraduate training.
Half-time student.--The term `half-time student' means any individual who would be a student as defined in section 151(c)(4) if `half-time' were substituted for `full- time' each place it appears in such section.
Dependent.--The term `dependent' has the meaning given such term by section 152.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Denial of double benefit.--No credit shall be allowed under this section for any amount for which a deduction is allowable under any other provision of this chapter.
Married couples must file joint return.--If the taxpayer is married at the close of the taxable year, the credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) only if the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse file a joint return for the taxable year.
Marital status.--Marital status shall be determined in accordance with section 7703.''
Reporting Requirement.-- (1) In general.--Subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information concerning transactions with other persons) is amended by inserting after section 6050P the following new section: ``SEC.
RETURNS RELATING TO EDUCATION LOAN INTEREST RECEIVED IN TRADE OR BUSINESS FROM INDIVIDUALS.
Education Loan Interest of $600 or More.--Any person-- ``(1) who is engaged in a trade or business, and ``(2) who, in the course of such trade or business, receives from any individual interest aggregating $600 or more for any calendar year on any qualified education loan, shall make the return described in subsection (b) with respect to each individual from whom such interest was received at such time as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
Form and Manner of Returns.--A return is described in this subsection if such return-- ``(1) is in such form as the Secretary may prescribe, ``(2) contains-- ``(A) the name and address of the individual from whom the interest described in subsection (a)(2) was received, ``(B) the amount of such interest received for the calendar year, and ``(C) such other information as the Secretary may prescribe.
Application to Governmental Units.--For purposes of subsection (a): ``(1) Treated as persons.--The term `person' includes any governmental unit (and any agency or instrumentality thereof).
Special rules.--In the case of a governmental unit or any agency or instrumentality thereof-- ``(A) subsection (a) shall be applied without regard to the trade or business requirement contained therein, and ``(B) any return required under subsection (a) shall be made by the officer or employee appropriately designated for the purpose of making such return.
Statements To Be Furnished to Individuals With Respect to Whom Information Is Required.--Every person required to make a return under subsection (a) shall furnish to each individual whose name is required to be set forth in such return a written statement showing-- ``(1) the name and address of the person required to make such return, and ``(2) the aggregate amount of interest described in subsection (a)(2) received by the person required to make such return from the individual to whom the statement is required to be furnished.
The written statement required under the preceding sentence shall be furnished on or before January 31 of the year following the calendar year for which the return under subsection (a) was required to be made.
Qualified Education Loan Defined.--For purposes of this section, except as provided in regulations prescribed by the Secretary, the term `qualified education loan' has the meaning given such term by section 23(e)(1).
Returns Which Would Be Required To Be Made by 2 or More Persons.--Except to the extent provided in regulations prescribed by the Secretary, in the case of interest received by any person on behalf of another person, only the person first receiving such interest shall be required to make the return under subsection (a).''
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
Interest on education loans.''
The table of sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 6050P the following new item: ``Sec.
Returns relating to education loan interest received in trade or business from individuals.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to any qualified education loan (as defined in section 23(e)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section) incurred on, before, or after the date of the enactment of this Act, but only with respect to any loan interest payment due after December 31, 1995, and before the termination of the period described in section 23(d)(1) of such Code.