This Act may be cited as the ``Telemarketing Relief Act of 2002''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TELEMARKETER NO-CALL LIST BY FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall amend its rules under section 3(a) of the Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act (15 United States Code 6102(a)), to-- (1) establish a list of telephone numbers of consumers who have notified the Commission or a Federal agency referred to in section 3 that they do not want to receive telephone calls for telemarketing purposes; (2) specify the manner by which consumers shall notify the Commission for purposes of paragraph (1); (3) make the list under paragraph (1) available to the public; and (4) subject to section 3, prohibit, as a deceptive or abusive telemarketing act or practice, the making of any telephone call for telemarketing purposes to a telephone number included on the list under paragraph (2).
RULES BY OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES.
In General.--Not later than 90 days after the effective date of rules issued under section 2, and subject to subsection (c)-- (1) the Securities and Exchange Commission shall amend its rules under section 3(d) of the Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act (15 United States Code 6102(d)) in substantially the same manner as the Federal Trade Commission amends its rules pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, subject to the exception set forth in section 3(d)(1)(B) of that Act; (2) the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shall amend its rules under section 6(f) of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 United States Code 9b), in substantially the same such manner, subject to the exceptions set forth in paragraph (2) of that section; and (3) the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, and the National Credit Union Administration Board shall each amend its rules under section 18(f) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a) in substantially the same such manner, subject to the exceptions set forth in clauses (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of that section.
Federal Communication Commission Rules.-- (1) Promulgation.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), and subject to subsection (c), not later than 90 days after the effective date of rules promulgated by the Federal Trade Commission under section 2, the Federal Communications Commission shall promulgate rules substantially similar to such rules to prohibit deceptive and other abusive telemarketing acts or practices by persons described in paragraph (2).
Exception.--The Federal Communications Commission is not required to promulgate a rule under subparagraph (A) if it determines that-- (i) rules adopted by the Federal Communications Commission provide protection from deceptive and other abusive telemarketing by persons described in paragraph (2) substantially similar to that provided by rules promulgated by the Federal Trade Commission under section 2; or (ii) such a rule promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission is not necessary or appropriate in the public interest, or for the protection of consumers.
Publication of determination.--If the Federal Communications Commission determines that an exception described in clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (B) applies, the Federal Communications Commission shall publish in the Federal Register its determination with the reasons for it.
Application.--The rules promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission under paragraph (1)(A) shall apply to a provider of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service as defined under section 3 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 153).
Enforcement.--Rules issued by the Federal Communications Commission under this Act shall be enforced by the Federal Communications Commission in the same manner as rules issued by the Commission under the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 151 et sequentes) (c) Enforcement of No-Call List Maintained by Federal Trade Commission.--Rules issued under this section shall prohibit the making of any telephone call for telemarketing purposes to a telephone number included on the list established and published by the Federal Trade Commission under section 2.
Provision of List to Federal Trade Commission.--Each Federal agency referred to in subsection (a) or (b) shall promptly provide to the Federal Trade Commission the list of telephone numbers established by the agency pursuant to section 2(1), and any revisions to such list.
The rules under this Act shall not prohibit use of a telephone number of a consumer for any of the following: (1) Charitable, political opinion polling, or other nonprofit activities.
Use with the consumer's prior written or verbal permission.
Contacting a consumer in response to the consumer's visit to an establishment with a fixed location.
Use primarily in connection with an existing debt of the consumer or contract with the consumer that has not been paid or performed, respectively.
Communication by a person with the consumer regarding an existing relationship between the person and the consumer.
Compilation, by a provider of telephone exchange service or telephone toll service as defined under section 3 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 153), of a directory of telephone numbers of that provider.
Use by one business to communicate with another business.