This Act may be cited as the ``Credit Union Audit Improvement Act of 1997''.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT AND AUDIT REQUIREMENTS.
Paragraph (6) of section 202(a) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 United States Code 1782(a)(6)) is amended to read as follows: ``(6) Financial statement and audit requirements.-- ``(A) Financial statement.-- ``(i) In general.--Each insured credit union shall prepare annual financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles.
Audit requirement.--The supervisory committee of each insured credit union shall have an annual independent audit of the financial statement of the credit union performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards by an independent certified public accountant or public accountant licensed by the appropriate State or jurisdiction to perform such services.
Effectiveness of internal controls.-- ``(i) In general.--Each insured credit union shall prepare a written assertion annually about the effectiveness of the internal controls over financial reporting.
Examination of written assertion.-- The supervisory committee of each insured credit union shall obtain annually an attestation report on an examination of management's written assertion under clause (i) which shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted standards for attestation engagements by an independent certified public accountant or public accountant licensed by the appropriate State or jurisdiction to perform such services.
Compliance with laws and regulations.--Each insured credit union shall prepare a written report annually on the extent to which the credit union is in compliance with laws and regulations relating to safety and soundness which have been designated by the Board.
De minimus exception.--This paragraph shall not apply with respect to any fiscal year of any insured credit union the total assets of which, as of the beginning of such fiscal year, are less than $10,000,000.''.
REQUIREMENTS FOR SUPERVISORY COMMITTEES.
Federal Credit Unions.--Section 115 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 United States Code 1761d) is amended-- (1) by striking ``The supervisory committee shall make or cause to be made'' and all that follows through ``submit reports of the supplementary audits to the board of directors; may by a unanimous vote'' and inserting ``(a) In General.--The supervisory committee may, by a unanimous vote,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Management Oversight.-- ``(1) Risk areas.--The supervisory committee shall-- ``(A) identify annually risk areas of the activities of the credit union; and ``(B) assess the extent to which internal and external audit coverage is necessary for those activities of the credit union which the committee determines have a high risk.
Internal audits.--The supervisory committee shall perform or supervise any internal audits of the credit union.
Outside auditors.--In the case of any outside audit of the credit union, the supervisory committee shall engage only an independent certified public accountant or public accountant licensed by the appropriate State or jurisdiction to perform such services.
Audit reports to board of directors and members.--The supervisory committee shall-- ``(A) promptly submit the audit report of any internal or outside audit to the board of directors and the Administration; and ``(B) submit the audit report of any outside audit and submit a summary of the audit report of any internal audit to the members at the annual meeting following the completion of any such report.''.
Insured State Credit Unions.--Section 201(b) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 United States Code 1781(b)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (8) and (9) as paragraphs (9) and (10), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following new paragraph: ``(8) to maintain a supervisory committee which complies with the requirements applicable under section 115(b) to a supervisory committee of a Federal credit union;''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to fiscal years (of insured credit unions) ending on or after December 15, 1997.