This Act may be cited as the ``Metropolitan Washington Airports Act Amendments of 1995''.
Section 6002(7) of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986 (49 United States Code App.
2451(7)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``declining'' after ``perceived''; and (2) by striking ``the growing local interest,'' and inserting ``the increasing need for local planning and management on a metropolitan statistical area basis,''.
Board of Directors.--Section 6007 of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986 (49 United States Code App.
2456) is amended by striking subsections (e), (f), (g), and (h) and inserting the following: ``(e) Board of Directors.-- ``(1) Appointment.--The Airports Authority shall be governed by a board of directors of 11 members as follows: ``(A) 1 member shall be appointed by the Governor of Virginia.
1 member shall be appointed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia.
1 member shall be appointed by the Governor of Maryland.
2 members shall be appointed by the Virginia State legislature.
2 members shall be appointed by those representatives from Virginia local governments who are on the Board of Directors of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments.
2 members shall be appointed by those representatives from the District of Columbia government who are on the Board of Directors of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments.
2 members shall be appointed by those representatives from Maryland local governments who are on the Board of Directors of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments.
The Chairman shall be appointed from among the members by a majority vote of the members and shall serve until replaced by a majority vote of the members.
Restrictions.--Members (A) shall serve without compensation other than reasonable expenses incident to board functions, and (B) must reside within the Washington Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for terms of 4 years.
Required number of votes.--7 votes shall be required to approve bond issues and the annual budget.
Airport Noise.-- ``(1) Balanced environmental protection.--In order to protect the public from the impact of aircraft noise and at the same time provide for suitable air transportation service to the Washington Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, a proposed action of the board of directors which could result in a change in the impact of aircraft noise in the vicinity of a Metropolitan Washington Airport may not take unless, at least 60 days before the action is to take effect, the board of directors-- ``(A) notifies, in writing, the Committee on Noise Abatement at National and Dulles Airports of the Washington Council of Governments of the action for the purpose of allowing such committee the opportunity to review, and submit comments on, the action; and ``(B) submits, in writing, to such committee a response to any comment of such committee with respect to the action within 30 days after the date of receipt of such comment.''.
In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), the amendments made by sections 2 and 3 shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Limitation on Applicability.--Persons appointed as members of the board of directors of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority on the date of the enactment of this Act shall continue to serve on such board until their respective terms expire under former section 6007(e).
Initial Appointments.-- (1) Virginia appointments.--The Governor of Virginia shall appoint under new section 6007(e)(1)(A) a person to fill the vacancy of the first member appointed by the Governor of Virginia under former section 6007(e)(1)(A) whose term expires after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Virginia State legislature shall appoint under new section 6007(e)(1)(D) persons to fill the vacancies of the second and third members appointed by the Governor under former section 6007(e)(1)(A) whose terms expire after such date of enactment.
Representatives from Virginia local governments shall appoint under new section 6007(e)(1)(E) persons to fill the vacancies of the fourth and fifth members appointed by the Governor under former section 6007(e)(1)(A) whose terms expire after such date of enactment.
District of columbia appointments.--The Mayor of the District of Columbia shall appoint under new section 6007(e)(1)(B) a person to fill the vacancy of the first member appointed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia under former section 6007(e)(1)(B) whose term expires after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Representatives from the District of Columbia government shall appoint under new section 6007(e)(1)(F) persons to fill the vacancies of the second and third such members appointed by the Mayor under former section 6007(e)(1)(B) whose terms expire after such date of enactment.
Maryland appointments.--The Governor of Maryland shall appoint under new section 6007(e)(1)(C) a person to fill the vacancy of the first member appointed by the Governor of Maryland under former section 6007(e)(1)(C) whose term expires after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Representatives from Maryland local governments shall appoint under new section 6007(e)(1)(G)-- (A) a person to fill the vacancy of the second member appointed by the Governor under former section 6007(e)(1)(C) whose term expires after such date of enactment; and (B) a person to fill the vacancy of the member appointed by the President under former section 6007(e)(1)(D) when the term of such member expires after such date of enactment.
Definitions.--In this section, the following definitions apply: (1) Former section 6007(e).--The term ``former section 6007(e)'' means section 6007(e) of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986 as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
New section 6007(e).--The term ``new section 6007(e)'' means section 6007(e) of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act of 1986, as amended by section 3 of this Act.