This Act may be cited as the ``Open Space Protection Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Congress has established a policy of dedicating revenue from the production and use of nonrenewable resources to reinvest in public land resources for American families and their children through programs such as the Land and Water Conservation Fund.
Since its creation by Congress in 1965, the Land and Water Conservation Fund has been responsible for nearly 7,000,000 acres of parkland, refuges and open spaces, and the development of more than 37,000 State and local parks and recreation projects.
From parks to playgrounds, wilderness to wetlands, open trails to open spaces, the Land and Water Conservation Fund has been an American success story.
The need for open spaces and recreation has soared.
Combined estimates from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service, United States Forest Service, and Bureau of Land Management total a $7,000,000,000 backlog to meet current land acquisition needs.
This backlog includes lands critical to conserving wetlands, watersheds and wilderness, protecting wildlife refuges and habitat, preserving important historic and cultural sites and providing trails and open spaces for outdoor recreation.
Conserving our Nation's most valuable natural and cultural treasures is critical to conserving America's heritage of open space and the great outdoors.
Suburban and urban sprawl and the loss of open space have become a primary concern for local communities with State and local revenues inadequate to address these critical needs.
The demand for outdoor recreation, and the corresponding need for more parks, open space and recreation infrastructure, has skyrocketed.
The National Survey on Recreation and the Environment (NSRE), conducted by the United States Forest Service, shows explosive growth in most outdoor pursuits, including mountain biking, backpacking, kayaking, and birdwatching.
The enormous popularity of youth soccer over the past decade has created an unprecedented demand for new playing fields which to date has been unmet.
The welcome increase in athletic participation among women and girls is continuing to increase demand for access to local parks and recreation facilities throughout America.
Conserving natural resources, protecting open space, and enhancing recreation opportunity will be effective only if undertaken through Federal, State, and local partnership.
The American legacy of conservation and open space is key to ensuring that our Nation's communities are healthy, safe, and secure, and that they are places where American families and their children can enjoy the quality of life that they deserve.
The findings of the 1995 National Biological Service study ``Endangered Ecosystems of the United States: A Preliminary Assessment of Loss and Degradation'' demonstrate the need to escalate conservation measures that protect our Nation's wildlands and habitats.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide a secure source of funds available for Federal land acquisition and to revitalize the State, local, and urban needs outlined in the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 and the Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 by providing matching grants for State, local, and urban conservation and recreation needs.
Section 3 of the Land and Water Conservation Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 4601-5(c)(1)) is amended as follows: (1) By striking ``Moneys'' the first place it appears and inserting ``Except as provided by subsection (b), moneys''.
By inserting ``(a)'' after ``3''.
By adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b)(1) Special Rule.--For any fiscal year beginning after September 30, 1998, and ending before October 1, 2015, from amounts covered into the Fund in the preceding fiscal year, there is appropriated for purposes of this Act $900,000,000.
Notwithstanding section 5, for each such fiscal year, such funds shall be available for the following purposes: ``(A) $450,000,000 shall be available for Federal purposes (in this Act referred to as the `Federal share').
$250,000,000 shall be available for financial assistance to the States under section 5 and for any other State purposes authorized under this Act.
Such sum shall be apportioned among the States pursuant to section 6 (in this Act referred to as the `State share').
No less than 50 percent of the State share for each State for each such fiscal year shall be directed by the State to local governments to provide natural areas, open space, parklands, or recreational areas.
$150,000,000 shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior for grants to local governments through the Urban Parks and Recreation Recovery Program (16 United States Code 2501-2514).
$50,000,000 shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior through and including fiscal year 2004, for grants for land acquisition in connection with the American Battlefield Protection Program.
For fiscal years 2004 through and including 2014, $50,000,000 shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior for the restoration and acquisition of historical and cultural sites found within the National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Land Management and the National Forest Service.
The President shall, in his annual budget submission for the fiscal year concerned, specify the specific purposes for which the funds referred to in subparagraphs (A), (C), and (D) of paragraph (1) are to be used by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture.
Such funds shall be used by the Secretary concerned for the purposes specified by the President in such annual budget submission unless the Congress, in the general appropriation Acts for the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture for such fiscal year, specifies that any part of such Federal share is to be used by the Secretary concerned for other puposes.
For purposes of the budget submission, the President shall require the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture to prepare Federal priority lists for expenditure of the Federal share.
Such lists shall be prepared in consultation with the head of the affected bureau or agency, taking into account the best professional judgment regarding the land acquisition priorities and policies of each bureau or agency.
In preparing such priority lists, the Secretaries shall consider-- ``(A) the potential adverse impacts which might result if the acquisition is not undertaken; ``(B) the availability of land appraisal and other information necessary to complete the acquisition in a timely manner; and ``(C) such other factors as the Secretaries deem appropriate.''.
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO STATES.
Section 6 of the Land and Water Conservation Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 4601-5(c)(1)) is amended as follows: (1) By amending subsection (b)(5) to strike the comma after ``the District of Columbia'' and insert ``shall be treated as one State.
Indian/Alaska Native Village Corporations shall be treated as one State and shall allocate their funds in a manner to be determined by the Secretary of the Interior.''.
By amending subsection (e)(1) by striking ``, but not including incidental costs relating to acquisition''.
By amending subsection (e)(2) by inserting before the period at the end ``or to enhance public safety.''.
By striking the second sentence of subsection (f)(5) and inserting: ``The Secretary shall approve such conversion only if the State demonstrates no prudent or feasible alternative exists with the exception of those properties that are no longer viable as an outdoor conservation and recreation facility due to changes in demographics or that must be abandoned because of environmental contamination which endangers public health and safety.
Any conversion must satisfy any conditions the Secretary deems necessary to assure the substitution of other conservation and recreation properties of at least equal market value and reasonably equivalent usefulness and location and which are in accord with the existing State Plan for Conservation and Recreation; except that wetland areas and interests therein as identified in the wetlands provisions of the action agenda and proposed to be acquired as suitable replacement property within that same State that is otherwise acceptable to the Secretary shall be considered to be of reasonably equivalent usefulness with the property proposed for conversion.''.
URBAN PARK AND RECREATION RECOVERY ACT OF 1978 AMENDMENTS.
The Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act (16 United States Code 2501 and following) is amended as follows: (1) In section 1004 by striking ``and'' at the end of subsection (j), by striking the period at the end of subsection (k) and inserting ``; and'' and by adding the following after subsection (k): ``(l) `development grants' means matching capital grants to local units of government to cover costs of development and construction on existing or new neighborhood recreation sites, including indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, support facilities, and landscaping, but excluding routine maintenance and upkeep activities; and ``(m) `acquisition grants' means matching capital grants to local units of government to cover the direct and incidental costs of purchasing new parkland to be permanently dedicated and made accessible for public conservation and recreation.''.
Section 1004(j) (16 United States Code 2503(j)) is amended by inserting ``the District of Columbia,'' after ``by the Governor,''.
Section 1005(a) (16 United States Code 2504(a) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Eligibility.--Eligibility of general purpose local governments to compete for assistance under this title shall be based upon need as determined by the Secretary.
Generally, the list of eligible governments shall include the following: ``(1) All political subdivisions included in Metropolitan, Primary, or Consolidated Statistical Areas as currently defined by the census.
Any other city or town within a Metropolitan Area with a total population of 50,000 or more in the census of 1970, 1980, or 1990, or each census thereafter.
Any other political subdivision, county, parish, or township with a total of 250,000 or more in the census of 1970, 1980, or 1990, or each census thereafter.''.
Section 1006(a) (16 United States Code 2505) is amended as follows: (A) In subsection (a) by striking ``and innovative grants directly'' and inserting ``innovation, development, or acquisition purposes''.
In paragraph (1) of subsection (a) by striking ``and innovation'' and inserting ``innovation, development, or acquisition'' and by striking all after ``subdivisions or regional park authorities'' and inserting ``except that such grantees shall provide assurance to the Secretary that they will maintain public conservation and recreation opportunities at assisted areas and facilities owned or managed by them in accordance with section 1010 of this Act.''
In paragraph (2) of subsection (a) by striking ``or innovative projects'' and inserting ``innovation, development, or acquisition projects'' and by striking ``, except'' and all that follows and inserting ``on a reimbursable basis.''.
Section 1010 (16 United States Code 2509) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``No property acquired or improved or developed under this title shall, without the approval of the Secretary, be converted to other than public recreation uses.
The Secretary shall approve such conversion only if the grantee demonstrates no prudent or feasible alternative exists (with the exception of those properties that are no longer a viable recreation facility due to changes in demographics or they must be abandoned because of environmental contamination which endangers public health and safety).
Any conversion must satisfy any conditions the Secretary deems necessary to assure the substitution of other conservation and recreation properties of at least equal market value and reasonably equivalent usefulness and location and which are in accord with the current conservation and recreation recovery action program.''.
Section 1014 (16 United States Code 2513) is repealed.