This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Energy Security Oversight Improvement Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) internal Department of Energy oversight of safeguards and security has suffered over the years from inconsistent application, lack of senior management attention, reduced resources, and overlapping and conflicting roles and responsibilities among various Department offices; (2) the Department of Energy is in need of a statutorily- based independent security oversight office with the responsibility to regularly assess the effectiveness of the Department's policy and site performance in the area of safeguards and security, including computer security, and report to the Secretary on such findings annually; (3) the Department of Energy's oversight of security at its sites should be streamlined to reduce overlapping and redundant oversight, to improve accountability, and to ensure greater consistency in application, findings, and reporting of results; and (4) it is appropriate to establish a single, independent security oversight office within the Department of Energy, without prejudice to the continued compliance assurance activities conducted at the Department site level.
OFFICE OF INDEPENDENT SECURITY OVERSIGHT.
Office.--The Secretary of Energy shall maintain an Office of Independent Security Oversight, which shall be headed by a Director appointed by the Secretary without regard to political affiliation and solely on the basis of integrity and demonstrated ability in the oversight and evaluation of security for nuclear and classified programs.
The Director shall report directly to and be under the general supervision of the Secretary, but the Director shall not report to or be subject to supervision by any other office or officer of the Department of Energy.
The Secretary shall not prevent, prohibit, or delay the Director from initiating, carrying out, or completing any inspection, evaluation, or report undertaken pursuant to this Act.
Such Office shall be responsible for carrying out the missions and functions described in subsections (c) and (d), but the Office shall have no authority to establish or require the implementation of any change to the policies, programs, or practices of the Department of Energy.
Experts and Consultants.--In addition to employees of the Department of Energy, the Director is authorized to utilize such experts and consultants as the Director deems appropriate.
For such purposes, the Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Upon request of the Director, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of such agency to the Director to assist the Director in carrying out functions under this section.
Mission.--The Office of Independent Security Oversight shall be responsible for the independent evaluation of the effectiveness of safeguards and security (including computer security) policies, programs, and practices throughout the Department of Energy, including the National Nuclear Security Administration.
The Office shall identify security weaknesses, make recommendations to the Secretary for improvement, and review the effectiveness and timeliness of corrective actions taken by the Department.
Functions.--The Office of Independent Security Oversight shall perform the following functions: (1) Conduct regular evaluations of safeguards and security programs at Department of Energy sites that have significant amounts of special nuclear material, classified information, or other security interests.
The scope of the evaluations shall include all aspects of safeguards and security, including physical protection of special nuclear material, accountability of special nuclear material, protection of classified and sensitive information, classified and unclassified computer security, personnel security, and interactions with foreign nationals.
Issue reports to the Secretary that clearly identify specific findings relating to security weaknesses, and make recommendations for improvement.
Perform timely followup reviews to ensure that any corrective actions implemented by the Department are effective.
Evaluate and assess Department of Energy policies related to safeguards and security.
Develop recommendations and opportunities for improving safeguards and security policies, programs, and practices for submittal to the Secretary.
Any other function the Secretary considers appropriate and consistent with the mission described in subsection (c).
Timing of Regular Evaluations.-- (1) General rule.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), evaluations conducted under subsection (d)(1) shall occur at least once every 2 years.
Computer security evaluations.--Evaluations conducted under subsection (d)(1) with respect to classified and unclassified computer security shall occur at least once every 18 months.
Access to Information.--In carrying out this section, the Director shall have access to all records and personnel of the Department concerning its safeguards and security programs, including classified and unclassified computer security programs.
Report by Office.--The Office of Independent Security Oversight shall, before February 15 of each year, transmit to the Secretary of Energy an unclassified report, with a classified appendix if requested or necessary, summarizing the activities of the Office during the immediately preceding calendar year.
Such report shall include-- (1) a summary of each significant report made to the Secretary pursuant to this Act during the reporting period, including a description of key security findings contained in those reports; (2) the adequacy of corrective actions, if any, taken by the Department to address significant problems and deficiencies; (3) an identification of each significant problem or deficiency described in previous annual reports on which corrective action has not been effectively completed; (4) a description and explanation of the reasons for any significant revisions to security policy decisions made during the reporting period; and (5) a description of any significant security policy decision with which the Director is in disagreement, along with an explanation of the reasons for disagreement.
Report by Secretary.--The Secretary of Energy shall, before March 15 of each year, transmit to the appropriate committees of Congress, without alteration, the Office's annual report submitted under subsection (a), along with an unclassified report, with a classified appendix if requested or necessary, summarizing the Secretary's response thereto.
Such report from the Secretary shall include-- (1) a description of the Secretary's response to each significant report and security finding made to the Secretary pursuant to this Act during the reporting period; (2) an explanation of the reasons for any failure on the part of the Department of Energy to remedy security findings identified by the Office in the current annual report and previous annual reports; and (3) to the extent relevant, an explanation of how the President's budget submissions will impact the ability of the Department to remedy unresolved security findings identified by the Office in its annual reports.
Public Availability.--Within 60 days after the transmission of the annual reports to the Congress under subsection (b), the Secretary of Energy shall make copies of the unclassified portions of such reports available to the public.
Special Reports.--The Director of the Office of Independent Security Oversight shall report immediately to the Secretary of Energy whenever the Director becomes aware of deficiencies relating to the security programs, practices, or operations of the Department of Energy that require an immediate response.
The Secretary shall, within 7 calendar days after receiving a report under this subsection, notify the appropriate committees of Congress in writing and explain the corrective actions taken to address such deficiencies.
Congressional Testimony and Briefings.--The Director of the Office of Independent Security Oversight, whenever called to testify before any Committee of Congress or to brief its Members or staff, shall provide the Secretary of Energy with advance notice of the subject matter of that testimony or briefing, but shall provide the requested information to the Congress without any further review, clearance, or approval by any other official in the Executive Branch.
This Act may be cited as the ``National Nuclear Security Administration Security Oversight Improvement Act of 2000''.
OFFICE OF INDEPENDENT SECURITY OVERSIGHT.
Office Required.--Subtitle B of the National Nuclear Security Administration Act (title XXXII of Public Law 106-65; 113 United States Statutes at Large 953; 50 United States Code 2401 et sequentes) is amended by inserting at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
OFFICE OF INDEPENDENT SECURITY OVERSIGHT.
Office Required.--The Administrator shall maintain an Office of Independent Security Oversight, which shall be headed by a Director appointed by the Administrator without regard to political affiliation and solely on the basis of integrity and demonstrated ability in the oversight and evaluation of security for nuclear and classified programs.
The Director shall report directly to and be under the general supervision of the Administrator, but the Director shall not be subject to supervision by any other office or officer of the Administration or of the Department of Energy.
Neither the Secretary of Energy nor the Administrator shall prevent, prohibit, or delay the Director from initiating, carrying out, or completing any inspection, evaluation, or report undertaken pursuant to this section or from submitting to the Congress any such report.
Such Office shall be responsible for carrying out the missions and functions described in subsections (c) and (d), but the Office shall have no authority to establish or require the implementation of any change to the policies, programs, or practices of the Administration.
Experts and Consultants.--In addition to employees of the Administration, the Director is authorized to utilize such experts and consultants as the Director deems appropriate.
For such purposes, the Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Upon request of the Director, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of such agency to the Director to assist the Director in carrying out functions under this section.
Mission.--The Office of Independent Security Oversight shall be responsible for the independent evaluation of the effectiveness of safeguards and security (including computer security) policies, programs, and practices of the Administration.
The Office shall identify security weaknesses, make recommendations to the Administrator for improvement, and review the effectiveness and timeliness of corrective actions taken by the Administration.
Functions.--The Office of Independent Security Oversight shall perform the following functions: ``(1) Conduct regular evaluations of safeguards and security programs at Administration sites that have significant amounts of special nuclear material, classified information, or other security interests.
The scope of the evaluations shall include all aspects of safeguards and security, including physical protection of special nuclear material, accountability of special nuclear material, protection of classified and sensitive information, classified and unclassified computer security, personnel security, and interactions with foreign nationals.
Issue reports to the Administrator that clearly identify specific findings relating to security weaknesses, and make recommendations for improvement.
Perform timely followup reviews to assess the effectiveness of any corrective actions implemented by the Administration.
Evaluate and assess Administration policies related to safeguards and security.
Develop recommendations and opportunities for improving safeguards and security policies, programs, and practices for submittal to the Administrator.
Any other function the Administrator considers appropriate and consistent with the mission described in subsection (c).
Timing of Regular Evaluations.-- ``(1) General rule.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), evaluations conducted under subsection (d)(1) shall occur at least once every two years.
Computer security evaluations.--Evaluations conducted under subsection (d)(1) with respect to classified and unclassified computer security shall occur at least once every 18 months.
Access to Information.--In carrying out this section, the Director shall have access to all records and personnel of the Administration concerning its safeguards and security programs, including classified and unclassified computer security programs.
Report by Office.--The Office of Independent Security Oversight shall, before February 15 of each year, transmit to the Administrator and the Secretary an unclassified report, with a classified appendix if requested or necessary, summarizing the activities of the Office during the immediately preceding calendar year.
Such report shall include-- ``(1) a summary of each significant report made to the Administrator pursuant to this section during the reporting period, including a description of key security findings contained in those reports; ``(2) the adequacy of corrective actions, if any, taken by the Administration to address significant problems and deficiencies; ``(3) an identification of each significant problem or deficiency described in previous annual reports on which corrective action has not been effectively completed; and ``(4) a description of any significant security policy decision with which the Director is in disagreement, along with an explanation of the reasons for disagreement.
Report by Administrator.--The Administrator shall, before March 15 of each year, transmit to the appropriate committees of Congress, without alteration, the Office's annual report submitted under subsection (g), along with an unclassified report, with a classified appendix if requested or necessary, summarizing the Administrator's response thereto.
Such report from the Administrator shall include-- ``(1) a description of the Administrator's response to each significant report and security finding made to the Administrator pursuant to this section during the reporting period; ``(2) an explanation of the reasons for any failure on the part of the Administration to remedy security findings identified by the Office in the current annual report and previous annual reports; and ``(3) to the extent relevant, an explanation of how the President's budget submissions will impact the ability of the Administration to remedy unresolved security findings identified by the Office in its annual reports.
Public Availability.--Within 60 days after the transmission of the annual reports to the Congress under subsection (h), the Administrator shall make copies of the unclassified portions of such reports available to the public.
Special Reports.--The Director of the Office of Independent Security Oversight shall report immediately to the Administrator whenever the Director becomes aware of deficiencies relating to the security programs, practices, or operations of the Administration that require an immediate response.
The Administrator shall, within seven calendar days after receiving a report under this subsection, notify the appropriate committees of Congress in writing and explain the corrective actions taken to address such deficiencies.
Congressional Testimony and Briefings.--The Director of the Office of Independent Security Oversight, whenever called to testify before a committee of Congress or to brief any Member of Congress or congressional staff, shall provide the Administrator with advance notice of the subject matter of that testimony or briefing, but shall provide the requested information to the Congress without any further review, clearance, or approval by any other official in the Executive Branch.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents at the beginning of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3236 the following new item: ``Sec.
Office of Independent Security Oversight.''.
Amend the title so as to read: ``A bill to ensure that the National Nuclear Security Administration has appropriate mechanisms to independently assess the effectiveness of its policy and site performance in the areas of safeguards and security and cyber security.