This Act may be cited as the ``Keep the Government Open Act of 1996''.
Congress finds that: (1) According to the General Accounting Office, between fiscal year 1962 and fiscal year 1981 there were 32 times when there was a lapse in appropriations for part of the Federal Government because there had not been enacted either an appropriations law or a continuing resolution.
During these lapses in appropriations Federal employees continued to work, and the Federal Government continued to obligate funds.
Congress then ratified the obligations incurred during the lapse in appropriations.
In January 1981, Attorney General Civiletti expressed the opinion that the Anti-Deficiency Act prohibits the operation of the Federal Government during a period of lapsed appropriations except for those emergency situations involving the safety of human life or the protection of property.
In 1990, Congress amended the Anti-Deficiency Act to limit the definition of emergencies so as to exclude ``ongoing, regular functions of government the suspension of which would not imminently threaten the safety of human life or the protection of property.''.
Between 1982 and 1994 the longest lapse in appropriations was 3 days.
Between December 16, 1995, and January 5, 1996, there was a lapse in appropriations for part of the Federal Government because of a disagreement between the President and the Congress.
During this 3-week period, 476,000 Federal employees came to work but were not paid, and 285,000 Federal employees were ordered not to come to work.
On January 5, Congress passed a continuing resolution which paid these 761,000 employees for the period December 16 through January 5, and the President signed this resolution.
Paying these 285,000 Federal employees for not working for 3 weeks wasted about $1,000,000,000 of the taxpayers' money.
Not paying Federal employees during a lapse in appropriations imposes serious financial hardships on many of these employees.
Not paying Federal employees during a lapse in appropriations imposes serious hardships on private firms that normally sell to Federal employees.
Prohibiting the obligation of Federal funds during a lapse of appropriations imposes serious hardships on State and local governments and private firms that normally receive Federal funds.
Prohibiting Federal employees from working imposes serious hardships on citizens who need the services provided by these employees.
AMENDMENT OF THE ANTI-DEFICIENCY ACT.
Authority To Enter Into Contracts or Obligations.--Section 1341(a)(1)(B) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding before the period at the end the following: ``or unless the President determines that an appropriation is likely to be made for that purpose before the end of the fiscal year in an amount exceeding the contract or obligation''.
Work and Payment of Employees.--(1) Section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``However, an officer or employee of the United States Government may continue to supply personal services before an appropriation or continuing resolution is enacted and shall be paid for such services even if no appropriation is enacted if the President determines that an appropriation is likely to be made for that purpose before the end of the fiscal year in an amount exceeding the cost to the Government of such services.''.
(A) For any day during a fiscal year on which funds are not available to pay the salary of any official or employee of the United States for which funds were available on the last day of the fiscal year preceding such fiscal year, there are appropriated such sums as may be necessary to maintain such salary at the level of such salary on the last day of the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year during which funds are not available for such purpose.
Funds appropriated by this paragraph shall not be available for any day during a fiscal year which occurs after the date of the enactment during such fiscal year of an Act or joint resolution which includes appropriations generally for the department or agency which has the responsibility for paying such salary and which makes no appropriation for such salary.
Appropriations and funds made available under this paragraph shall cover all objections or expenditures incurred to pay the salary of any official or employee of the United States during the period for which funds for such salary are made available under this paragraph.
Any expenditure made under the appropriation contained in this paragraph shall be charged to the appropriation, fund, or authorization which includes funds for such expenditure whenever a bill or joint resolution in which such appropriation, fund, or authorization is provided for is enacted into law.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``salary'' includes any benefits paid to or for an official or employee of the United States because of such employment of the official or employee (including medical and dental benefits, life and health insurance premiums, and pension contributions) and any pay and allowances of members of the Armed Forces.