SHORT TITLE AND REFERENCE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Amendment Act''.
Reference.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Act (Public Law 102-579).
Paragraphs (18) and (19) of section 2 are repealed.
TEST PHASE AND RETRIEVAL PLANS.
Section 5 and the item relating to such section in the table of contents are repealed.
Section 4(b)(5)(B) is amended by striking ``or with the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes)''.
Section 6 is amended-- (1) by repealing subsections (a) and (b), (2) by repealing paragraph (1) of subsection (c), (3) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (a) and in that subsection-- (A) by repealing subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2), (B) by striking the subsection heading and the matter immediately following the subsection heading and inserting ``Study.--The following study shall be conducted:'', (C) by striking ``(2) Remote-handled waste.--'', (D) by striking ``(B) Study.--'', (E) by redesignating clauses (i), (ii), and (iii) as paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), respectively, and (F) by realigning the margins of such clauses to be margins of paragraphs, (5) in subsection (d), by striking ``, during the test phase, a biennial'' and inserting ``a'' and by striking ``, consisting of a documented analysis of'' and inserting ``as necessary to demonstrate'', and (6) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (b).
Section 7(b) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Requirements for Commencement of Disposal Operations.--The Secretary may commence emplacement of transuranic waste underground for disposal at WIPP only upon completion of-- ``(1) the Administrator's certification under section 8(d)(1) that the WIPP facility will comply with disposal regulations; and ``(2) the acquisition by the Secretary (whether by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise) of Federal Oil and Gas Leases No.
NMNM 02953 and No.
NMNM 02953C, unless the Administrator determines, under section 4(b)(5), that such acquisition is not required.''.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY DISPOSAL REGULATIONS.
Section 8(d)(1).--Section 8(d)(1) is amended-- (1) by amending subparagraph (A) to read as follows: ``(A) Application for compliance.--Within 30 days after the date of the enactment of the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Amendment Act, the Secretary shall provide to Congress a schedule for the incremental submission of chapters of the application to the Administrator beginning no later than 30 days after such date.
The Administrator shall review the submitted chapters and provide requests for additional information from the Secretary as needed for completeness within 45 days of the receipt of each chapter.
The Administrator shall notify Congress of such requests.
The schedule shall call for the Secretary to submit all chapters to the Administrator no later than October 31, 1996.
''; and (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``after the application is'' and inserting ``after the full application has been''.
Section 8(d) (2), (3).--Section 8(d) is amended by striking paragraphs (2) and (3), by striking ``(1) Compliance with disposal regulations.--'', and by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), and (D) of paragraph (1) as paragraph (1), (2), (3), and (4), respectively.
Section 8(g).--Section 8(g) is amended to read as follows: ``(g) Engineered and Natural Barriers, Etc.--The Secretary shall use both engineered and natural barriers and any other measures to the extent necessary at WIPP to comply with final disposal regulations.''.
COMPLIANCE WITH ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
Section 9(a)(1).--Section 9(a)(1) is amended by adding after and below subparagraph (H) the following: ``With respect to transuranic mixed waste designated by the Secretary for disposal at WIPP, such waste is exempt from the land disposal restrictions published at part 268 of 40 Code of Federal Regulations because compliance with the environmental radiation protection standards published at part 191 of 40 Code of Federal Regulations renders compliance with the land disposal restrictions unnecessary to achieve desired environmental protection and a no migration variance is not required for disposal of transuranic mixed waste at WIPP.''.
Section 9(b).--Subsection (b) of section 9 is repealed.
Section 9(c).--Subsection (c) of section 9 is repealed.
Section 14.--Section 14 is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``No provision'' and inserting ``Except for the exemption from the land disposal restrictions described in section 9(a)(1), no provision''; and (2) in subsection (b)(2), by striking ``including all terms and conditions of the No-Migration Determination'' and inserting ``except that the transuranic mixed waste designated by the Secretary for disposal at WIPP is exempt from the land disposal restrictions described in section 9(a)(1)''.
Section 10.--Section 10 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``It is the intent of Congress that a decision will be made by the Secretary with respect to the disposal of transuranic waste no later than November 30, 1997.''.
Conforming Amendment .--The item relating to section 10 in the table of contents is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Section 13 is amended-- (1) by repealing subsection (a), and (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``(b) Management Plan for the Withdrawal After Decommissioning.--Within 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the'' and inserting ``The''.
ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE AND MISCELLANEOUS PAYMENTS.
Section 15(a) is amended-- (1) by striking ``to the Secretary for payments to the State $20,000,000 for each of the 15 fiscal years beginning with the fiscal year in which the transport of transuranic waste to WIPP is initiated'' and inserting ``to the State $20,000,000 for each of the 15 fiscal years beginning with the date of the enactment of the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Amendment Act'', and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``An appropriation to the State shall be in addition to any appropriation for WIPP.''.
Section 7(a) is amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Non-defense waste.--Within the limits prescribed in paragraphs (1) and (2) and within the capacity prescribed by paragraph (4), WIPP may receive transuranic waste from the Secretary which did not result from a defense activity.