This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness and Equity Tax Act of 1995''.
MINIMUM TAX ON FOREIGN AND FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORATIONS.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to determination of tax liability) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART VIII--MINIMUM TAX ON CERTAIN FOREIGN AND FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORATIONS ``Sec.
Minimum tax on certain foreign and foreign-owned corporations.
MINIMUM TAX ON CERTAIN FOREIGN AND FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORATIONS.
Imposition of Tax.--In the case of a corporation to which this section applies, the taxable income of such corporation for the taxable year from each category of its business activities shall not be less than 90 percent of the amount determined by applying the applicable profit percentage to the gross receipts of such corporation for the taxable year from such category of business activities.
Corporations to Which Section Applies.--This section shall apply to a corporation for the taxable year if-- ``(1) such corporation is-- ``(A) a domestic corporation which is 25-percent foreign-owned, or ``(B) a foreign corporation which has gross income which is effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the United States, and ``(2) has substantial foreign-related person transactions during the taxable year.
Exception Where Alternative Method Approved by the Secretary.-- ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply for purposes of determining the taxable income of any corporation to which this section applies from any category of business activities if, when such corporation files its return for the taxable year, a qualified section 482 agreement is in effect with such corporation for such year with respect to such category.
Qualified section 482 agreement.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified section 482 agreement' means any agreement between the Secretary and a corporation to which this section applies with respect to the application of this section with respect to all transactions with related parties in any category of business activities of such corporation.
The Secretary may enter into such an agreement if, in the Secretary's sole discretion, the Secretary determines that such an agreement will result in a clear reflection of the taxable income of the corporation from the category of activities to which such agreement relates.
Agreement may be given retroactive effect.--If, when entering into a qualified section 482 agreement, the Secretary determines, in the Secretary's sole discretion, that such agreement should also apply to prior taxable years, the requirement of paragraph (1) that the agreement be in effect when the corporation files its return shall not apply for purposes of applying such agreement to such prior taxable years as may be specified in such agreement.
Exception Where Secretary Cannot Categorize Activities.--In the case of a corporation whose activities cannot be categorized by the Secretary on the basis of 1 or more 3-digit classifications of the Standard Industrial Classification Code as described in subsection (h)(3), in lieu of subsection (a), there is hereby imposed a minimum tax equal to 35 percent of the product of-- ``(1) 9 percent, and ``(2) the gross receipts of the taxpayer from the sale or leasing of property manufactured by the taxpayer or by any foreign person that is a related party of the taxpayer.
Waiver in Case of Casualty or Disaster.--This section shall not apply to the extent that the Secretary determines, in the Secretary's sole discretion, that by reason of any casualty or disaster the application of this section would be inequitable.
Treatment of Foreign Taxes.--For purposes of this section, taxable income shall be determined without regard to any income, war profits, or excess profits taxes paid to any foreign country or to any possession of the United States.
Applicable Profit Percentage.-- ``(1) In general.--For each calendar year after 1995, the Secretary shall prescribe an applicable profit percentage for each category of business activities.
Such percentage shall apply to taxable years beginning in the calendar year for which prescribed.
Based on average earnings rates.--The applicable profit percentage prescribed under paragraph (1) for any category of business activities shall be based on the average earnings rates of domestic corporations which had taxable income from such category of business activities.
Earnings rate.--The earnings rate of any domestic corporation for any category of business activities shall be based on the ratio of-- ``(A) the adjusted book income of the domestic corporation from such activity, to ``(B) the gross receipts of such domestic corporations from such activities.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `adjusted book income' means income as reported for financial purposes but disregarding any reduction for any income, war profits, or excess profits taxes imposed by the United States, any possession of the United States, or any foreign country.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) 25-percent foreign owned.--The term `25-percent foreign-owned', `foreign person', and `related party' have the respective meanings given such terms by section 6038A(c).
Substantial foreign-related person transactions.--A corporation has substantial foreign-related person transactions for a taxable year if the aggregate amount involved in transactions with related parties who are foreign persons during such taxable year exceeds the lesser of $2,000,000 or 10 percent of the gross income of the corporation for such taxable year.
Only amounts which are taken into account in the determination of taxable income of the corporation shall be taken into account under the preceding sentence.
Category of business activities.--Business activities shall be categorized by reference to the 3-digit classification of the Standard Industrial Classification Code.
The Secretary may provide for the aggregation of 2 or more 3-digit classifications where appropriate and for a classification system other than the Standard Industrial Classification Code in appropriate cases.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part VIII.
Minimum tax on certain foreign and foreign-owned corporations.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.