This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Retirement Reform Technical Corrections Act of 1998''.
TECHNICAL AND CLARIFYING AMENDMENTS RELATING TO DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA RETIREMENT FUNDS.
Permitting Other Federal Entities to Administer Program.-- Section 11003 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (DC Code, sec.
761.2) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``, and includes any agreement with a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States entered into under that section'' after ``the Trustee''; and (2) in paragraph (10), by striking ``, partnership, joint venture, corporation, mutual company, joint-stock company, trust, estate, unincorporated organization, association, or employee organization'' and inserting ``; partnership; joint venture; corporation; mutual company; joint-stock company; trust; estate; unincorporated organization; association; employee organization; or department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States''.
Permitting Waiver of Recovery of Amounts Paid in Error.-- Section 11021(3) of such Act (DC Code, sec.
763.1(3)) is amended by inserting ``, or waive recoupment or recovery of,'' after ``recover''.
Permitting Use of Trust Fund To Cover Administrative Expenses.--Section 11032 of such Act (DC Code, sec.
764.2) is amended-- (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows: ``(a) In General.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be used-- ``(1) to make Federal benefit payments under this subtitle; ``(2) subject to subsection (b)(1), to cover the reasonable and necessary expenses of administering the Trust Fund under the contract entered into pursuant to section 11035(b); ``(3) to cover the reasonable and necessary administrative expenses incurred by the Secretary in carrying out the Secretary's responsibilities under this subtitle; and ``(4) for such other purposes as are specified in this subtitle.
''; and (2) in subsection (b)(2), by inserting ``(including expenses described in section 11041(b))'' after ``to administer the Trust Fund''.
Promoting Flexibility in Administration of Program.--Section 11035 of such Act (DC Code, sec.
764.5) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (e); and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsections: ``(c) Subcontracts.--Notwithstanding any provision of a District Retirement Program or any other law, rule, or regulation, the Trustee may, with the approval of the Secretary, enter into one or more subcontracts with the District Government or any person to provide services to the Trustee in connection with its performance of the contract.
The Trustee shall monitor the performance of any such subcontract and enforce its provisions.
Determination by the Secretary.--Notwithstanding subsection (b) or any other provision of this subtitle, the Secretary may determine, with respect to any function otherwise to be performed by the Trustee, that in the interest of economy and efficiency such function shall be performed by the Secretary rather than the Trustee.''.
Process for Reimbursement of District Government for Expenses of Interim Administration.--Section 11041 of such Act (DC Code, sec.
765.1) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``The Trustee shall'' and inserting ``The Secretary or the Trustee shall, at such times during or after the period of interim administration described in subsection (a) as are deemed appropriate by the Secretary or the Trustee''; (2) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting ``the Secretary or'' after ``if''; and (3) in subsection (c), by striking ``the replacement plan adoption date'' and inserting ``such time as the Secretary notifies the District Government that the Secretary has directed the Trustee to carry out the duties and responsibilities required under the contract''.
Annual Federal Payment Into Federal Supplemental Fund.--Section 11053 of such Act (DC Code, sec.
766.3) is amended-- (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows: ``(a) Annual Amortization Amount.--At the end of each applicable fiscal year the Secretary shall promptly pay into the Federal Supplemental Fund from the General Fund of the Treasury an amount equal to the annual amortization amount for the year (which may not be less than zero).
''; (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``freeze date'' and inserting ``effective date of this Act''; (3) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d); and (4) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection: ``(b) Administrative Expenses.--During each applicable fiscal year, the Secretary shall pay into the Federal Supplemental Fund from the General Fund of the Treasury amounts not to exceed the covered administrative expenses for the year.''.
Technical Corrections.--(1) Section 11012(c) of such Act (DC Code, sec.
752.2(c)) is amended by striking ``District of Columbia Retirement Board'' and inserting ``District Government''.
Section 11033(c)(1) of such Act (DC Code, sec.
764.3(c)(1)) is amended by striking ``consisting'' in the first place that it appears.
Section 11052 of such Act (DC Code, sec.
766.2) is amended by inserting ``to'' after ``may be made only''.
CLARIFYING TREATMENT OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA EMPLOYEES TRANSFERRED TO FEDERAL RETIREMENT SYSTEMS.
Eligibility of Nonjudicial Employees of District of Columbia Courts for Medicare and Social Security Benefits.--Section 11246(b) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 United States Statutes at Large 755) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as paragraphs (3) and (4); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) Conforming amendments to internal revenue code and social security.--(A) Section 3121(b)(7)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the definition of employment for service performed in the employ of the District of Columbia) is amended by inserting `(other than the Federal Employees Retirement System provided in chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code)' after `law of the United States'.
Section 210(a)(7)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 410(a)(7)(D)) (relating to the definition of employment for service performed in the employ of the District of Columbia), is amended by inserting `(other than the Federal Employees Retirement System provided in chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code)' after `law of the United States'.''.
Vesting Under Previous District of Columbia Retirement Program.--For purposes of vesting pursuant to section 2610(b) of the District of Columbia Government Comprehensive Merit Personnel Act of 1978 (DC Code, sec.
627.10(b)), creditable service with the District for employees whose participation in the District Defined Contribution Plan ceases as a result of the implementation of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 shall include-- (1) continuous service performed by nonjudicial employees of the District of Columbia courts after September 30, 1997; and (2) service performed for a successor employer, including the Department of Justice or the District of Columbia Offender Supervision, Defender, and Courts Services Agency established under section 11233 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, that provides services previously performed by the District government.
METHODOLOGY FOR DESIGNATING ASSETS OF RETIREMENT FUND.
Section 11033 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (DC Code, sec.
764.3) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Methodology for Designating Assets.-- ``(1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Secretary may develop and implement a methodology for designating assets after the replacement plan adoption date that takes into account the value of the District Retirement Fund as of the replacement plan adoption date and the proportion of such value represented by $1.275 billion, together with the income (including returns on investments) earned on the assets of and withdrawals from and deposits to the Fund during the period between such date and the date on which the Secretary designates assets under subsection (b).
In implementing a methodology under the previous sentence, the Secretary shall not be required to determine the value of designated assets as of the replacement plan adoption date.
Nothing in this paragraph may be deemed to effect the entitlement of the District Retirement Fund to income (including returns on investments) earned after the replacement plan adoption date on assets designated for retention by the Fund.
Employee contributions; judicial retirement and survivors annuity fund.--The Secretary may develop and implement a methodology comparable to the methodology described in paragraph (1) in carrying out the requirements of subsection (c) and in designating assets to be transferred to the District of Columbia Judicial Retirement and Survivors Annuity Fund pursuant to section 124(c)(1) of the District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act (as amended by section 11252).
Discretion of the secretary.--The Secretary's development and implementation of methodologies for designating assets under this subsection shall be final and binding.''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect as if included in the enactment of title XI of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.