This Act may be cited as the ``Voting Equipment Compatibility With Instant Runoff Voting Act of 2001''.
Congress finds the following: (1) In the three Presidential elections since 1988, most States have awarded their electoral votes to a candidate who earned less than half the popular vote in that State.
In many elections, the majority of voters split their votes between two similar candidates, letting a third candidate supported by only a minority of the electorate win the election.
The principle of majority rule is violated when the majority does not choose the winner of an election.
A simple solution to this problem of non majority winners is to require the winner of an election to earn a majority of votes.
Instant runoff voting, as used in Ireland, Australia, and London, requires the winner of an election to earn a majority of votes.
Voters rank candidates in case their favorite candidate is eliminated, and the votes of the candidate's supporters count for their second choice in a runoff round.
This process continues until one candidate earns a majority of votes.
There is increased interest in instant runoff voting.
For example, Alaskans in 2002 will vote on whether to adopt instant runoff voting for Presidential elections in 2004.
In 1999, the New Mexico Senate passed legislation providing for a ballot measure under which voters would be allowed to implement instant runoff voting for Presidential elections.
In Vermont, legislation to enact instant runoff voting for statewide offices, including the Presidential race, has been endorsed by Common Cause, the League of Women Voters, and the Grange.
Additionally, the legislatures of States such as Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, and Washington in 2001 debated legislation to enact instant runoff voting for Presidential elections, and the Speaker of the California Assembly has introduced a bill to implement instant runoff voting in elections to fill vacancies in Congress.
In order to conduct an instant runoff election, voting equipment must be compatible with ranked ballots.
Consistent with the national underinvestment in voting equipment, much of the Nation's voting equipment is not currently compatible with ranked ballots.
There are currently no Federal mandatory minimum standards for voting equipment.
Although the Federal Election Commission has promulgated voluntary standards, these voluntary standards do not include compatibility with ranked ballots.
FUNDING FOR STATES IMPLEMENTING INSTANT RUNOFF VOTING FOR PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS.
Establishment of Grant Program.--There is established a program under which the Federal Election Commission (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'') shall make grants to eligible States which have adopted an instant runoff voting system for presidential elections to defray the costs of administering such a system, including the costs of purchasing voting equipment, software, and other technology necessary for such a system.
Plan for Program.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall develop and make public a plan describing the criteria to be used in the solicitation and approval of applications for grants under this Act and the criteria to be used in overseeing the use of funds provided under such grants, except that under such criteria the Commission may not require a State to match any portion of the amount awarded as a condition of eligibility.
Eligibility of States.-- (1) In general.--A State is eligible to receive a grant under the program under this section if it submits to the Commission (in such form and manner as the Commission may require) an application containing such information and assurances as the Commission may require.
Deadline for application.--The Commission may not consider an application for a grant under this section unless the application is submitted prior to the expiration of the 60- day period which begins on the date the Commission makes public the plan developed under subsection (b).
Deadline for response.--The Commission shall approve or reject an application submitted under this subsection not later than 120 days after receiving the application.
Criteria for rejection.--The Commission may not reject an application submitted under this subsection unless it finds that-- (A) the equipment, software, or other technology used to administer elections in the State is not compatible with an instant runoff voting system; or (B) the State does not provide for appropriate education for voters, poll workers, and election officials in the use of an instant runoff voting system.
Cap on Amount of Grant.--The amount of any grant awarded to a State under the program under this section may not exceed the product of-- (1) the number of residents in the State at the time the grant is awarded (based on the most recent decennial census); and (2) $12.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the program under this section-- (1) $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; and (2) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2003 and each succeeding fiscal year.
REQUIRING STATES TO USE VOTING EQUIPMENT COMPATIBLE WITH INSTANT RUNOFF VOTING FOR FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each State shall administer elections for Federal office using voting equipment and technology which is compatible with an instant runoff voting system.
Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall apply with respect to the regularly scheduled general election for Federal office held during 2004 and each succeeding election for Federal office.
Instant Runoff Voting System.--In this Act, the term ``instant runoff voting system'' means a system for the election of candidates under which-- (1) voters may rank candidates on the ballot according to the order of preference; (2) runoff counts of candidates are conducted in rounds; (3) if in any round no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, the candidate with the fewest number of votes is eliminated and the remaining candidates advance to the next round; (4) in each round, a voter shall be considered to have cast one vote for the candidate the voter ranked highest on the ballot who has not been eliminated; and (5) the runoff counts are carried out automatically at the time the votes are cast and tabulated.
State.--In this Act, the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, and the United States Virgin Islands.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
Nothing in this Act may be construed to supersede or conflict with the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 1973aa et sequentes) or the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg et sequentes).