This Act may be cited as the ``Anaktuvuk Pass Land Exchange and Wilderness Redesignation Act of 1994''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 United States Code 460hh et sequentes), enacted on December 2, 1980, established the Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve and the Gates of the Arctic Wilderness.
The village of Anaktuvuk Pass, located in the highlands of the central Brooks Range, is virtually surrounded by such national park and wilderness area.
Unlike most other Alaska Native communities, the village of Anaktuvuk Pass is not located on a major river, lake, or coastline that can be used as a means of access.
The residents of Anaktuvuk Pass have relied increasingly on snow machines in winter and all-terrain vehicles in summer as their primary means of access to pursue caribou and other subsistence resources.
In a land exchange agreement in 1983, linear easements were reserved by the Inupiat Eskimo people for use of all- terrain vehicles across certain national park lands, mostly along stream and river banks.
Such linear easements proved unsatisfactory, because such easements provided inadequate access to subsistence resources and caused excessive environmental impact from concentrated use.
Officials of the National -P-a-r-k -S-e-r-v-i-c-e -a-n-d -t-h-e Park Service and Nunamiut Corporation initiated discussions in 1985 to address concerns over the use of all- terrain vehicles on park and wilderness land.
Such discussions resulted in an agreement, originally executed in 1992, and subsequently amended in 1993 and 1994, between the National -P-a-r-k -S-e-r-v-i-c-e -a-n-d -t-h-e Park Service and Nunamiut Corporation and the city of Anaktuvuk Pass, -A-l-a-s-k-a-, -a-n-d -t-h-e Alaska, and Arctic Slope Regional Corporation.
The full effectuation of the agreement, by its terms, described in paragraph (7) requires the approval and ratification by Congress.
As used in this Act: (1) Agreement.--The term ``Agreement'' means the document entitled ``Donation, Exchange of Lands and Interests and Wilderness Redesignation Agreement Among Arctic Slope Regional Corporation, Nunamuit Corporation, City of Anaktuvuk Pass and the United States of America'', executed on December 17, 1992, and subsequently amended by the parties in 1993 and 1994.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Ratification.-- (1) In general.--The Agreement is hereby ratified and confirmed.
The terms, conditions, procedures, covenants, reservations, and other provisions set forth by the parties specified in section 2(7) of the Agreement, and subsequently amended are hereby are ratified and confirmed.
The obligations and commitments of the United States, Arctic Slope Regional Corporation, Nunamiut Corporation and the city of Anaktuvuk Pass, under such Agreement are hereby considered to be a matter of Federal law.
Land acquisition.--Subject to any applicable law, the lands acquired by the United States pursuant to the Agreement shall be administered by the Secretary as part of the Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve.
Maps.-- (1) In general.--The lands subject to the conveyances, retention of surface access rights, access easements, and all- terrain vehicle easements shall be determined in accordance with the maps described as exhibits C1, C2, and D through I of the Agreement and the Map No.
185/80,039, entitled ``Land Exchange -A-c-t-i-o-n-s-, -P-r-o-p-o-s-e-d Actions, Anaktuvuk Pass Land Exchange and Wilderness Redesignation, Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve'', dated April 1994.
Location of maps.--The maps shall be on file at the Alaska Regional Office of the National Park Service and the offices of Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve in Fairbanks, Alaska.
Public inspection.--The Secretary shall ensure that written legal descriptions of the lands described in paragraph (1) shall be available for public inspection in the offices specified in paragraph (2).
Discrepancies.--In case of any discrepancy between the maps described in paragraph (1) and the Map No.
185/80,039, the Map No.
NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM WILDERNESS.
Redesignation.-- (1) In general.--Section 701(2) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 United States Code 1132 note) is amended by striking out ``approximately seven million and fifty-two thousand acres'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``approximately -7-,-3-4-0-,-8-3-2 -a-c-r-e-s seven million thirty-four thousand eight hundred and thirty-two acres''.
Acreage.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall result in the addition to the Gates of the Arctic Wilderness of approximately 56,825 acres, and the rescission of approximately 73,993 acres as wilderness, from the total acreage of the Gates of Arctic Wilderness (as determined on the day before the date of enactment of this Act).
Maps.--The lands redesignated in subsection (a) are depicted on a map prepared by the National Park Service entitled ``Wilderness -A-c-t-i-o-n-s-, -P-r-o-p-o-s-e-d Actions, Anaktuvuk Pass Land Exchange and Wilderness Redesignation, Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve'', Map No.
185/80,040, dated April 1994, and on file at the Alaska Regional Office of the National Park Service and the office of Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve in Fairbanks, Alaska.
Redesignation.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Section 201(8)(a) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act is amended by striking out ``approximately six million four hundred and sixty thousand acres'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``approximately six million four hundred and seventy- seven thousand one hundred and sixty-eight acres''.
Section 701(7) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 United States Code 1132) is amended by striking out ``approximately five million eight hundred thousand acres'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``approximately five million eight hundred seventeen thousand one hundred and sixty eight acres''.
Acreage.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall result in the addition to the Noatak National Preserve and the Noatak Wilderness of approximately 17,168 acres to the total acreage of the Noatak National Preserve and the Noatak Wilderness (as determined on the day before the date of enactment of this Act).
Maps.--The lands redesignated in subsection (c) are depicted on a map entitled ``Proposed Noatak National Preserve Wilderness expansion'' dated September 19, 1994.
CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER LAW.
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.--All of the lands, or interests therein, conveyed to and received by Arctic Slope Regional Corporation or Nunamiut Corporation pursuant to the Agreement shall be deemed to have been conveyed and received pursuant to the requirements relating to land exchanges under section 22(f) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1621(f)).
Valid Existing Rights.--All of the lands or interests in lands conveyed pursuant to the Agreement shall be conveyed subject to valid existing rights.
Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act.--Nothing in this Act or in the Agreement may be construed to enlarge or diminish the rights, privileges, or obligations of any person, except to the extent specifically set forth in this Act or the Agreement (including the specific preference for subsistence uses and access to subsistence resources provided under the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (94 United States Statutes at Large 2417 et sequentes)).