SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Oregon Public Land Transfer and Protection Act of 1998''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--ROGUE RIVER NATIONAL FOREST TRANSFERS Sec.
Land transfers involving Rogue River National Forest and other public land in Oregon.
TITLE II--PROTECTION OF OREGON AND CALIFORNIA RAILROAD GRANT LAND Sec.
No net loss of O & C land, CBWR land, or public domain land.
Relationship to Umpqua land exchange authority.
TITLE III--CONVEYANCE TO DESCHUTES COUNTY, OREGON Sec.
Conveyance to Deschutes County, Oregon.
TITLE I--ROGUE RIVER NATIONAL FOREST TRANSFERS SEC.
LAND TRANSFERS INVOLVING ROGUE RIVER NATIONAL FOREST AND OTHER PUBLIC LAND IN OREGON.
Transfer From Public Domain to National Forest.-- (1) Land transfer.--The public domain land depicted on the map entitled ``BLM/Rogue River NF Administrative Jurisdiction Transfer, North Half'' and dated April 28, 1998, and the map entitled ``BLM/Rogue River NF Administrative Jurisdiction Transfer, South Half'' and dated April 28, 1998, consisting of approximately 2,058 acres within the external boundaries of Rogue River National Forest in the State of Oregon, is added to and made a part of Rogue River National Forest.
Administrative jurisdiction.--Administrative jurisdiction over the land described in paragraph (1) is transferred from the Secretary of the Interior to the Secretary of Agriculture.
Management.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary of Agriculture shall manage the land described in paragraph (1) as part of Rogue River National Forest in accordance with the Act of March 1, 1911 (commonly known as the ``Weeks Law'') (36 United States Statutes at Large 961, chapter 186), and other laws (including regulations) applicable to the National Forest System.
Transfer From National Forest to Public Domain.-- (1) Land transfer.--The Federal land depicted on the maps described in subsection (a)(1), consisting of approximately 1,632 acres within the external boundaries of Rogue River National Forest, is transferred to unreserved public domain status, and the status of the land as part of Rogue River National Forest and the National Forest System is revoked.
Administrative jurisdiction.--Administrative jurisdiction over the land described in paragraph (1) is transferred from the Secretary of Agriculture to the Secretary of the Interior.
Management.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary of the Interior shall administer such land under the laws (including regulations) applicable to unreserved public domain land.
Restoration of Status of Certain National Forest Land as Revested Railroad Grant Land.-- (1) Restoration of earlier status.--The Federal land depicted on the maps described in subsection (a)(1), consisting of approximately 4,298 acres within the external boundaries of Rogue River National Forest, is restored to the status of revested Oregon and California Railroad grant land, and the status of the land as part of Rogue River National Forest and the National Forest System is revoked.
Administrative jurisdiction.--Administrative jurisdiction over the land described in paragraph (1) is transferred from the Secretary of Agriculture to the Secretary of the Interior.
Management.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary of the Interior shall administer the land described in paragraph (1) under the Act of August 28, 1937 (43 United States Code 1181a et sequentes), and other laws (including regulations) applicable to revested Oregon and California Railroad grant land under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior.
Addition of Certain Revested Railroad Grant Land to National Forest.-- (1) Land transfer.--The revested Oregon and California Railroad grant land depicted on the maps described in subsection (a)(1), consisting of approximately 960 acres within the external boundaries of Rogue River National Forest, is added to and made a part of Rogue River National Forest.
Administrative jurisdiction.--Administrative jurisdiction over the land described in paragraph (1) is transferred from the Secretary of the Interior to the Secretary of Agriculture.
Management.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary of Agriculture shall manage the land described in paragraph (1) as part of Rogue River National Forest in accordance with the Act of March 1, 1911 (36 United States Statutes at Large 961, chapter 186), and other laws (including regulations) applicable to the National Forest System.
Distribution of receipts.--Notwithstanding the sixth paragraph under the heading ``forest service'' in the Act of May 23, 1908 and section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (16 United States Code 500), revenues derived from the land described in paragraph (1) shall be distributed in accordance with the Act of August 28, 1937 (43 United States Code 1181a et sequentes).
Boundary Adjustment.--The boundaries of Rogue River National Forest are adjusted to encompass the land transferred to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture under this section and to exclude private property interests adjacent to the exterior boundaries of Rogue River National Forest, as depicted on the map entitled ``BLM/Rogue River NF Boundary Adjustment, North Half'' and dated April 28, 1998, and the map entitled ``BLM/Rogue River NF Boundary Adjustment, South Half'' and dated April 28, 1998.
Maps.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the maps described in this section shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
Miscellaneous Requirements.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall-- (1) revise the public land records relating to the land transferred under this section to reflect the administrative, boundary, and other changes made by this section; and (2) publish in the Federal Register appropriate notice to the public of the changes in administrative jurisdiction made by this section with regard to the land.
TITLE II--PROTECTION OF OREGON AND CALIFORNIA RAILROAD GRANT LAND SEC.
In this title: (1) O & C land.--The term ``O & C land'' means the land (commonly known as ``Oregon and California Railroad grant land'') that-- (A) revested in the United States under the Act of June 9, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 218, chapter 137); and (B) is managed by the Secretary of the Interior through the Bureau of Land Management under the Act of August 28, 1937 (43 United States Code 1181a et sequentes).
CBWR land.--The term ``CBWR land'' means the land (commonly known as ``Coos Bay Wagon Road grant land'') that-- (A) was reconveyed to the United States under the Act of February 26, 1919 (40 United States Statutes at Large 1179, chapter 47); and (B) is managed by the Secretary of the Interior through the Bureau of Land Management under the Act of August 28, 1937 (43 United States Code 1181a et sequentes).
Public domain land.-- (A) In general.--The term ``public domain land'' has the meaning given the term ``public lands'' in section 103 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1702).
Exclusions.--The term ``public domain land'' does not include O & C land or CBWR land.
Geographic area.--The term ``geographic area'' means the area in the State of Oregon within the boundaries of the Medford District, Roseburg District, Eugene District, Salem District, Coos Bay District, and Klamath Resource Area of the Lakeview District of the Bureau of Land Management, as the districts and the resource area were constituted on January 1, 1998.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
NO NET LOSS OF O & C LAND, CBWR LAND, OR PUBLIC DOMAIN LAND.
In carrying out sales, purchases, and exchanges of land in the geographic area, the Secretary shall ensure that on expiration of the 10-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act and on expiration of each 10-year period thereafter, the number of acres of O & C land and CBWR land in the geographic area, and the number of acres of O & C land, CBWR land, and public domain land in the geographic area that are available for timber harvesting, are not less than the number of acres of such land on the date of enactment of this Act.
RELATIONSHIP TO UMPQUA LAND EXCHANGE AUTHORITY.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, this title shall not apply to an exchange of land authorized under section 1028 of the Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996 (Public Law 104- 333; 110 United States Statutes at Large 4231), or any implementing legislation or administrative rule, if the land exchange is consistent with the memorandum of understanding between the Umpqua Land Exchange Project and the Association of Oregon and California Land Grant Counties dated February 19, 1998.
TITLE III--CONVEYANCE TO DESCHUTES COUNTY, OREGON SEC.
CONVEYANCE TO DESCHUTES COUNTY, OREGON.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to sell at fair market value to Deschutes County, Oregon, certain land to be used to protect the public's interest in clean water in the aquifer that provides drinking water for residents and to promote the public interest in the efficient delivery of social services and public amenities in southern Deschutes County, Oregon, by-- (1) providing land for private residential development to compensate for development prohibitions on private land currently zoned for residential development the development of which would cause increased pollution of ground and surface water; (2) providing for the streamlined and low-cost acquisition of land by nonprofit and governmental social service entities that offer needed community services to residents of the area; (3) allowing the County to provide land for community amenities and services such as open space, parks, roads, and other public spaces and uses to area residents at little or no cost to the public; and (4) otherwise assist in the implementation of the Deschutes County Regional Problem Solving Project.
Sale of Land.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') may make available for sale at fair market value to Deschutes County, Oregon, the land in Deschutes County, Oregon (referred to in this section as the ``County''), comprising approximately 544 acres and lying in Township 22, S., Range 10 E. Willamette Meridian, described as follows: (A) Sec.
1: (i) Government Lot 3, the portion west of Highway 97; (ii) Government Lot 4; (iii) SENW, the portion west of Highway 97; SWNW, the portion west of Highway 97, NWSW, the portion west of Highway 97; SWSW, the portion west of Highway 97; (B) Sec.
2: (i) Government Lot 1; (ii) SENE, SESW, the portion east of Huntington Road; NESE; NWSE; SWSE; SESE, the portion west of Highway 97; (C) Sec.
11: (i) Government Lot 10; (ii) NENE, the portion west of Highway 97; NWNE; SWNE, the portion west of Highway 97; NENW, the portion east of Huntington Road; SWNW, the portion east of Huntington Road; SENW.
Suitability for sale.--The Secretary shall convey the land under paragraph (1) only if the Secretary determines that the land is suitable for sale through the land use planning process.
Special Account.--The amount paid by the County for the conveyance of land under subsection (b)-- (1) shall be deposited in a special account in the Treasury of the United States; and (2) may be used by the Secretary for the purchase of environmentally sensitive land east of Range Nine East in the State of Oregon that is consistent with the goals and objectives of the land use planning process of the Bureau of Land Management.
Passed the Senate October 9 (legislative day, October 2), 1998.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.