This Act may be cited as the ``Radio Free Iran Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) It is the policy of the United States to support the right of the people of Iran to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas through any media, regardless of frontiers, in accordance with article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Consonant with this policy, radio broadcasting to Iran may be effective in furthering the open communication of accurate information and ideas about Iran to the people of Iran.
Such broadcasting to Iran, operated in a manner not inconsistent with the broad foreign policy of the United States and in accordance with high professional standards, would be in the national interest.
RADIO BROADCASTING TO IRAN.
In General.--In order to carry out the objectives set forth in section 2, the United States Information Agency shall provide for the open communication of information and ideas on Iran through the use of radio broadcasting to Iran.
Radio broadcasting to Iran under this section shall serve as a consistently reliable and authoritative source of accurate, objective, and comprehensive news on Iran.
Requirements Relating to Broadcasting.--(1) Radio broadcasting under subsection (a) shall be provided in accordance with standards that ensure the broadcast of programs which are objective, accurate, and balanced, and which present a variety of views.
Such standards shall be established by the board established under section 4.
Radio broadcasting under subsection (a) shall be provided in the Farsi language.
Designation of Broadcasts.--Any program of United States Government radio broadcasts in the Farsi language under this section shall be designated ``Radio Free Iran''.
Relationship With Other Radio Service to Iran.--It is the sense of Congress that radio broadcasting under this section supplement and not supplant other radio broadcasting and radio broadcasting services to Iran in the Farsi language that are provided by the United States Government.
Authority To Contract.--The Director of the United States Information Agency may carry out this section by means of grants, contracts, and leases and by such other means as the Director determines appropriate.
Any grant, contract, or lease under this subsection shall specify that payment thereunder by the Director is subject to the availability of appropriations therefor.
Assistance From Other Government Agencies.--The Director may secure on a reimbursable basis from any department or agency of the Federal Government, with the concurrence of the head of the department or agency, any technical or administrative support or services (including personnel and property) that the Director may require in order to provide radio broadcasting to Iran under this section.
Any reimbursement under this subsection shall be credited to the appropriation from which the support or services was derived.
In General.--There is hereby established an advisory board to be known as the Advisory Board for Radio Free Iran (in this section referred to as the ``Board'').
Membership Matters.--(1) The Board shall be composed of eight members of whom-- (A) four shall be appointed by the President; (B) two shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, upon the recommendation of the majority and minority leaders of the Senate; and (C) two shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Members shall be appointed for terms of 4 years.
Any vacancy in the Board shall not affect its powers but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
The President shall designate one member of the Board to be the Chairman.
Duties.--The Board shall have the following duties: (1) To establish standards for the broadcast of programs under section 3, which standards shall ensure that such programs are objective, accurate, and balanced, and present a variety of views.
To monitor the broadcast of programs under that section in order to ensure that the programs meet the standards so established.
Compensation.--(1) Each member of the Board who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Board.
All members of the Board who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
The members of the Board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Board.
Procurement of Supplies and Services.--The Board may, to the extent it considers necessary to carry out its duties under this section, procure supplies, services, and other personal property, including specialized electronic equipment.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for the United States Information Agency for fiscal year 1996 such sums as may be necessary for purposes of carrying out this Act, in-cluding the activities of the Board established under section 4.
Availability of Funds.--Amounts appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.