This Act may be cited as the ``Access Aid Act of 1999''.
Title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8001 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: PART L--ACCESS AID ACT ``SEC.
Purposes of Access Aid Act.--The Secretary is authorized, in accordance with the requirements of this part, to establish a demonstration program with the following purposes: ``(1) Encourage nonprofit organizations working with local school districts to establish a program that identifies and mentors college eligible students and their families on college selection, college admissions, and college funding.
Such program shall serve students no later than the end of grade 10 and shall continue to support them until the end of their 4- or 5-year college career.
Nonprofit organizations shall provide comprehensive mentoring, supportive services, and outreach to students and others and schools participating under this part to promote enrollment of first generation, low-income students and others in colleges and universities across the Nation.
Shift the cost of programs established under this part from the Federal Government to the private sector after 24 months to ensure that programs created under this part continue without Federal funds.
A nonprofit organization selected to receive assistance under this part shall involve parents or legal guardians of students in every aspect of college selection and college admissions in the financial aid process.
Counseling Component; Individual Services.--The primary focus of the counseling services under this part shall be college selection, college admissions, and college funding.
Such counseling shall involve the students' parents or legal guardians and shall be conducted on an individual and confidential basis.
The program shall enable students to evaluate and select a college based on the student's interest level and qualifications not cost.
Such support programs ensures a higher rate of college graduation.
Emergency Grant Component.--Programs under this part may provide participating students small grants to underwrite the costs of college visits or to purchase books and equipment required by (but not included in) the student budget of the college.
In addition, emergency grants may be used when a student's demonstrated need is not fully funded by the postsecondary institution.
In every case, emergency grants will be made pursuant to the purposes outlined in this part.
Workshops Component.--In addition to individual counseling of students and scholars, the organization shall provide outreach support to each participating school's guidance or career counseling staff and provide workshops relating to college admissions, college funding, and financial aid form completion to the general population of each participating school or other interested schools.
At each project site, the organization shall provide no less than 10 workshops in participating and surrounding school districts.
Identification of Participants.--The students selected for assistance under this part shall be nominated for the program by the staffs of the participating high schools.
The primary standard for selection relates to college eligible, first generation, low-income students, with no student served by TRIO or GEAR UP eligible for the program under this part.
Scope of Access Aid.--Students shall be selected for assistance under this part in each State.
Qualifying Organizations.--In order to qualify for a grant under this part, the applicant shall-- ``(1) be a tax-exempt not-for-profit organization; ``(2) not be affiliated with a public or private educational institution; ``(3) not sell a financial product of any kind; ``(4) demonstrate experience in the college admissions and college funding arenas; ``(5) demonstrate familiarity with Federal outreach programs; ``(6) demonstrate prior experience with the public secondary school sector; ``(7) provide evidence that there is a demand by schools and school districts for its program; ``(8) provide a plan for orderly shift of the funding component from the public to the private sector; ``(9) provide for a plan for public awareness of the program, the participants, and the outcomes; ``(10) provide a plan for counseling services for participants from entry into the program until completion of college; and ``(11) include a quantifiable evaluation plan.
Plan Required for Eligibility.-- ``(1) In order to qualify for a grant under this part, the applicant shall submit to the Secretary a plan for carrying out the program under this part.
Such plan shall describe the program, including the selection process for participating students and the districts, the services rendered, and the strategy to be used to shift the funding responsibility from the Federal Government to the private sector.
The plan submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be in such form, contain or be accompanied by such information, and be submitted at such time as the Secretary may require by regulation and shall-- ``(A) describe the activities for which assistance under this section is sought; and ``(B) provide such additional assurances to ensure compliance with the requirements of this part.
``In order to receive payments under this part, an organization shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the organization will provide comprehensive mentoring, outreach, and supportive services to students, parents, and schools participating under this part to promote enrollment of first generation, low-income students in colleges and universities across the Nation.
Such individual services shall begin not later than the end of the 10th grade and shall continue until completion of college.
Such counseling must involve the students' parents or legal guardians and shall be conducted on an individual and confidential basis.
The primary focus of the counseling services shall be college selection, college admissions, and college funding.
In order to assure completion of college, the program shall have participating students select and attend colleges across the Nation based upon their appropriateness for the student rather than the cost.
In General.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, establish criteria for determining whether comprehensive mentoring, counseling, outreach, and supportive services programs may be used to meet the requirements of this part.
Allowable Providers.--To meet the requirements of this part, the organization may contract on a limited basis certain services from other providers.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2005.