This Act may be cited as the ``China Policy Act of 1995''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The People's Republic of China comprises one-fifth of the world's population, or 1,200,000,000 people, and its policies have a profound effect on the world economy and global security.
The People's Republic of China is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and plays an important role in regional organizations such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum and the ASEAN Regional Forum.
The People's Republic of China is a nuclear power with the largest standing army in the world, and has been rapidly modernizing and expanding its military capabilities.
The People's Republic of China is currently undergoing a change of leadership which will have dramatic implications for the political and economic future of the Chinese people and for China's relations with the United States.
China's estimated $600,000,000,000 economy has enjoyed unparalleled growth in recent years.
Economic liberalization in China has hastened development of an informed middle class which demands greater political and civil freedom; therefore, the Chinese people, including a number of dissidents, favor increased economic contacts between the United States and China.
Despite increased economic linkages between the United States and China, bilateral relations have deteriorated significantly because of fundamental policy differences over a variety of important foreign policy issues.
The People's Republic of China has violated international standards regarding the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
According to the State Department Country Report on Human Rights Practices for 1994, there continue to be ``widespread and well-documented human rights abuses in China, in violation of internationally accepted norms .
arbitrary and lengthy incommunicado detention, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners.
The regime continued severe restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly and association, and tightened control on the exercise of these rights during 1994.
Serious human rights abuses persisted in Tibet and other areas populated by ethnic minorities.''.
The unjustified and arbitrary arrest, imprisonment, and initiation of criminal proceedings against Harry Wu, a citizen of the United States, has greatly exacerbated the deterioration in relations between the United States and the People's Republic of China, and all charges against him should be dismissed.
The United States currently has numerous sanctions on the People's Republic of China with respect to government-to- government assistance, arms sales, and other commercial transactions.
It is in the interest of the United States to foster China's continued engagement in the broadest range of international fora and increased respect for human rights, democratic institutions, and the rule of law in China.
UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC INITIATIVES.
United States Objectives.--The Congress calls upon the President to undertake intensified diplomatic initiatives to persuade the Government of the People's Republic of China to-- (1) immediately and unconditionally release Harry Wu from detention; (2) adhere to prevailing international standards regarding the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction by, among other things, immediately halting the export of ballistic missile technology and the provision of other weapons of mass destruction assistance, in violation of international standards, to Iran, Pakistan, and other countries of concern; (3) respect the internationally-recognized human rights of its citizens by, among other things-- (A) permitting freedom of speech, freedom of press, freedom of assembly, freedom of association, and freedom of religion; (B) ending arbitrary detention, torture, forced labor, and other mistreatment of prisoners; (C) releasing all political prisoners, and dismantling the Chinese system of jailing political prisoners (the gulag) and the Chinese forced labor system (the Laogai); (D) ending coercive birth control practices; and (E) respecting the legitimate rights of the people of Tibet and other ethnic minorities; (4) curtail excessive modernization and expansion of China's military capabilities, and adopt defense transparency measures that will reassure China's neighbors; (5) end provocative military actions in the South China Sea and elsewhere that threaten China's neighbors, and work with them to resolve disputes in a peaceful manner; (6) adhere to a rules-based international trade regime in which existing trade agreements are fully implemented and enforced, and equivalent and reciprocal market access is provided for United States goods and services in China; and (7) reduce tensions with Taiwan by means of dialogue and other confidence building measures.
Venues for Diplomatic Initiatives.--The diplomatic initiatives taken in accordance with subsection (a) should include actions by the United States-- (1) in the conduct of bilateral relations with China; (2) in the United Nations and other international organizations; (3) in the World Bank and other international financial institutions; (4) in the World Trade Organization and other international trade fora; and (5) in the conduct of bilateral relations with other countries in order to encourage them to support and join with the United States in taking the foregoing actions.
The President shall report to the Congress within 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and no less frequently than every 6 months thereafter, on-- (1) the actions taken by the United States in accordance with section 3 during the preceding 6-month period; (2) the actions taken with respect to China during the preceding 6-month period by-- (A) the United Nations and other international organizations; (B) the World Bank and other international financial institutions; and (C) the World Trade Organization and other international trade fora; and (3) the progress achieved with respect to each of the United States objectives identified in section 3(a).
Such reports may be submitted in classified and unclassified form.
Plan for Radio Free Asia.--Section 309(c) of the United States International Broadcasting Act of 1994 (22 United States Code 6208(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Submission of Plan.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of the China Policy Act of 1995, the Director of the United States Information Agency shall submit to the Congress a detailed plan for the establishment and operation of Radio Free Asia in accordance with this section.
Such plan shall include the following: ``(1) A description of the manner in which Radio Free Asia would meet the funding limitations provided in subsection (d)(4).
A description of the numbers and qualifications of employees it proposes to hire.
How it proposes to meet the technical requirements for carrying out its responsibilities under this section.''.
Initiation of Broadcasting to China.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, Radio Free Asia shall commence broadcasting to China.
Such broadcasting may be undertaken initially by means of contracts with or grants to existing broadcasting organizations and facilities.