This Act may be cited as the ``American History and Civics Education Act of 2003''.
In this Act: (1) American history and civics.--The term ``American history and civics'' means the key events, key persons, key ideas, and key documents that shaped the institutions and democratic heritage of the United States of America.
Chairman.--The term ``Chairman'' means the Chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Educational institution.--The term ``educational institution''-- (A) means-- (i) an institution of higher education; (ii) an educational institution created by a legislative act of a State for the express purpose of teaching American history and civics to elementary school and secondary school students; or (iii) a nonprofit educational institution, library, or research center; and (B) includes a consortium of entities described in subparagraph (A).
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)).
Key documents.--The term ``key documents'' means the documents that established or explained the foundational principles of democracy in the United States, including the United States Constitution and the amendments to the Constitution (particularly the Bill of Rights), the Declaration of Independence, the Federalist Papers, and the Emancipation Proclamation.
Key events.--The term ``key events'' means the critical turning points in the history of the United States (including the encounter of Native Americans with European settlers, the American Revolution, the Civil War, the world wars of the twentieth century, the civil rights movement, and the major court decisions, legislation, literature, and the arts) that established democracy and extended its promise in American life.
Key ideas.--The term ``key ideas'' means the ideas that shaped the democratic institutions and heritage of the United States, including the notions of liberty, equal opportunity, individualism, laissez faire, the rule of law, federalism and e pluribus unum, the free exercise of religion, the separation of church and state, and a belief in progress.
Key persons.--The term ``key persons'' means the men and women who led the United States as Founding Fathers, Native American leaders, elected officials, scientists, inventors, pioneers, advocates of equal rights, entrepreneurs, and artists.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
Teachers of american history and civics.--The term ``teachers of American history and civics'' means kindergarten through grade 12 teachers who teach American history, government, or civics, or who incorporate such subjects into their teaching.
PRESIDENTIAL ACADEMIES FOR TEACHING OF AMERICAN HISTORY AND CIVICS.
Establishment.--From amounts appropriated under subsection (j), the National Endowment for the Humanities shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to educational institutions to establish Presidential Academies for Teaching of American History and Civics (in this section referred to as ``Academies'') that shall offer workshops for teachers of American history and civics-- (1) to strengthen such teachers' knowledge of the subjects of American history and civics; and (2) to learn how better to teach such subjects.
Application.-- (1) In general.--An educational institution that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the National Endowment for the Humanities at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the National Endowment for the Humanities may require.
Contents.--An application submitted under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) include the criteria that will be used to determine which teachers will be selected to attend workshops offered by the Academy; (B) identify the individual the educational institution intends to appoint to be the primary scholar at the Academy; (C) include a description of the curriculum to be used at workshops offered by the Academy; and (D) provide an assurance that the recruitment plan for which teachers will be selected to attend workshops offered by the Academy will include teachers from schools receiving assistance under part A of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6311 et sequentes), particularly those schools with high concentrations of students described in section 1124(c) of such Act.
Number of Grants.--The National Endowment for the Humanities shall award not more than 12 grants to different educational institutions under this section.
Distribution.--The Chairman shall encourage equitable distribution of grants under this section among the geographical regions of the United States.
Grant Terms.--Grants awarded under this section shall be for a term of 2 years.
Use of Funds.-- (1) Workshops.-- (A) In general.--An educational institution that receives a grant under this section shall establish an Academy that shall offer a workshop during the summer, or during another appropriate time, for teachers of American history and civics-- (i) to strengthen such teachers' knowledge of the subjects of American history and civics; and (ii) to learn how better to teach such subjects.
Duration of workshop.--A workshop offered pursuant to this section shall be approximately 2 weeks in duration.
Academy staff.-- (A) Primary scholar.--Each Academy shall be headed by a primary scholar identified in the application submitted under subsection (b) who shall-- (i) be accomplished in the field of American history and civics; and (ii) design the curriculum for and lead the workshop.
Core teachers.--Each primary scholar shall appoint an appropriate number of core teachers.
At the direction of the primary scholar, the core teachers shall teach and train the workshop attendees.
Selection of teachers.-- (A) In general.-- (i) Number of teachers.--Each year, each Academy shall select kindergarten through grade 12 teachers of American history and civics to attend the workshop offered by the Academy.
Flexibility in number of teachers.-- Each Academy shall select not more than 300 and not less than 50 teachers under clause (i).
Teachers from public and private schools.--An Academy may select teachers from public schools and private schools to attend the workshop offered by the Academy.
Costs.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a teacher who attends a workshop offered pursuant to this section shall not incur costs associated with attending the workshop, including costs for meals, lodging, and materials while attending the workshop, and may receive a stipend to cover such costs.
Travel costs.--A teacher who attends a workshop offered pursuant to this section shall use non-Federal funds to pay for such teacher's costs of transit to and from the Academy.
Evaluation.-- (1) In general.--At the completion of all of the workshops assisted in the third year grants are awarded under this section, the National Endowment for the Humanities shall conduct an evaluation and submit a report on its findings to the relevant committees of Congress.
Content of evaluation.--The evaluation conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall-- (A) determine the overall success of the grant program authorized under this section; and (B) highlight the best grantees' practices in order to become models for future grantees.
Non-Federal Funds.--An educational institution receiving Federal assistance under this section may contribute non-Federal funds toward the costs of operating the Academy.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $7,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
CONGRESSIONAL ACADEMIES FOR STUDENTS OF AMERICAN HISTORY AND CIVICS.
Establishment.--From amounts appropriated under subsection (j), the National Endowment for the Humanities shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to educational institutions to establish Congressional Academies for Students of American History and Civics (in this section referred to as ``Academies'') that shall offer workshops for outstanding students of American history and civics to broaden and deepen such students' understanding of American history and civics.
Application.-- (1) In general.--An educational institution that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the National Endowment for the Humanities at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the National Endowment for the Humanities may require.
Contents.--An application submitted under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) include the criteria that will be used to determine which students will be selected to attend workshops offered by the Academy; (B) identify the individual the educational institution intends to appoint to be the primary scholar at the Academy; (C) include a description of the curriculum to be used at workshops offered by the Academy; and (D) include a description of how the educational institution will-- (i) inform students from schools receiving assistance under part A of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6311 et sequentes), particularly those schools with high concentrations of students described in section 1124(c) of such Act, of the Academy; and (ii) provide such students with information on how to apply to attend workshops offered by the Academy so that such students may attend the workshops.
Number of Grants.--The National Endowment for the Humanities shall award not more than 12 grants to different educational institutions under this section.
Distribution.--The Chairman shall encourage equitable distribution of grants under this section among the geographical regions of the United States.
Grant Terms.--Grants awarded under this section shall be for a term of 2 years.
Use of Funds.-- (1) Workshops.-- (A) In general.--An educational institution that receives a grant under this section shall establish an Academy that shall offer a workshop during the summer, or during another appropriate time, for outstanding students of American history, government, and civics to broaden and deepen such students' understanding of American history and civics.
Duration of workshop.--A workshop offered pursuant to this section shall be approximately 4 weeks in duration.
Academy staff.-- (A) Primary scholar.--Each Academy shall be headed by a primary scholar identified in the application submitted under subsection (b) who shall-- (i) be accomplished in the field of American history and civics; and (ii) design the curriculum for and lead the workshop.
Core teachers.--Each primary scholar shall appoint an appropriate number of core teachers.
At the direction of the primary scholar, the core teachers shall teach the workshop attendees.
Selection of students.-- (A) Number of students.--Each year, each Academy shall select between 100 and 300 eligible students to attend the workshop offered by the Academy.
Eligible students.--A student shall be eligible to attend a workshop offered by an Academy if the student-- (i) is recommended by the student's secondary school principal (or other head of such student's academic program) to attend the workshop; and (ii) will be a junior or senior in the academic year following attendance at the workshop.
Costs.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a student who attends a workshop offered pursuant to this section shall not incur costs associated with attending the workshop, including costs for meals, lodging, and materials while attending the workshop.
Travel costs.--A student who attends a workshop offered pursuant to this section shall use non-Federal funds to pay for such student's costs of transit to and from the Academy.
Evaluation.-- (1) In general.--At the completion of all of the workshops assisted in the third year grants are awarded under this section, the National Endowment for the Humanities shall conduct an evaluation and submit a report on its findings to the relevant committees of Congress.
Content of evaluation.--The evaluation conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall-- (A) determine the overall success of the grant program authorized under this section; and (B) highlight the best grantees' practices in order to become models for future grantees.
Non-Federal Funds.--An educational institution receiving Federal assistance under this section may contribute non-Federal funds toward the costs of operating the Academy.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $14,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
NATIONAL ALLIANCE OF TEACHERS OF AMERICAN HISTORY AND CIVICS.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under subsection (e), the National Endowment for the Humanities shall award 1 or more grants to organizations for the creation of a national alliance of elementary school and secondary school teachers of American history and civics.
Purpose.--The purpose of the national alliance is-- (A) to facilitate the sharing of ideas among teachers of American history and civics; and (B) to encourage best practices in the teaching of American history and civics.
Application.--An organization that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the National Endowment for the Humanities at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the National Endowment for the Humanities may require.
Grant Term.--A grant awarded under this section shall be for a term of 2 years and may be reapplied after the initial term expires.
Use of Funds.--An organization that receives a grant under this section may use the grant funds for any of the following: (1) Creation of a website on the Internet to facilitate discussion of new ideas on improving American history and civics education.
Creation of in-State chapters of the national alliance, to which individual teachers of American history and civics may belong, that sponsors American history and civics activities for such teachers in the State.
Seminars, lectures, or other events focused on American history and civics, which may be sponsored in cooperation with, or through grants awarded to, libraries, States' humanities councils, or other appropriate entities.
Coordinate activities with other nonprofit educational alliances that promote the teaching or study of subjects related to American history and civics.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, and for any administrative costs associated with carrying out sections 3 and 4, $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
Passed the Senate June 20, 2003.
Attest: EMILY J. REYNOLDS, Secretary.