This Act may be cited as the ``225th Anniversary of the American Revolution Commemoration Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The American Revolution, inspired by the spirit of liberty and independence among the inhabitants of the original 13 colonies of Great Britain, was an event of global significance having a profound and lasting effect upon American Government, laws, culture, society, and values.
The years 2000 through 2008 mark the 225th anniversary of the Revolutionary War.
Every generation of American citizens should have an opportunity to understand and appreciate the continuing legacy of the American Revolution.
This 225th anniversary provides an opportunity to enhance public awareness and understanding of the impact of the American Revolution's legacy on the lives of citizens today.
Although the National Park Service administers battlefields, historical parks, historic sites, and programs that address elements of the story of the American Revolution, there is a need to establish partnerships that link sites and programs administered by the National Park Service with those of other Federal and non-Federal entities in order to place the story of the American Revolution in the broad context of its causes, consequences, and meanings.
The story and significance of the American Revolution can best engage the American people through a national program of the National Park Service that links historic structures and sites, routes, activities, community projects, exhibits, and multimedia materials, in a manner that is both unified and flexible.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To recognize the enduring importance of the American Revolution in the lives of American citizens today.
To authorize the National Park Service to coordinate, connect, and facilitate Federal and non-Federal activities to commemorate, honor, and interpret the history of the American Revolution, its significance, and its relevance to the shape and spirit of American Government and society.
225TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION COMMEMORATION PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a program to be known as the ``225th Anniversary of the American Revolution Commemoration'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``225th Anniversary'').
In administering the 225th Anniversary, the Secretary shall-- (1) produce and disseminate to appropriate persons educational materials, such as handbooks, maps, interpretive guides, or electronic information related to the 225th Anniversary and the American Revolution; (2) enter into appropriate cooperative agreements and memoranda of understanding to provide technical assistance under subsection (c); (3) assist in the protection of resources associated with the American Revolution; (4) enhance communications, connections, and collaboration among the National Park Service units and programs related to the Revolutionary War; (5) expand the research base for American Revolution interpretation and education; and (6) create and adopt an official, uniform symbol or device for the theme ``Lighting Freedom's Flame: American Revolution, 225th Anniversary'' and issue regulations for its use.
Elements.--The 225th Anniversary shall encompass the following elements: (1) All units and programs of the National Park Service determined by the Secretary to pertain to the American Revolution.
Other governmental and nongovernmental sites, facilities, and programs of an educational, research, or interpretive nature that are documented to be directly related to the American Revolution.
Through the Secretary of State, the participation of the Governments of the United Kingdom, France, the Netherlands, Spain, and Canada.
Cooperative Agreements and Memoranda of Understanding.--To achieve the purposes of this Act and to ensure effective coordination of the Federal and non-Federal elements of the 225th Anniversary with National Park Service units and programs, the Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements and memoranda of understanding with, and provide technical assistance to, the following: (1) The heads of other Federal agencies, States, units of local government, and private entities.
In cooperation with the Secretary of State, the Governments of the United Kingdom, France, the Netherlands, Spain, and Canada.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this Act $500,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2008.