This Act may be cited as the ``Right to Bear Arms Protection and Privacy Act of 2000''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Citizens have a right, under the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution, to keep and bear arms.
Lawsuits have been commenced against manufacturers, distributors, dealers, and importers of nondefective firearms, which seek money damages and other relief for the harm caused by the misuse of firearms by third parties, including criminals.
The manufacture, importation, possession, sale, and use of firearms and ammunition in the United States is heavily regulated by Federal, State, and local laws.
Such Federal laws include the Gun Control Act of 1968, the National Firearms Act, and the Arms Export Control Act.
Businesses in the United States that are engaged in interstate and foreign commerce through the lawful design, marketing, distribution, manufacture, importation, or sale to the public of firearms or ammunition that have been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce are not, and should not be, liable or otherwise legally responsible for the harm caused by those who criminally or unlawfully misuse firearm products or ammunition products.
The possibility of imposing liability or other legal restrictions on an entire industry as a result of harm that is the sole responsibility of others is an abuse of the legal system, erodes public confidence in our Nation's laws, threatens the diminution of a basic constitutional right, invites the disassembly and destabilization of other industries and economic sectors lawfully competing in America's free enterprise system, and constitutes an unreasonable burden on interstate and foreign commerce.
The liability and equitable actions commenced or contemplated by municipalities, cities, and other entities are based on theories without foundation in hundreds of years of the common law and American jurisprudence.
The possible sustaining of these actions by a maverick judicial officer would expand civil liability in a manner never contemplated by the Framers of the Constitution.
The Congress further finds that such an expansion of liability would constitute a deprivation of the rights, privileges, and immunities guaranteed to a citizen of the United States under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To prohibit causes of action against law-abiding manufacturers, distributors, dealers, and importers of firearms or ammunition products for the harm caused by the criminal or unlawful misuse of firearm products or ammunition products by others.
To preserve a citizen's constitutional access to a supply of firearms and ammunition for all lawful purposes, including hunting, self-defense, collecting, and competitive or recreational shooting.
To protect a citizen's right to privacy concerning the lawful purchase and ownership of firearms.
To guarantee a citizen's rights, privileges, and immunities, as applied to the States, under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, pursuant to section five of that Amendment.
PROHIBITION ON BRINGING OF QUALIFIED CIVIL ACTIONS IN FEDERAL OR STATE COURT.
In General.--A qualified civil action may not be brought in any Federal or State court.
Dismissal of Pending Actions.--A qualified civil action that is pending on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be dismissed immediately by the court in which the action was brought.
In this Act: (1) Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' means, with respect to a qualified product-- (A) a person who is lawfully engaged in a business to import, make, produce, create, or assemble a qualified product, and who designs or formulates, or has engaged another person to design or formulate, a qualified product; (B) a lawful seller of a qualified product, but only with respect to an aspect of the product that is made or affected when the seller makes, produces, creates, or assembles and designs or formulates an aspect of the product made by another person; and (C) any lawful seller of a qualified product who represents to a user of a qualified product that the seller is a manufacturer of the qualified product.
Person.--The term ``person'' means any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity, including any governmental entity.
Qualified product.--The term ``qualified product'' means a firearm (as defined in section 921(a)(3) of title 18, United States Code) or ammunition (as defined in section 921(a)(17) of such title), or a component part of a firearm or ammunition, that has been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce.
Qualified civil action.--The term ``qualified civil action'' means a civil or equitable action brought by any person against a lawful manufacturer or lawful seller of a qualified product, or a trade association, for damages or other relief as a result of the criminal or unlawful misuse of a qualified product by the person or a third party, but shall not include an action brought against a manufacturer, seller, or transferor who knowingly manufactures, sells, or transfers a qualified product with knowledge that such product will be used to commit a crime under Federal or State law.
Seller.--The term ``seller'' means, with respect to a qualified product, a person who-- (A) in the course of a lawful business conducted for that purpose, lawfully sells, distributes, rents, leases, prepares, blends, packages, labels, or otherwise is involved in placing a qualified product in the stream of commerce; or (B) lawfully installs, repairs, refurbishes, reconditions, or maintains an aspect of a qualified product that is alleged to have resulted in damages.
State.--The term ``State'' includes each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States, and any political subdivision of any such place.
Trade association.--The term ``trade association'' means any association or business organization (whether or not incorporated under Federal or State law) 2 or more members of which are manufacturers or sellers of a qualified product.
PROHIBITION OF BACKGROUND CHECK FEE; GUN OWNER PRIVACY.
Prohibition of Background Check Fee.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 33 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Prohibition of fee for background check in connection with firearm transfer ``No officer, employee, or agent of the United States, including a State or local officer or employee acting on behalf of the United States, may charge or collect any fee in connection with any background check required in connection with the transfer of a firearm (as defined in section 921(a) of title 18).''.
Conforming amendment.--The analysis for chapter 33 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 540B the following: ``540C.
Prohibition of fee for background check in connection with firearm transfer.''.
Protection of Gun Owner Privacy and Ownership Rights.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Gun owner privacy and ownership rights ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States or officer, employee, or agent of the United States, including a State or local officer or employee acting on behalf of the United States-- ``(1) shall perform any criminal background check through the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (referred to in this section as the `system') on any person if the system does not require and result in the immediate destruction of all information, in any form whatsoever or through any medium, about any such person that is determined, through the use of the system, not to be prohibited by subsection (g) or (n) of section 922, or by State law, from receiving a firearm; or ``(2) shall continue to operate the system (including requiring a background check before the transfer of a firearm) unless-- ``(A) the NICS Index complies with the requirements of section 552a(e)(5) of title 5, United States Code; and ``(B) the agency responsible for the system and the system's compliance with Federal law does not invoke the exceptions under subsection (j)(2) or paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (k) of section 552a of title 5, United States Code, except if specifically identifiable information is compiled for a particular law enforcement investigation or specific criminal enforcement matter.
Applicability.--Subsection (a)(1) does not apply to the retention or transfer of information relating to-- ``(1) any unique identification number provided by the National Instant Criminal Background Check System under section 922(t)(1)(B)(i); or ``(2) the date on which that number is provided.''.
Conforming amendment.--The analysis for chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``931.
Gun owner privacy and ownership rights.''.
Civil Remedies.--Any person aggrieved by a violation of section 540C of title 28 or 931 of title 18, United States Code (as added by this section), may bring an action in the United States district court for the district in which the person resides for actual damages, punitive damages, and such other relief as the court determines to be appropriate, including a reasonable attorney's fee.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take effect on the date of enactment of this Act except that the amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect as of November 30, 1998.