This Act may be cited as the ``School-Based Childhood Immunizations Program Amendments Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM FOR PROVISION OF CHILDHOOD IMMUNIZATIONS THROUGH ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes), as amended by section 308 of Public Law 102-531 (106 United States Statutes at Large 3495), is amended by inserting after section 317D the following section: ``school-based program of immunizations for children ``Sec.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and after consultation with the Secretary of Education, may make grants to local educational agencies for the purpose of providing to children immunizations for vaccine-preventable diseases.
Eligible Geographic Areas.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the local educational agency involved administers 1 or more elementary schools located in communities-- ``(1) with substantial numbers of cases of vaccine- preventable diseases; or ``(2) with substantial numbers of children who have not received the number and variety of immunizations commonly recommended by medical authorities.
Certain Program Requirements.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the local educational agency involved makes agreements as follows for the program operated with the grant: ``(1) The principal locations for providing immunizations will be the premises of schools described in subsection (b).
To the extent practicable, the individual with the principal responsibility for carrying out such program for a participating school will be a registered nurse-- ``(A) who is licensed by the State involved to practice as a nurse; and ``(B)(i) to whom the State has issued a credential in school nursing; or ``(ii) in the case of a State that does not issue such credentials, who has other documentation or experience appropriate for serving as a nurse at an elementary school.
(A) Each participating school will, on the premises of the school, make available to each student, and to each of the siblings of the student whose age is below the official age of school entry, the number and variety of vaccines recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
To the extent practicable, each participating school will, on the premises of the school, make available to children in family child care homes or child care centers the number and variety of vaccines so recommended.
To the extent practicable, the immunizations will be administered only by the school nurse or by other registered nurses licensed by the State involved.
A charge will not be imposed for the provision of the immunizations.
Each participating school will notify the families of the students of the school that the school is providing the immunizations and of the importance of early immunization, and will answer parental inquiries about immunization.
(A) In the case of the community in which a participating school is located and the communities in which the students of the school reside, the school will, subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C), carry out in each such community a program to educate the residents of the community on-- ``(i) the availability from the school of immunizations; ``(ii) the importance of children receiving the number and variety of immunizations recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics; ``(iii) the fact that no significant adverse health consequences result from administering immunizations to children during periods in which the children have common illnesses; and ``(iv) the availability of other health, educational, or social services from public and nonprofit entities in the geographic area involved.
In educating residents for purposes of subparagraph (A), each participating school will carry out the program of education for individuals caring for children in child care homes and child care centers, and will carry out the program for all parents of newborn infants.
Such program of education will be coordinated among each participating school (and such schools will not carry out duplicative activities in a community) and will be coordinated with local health departments, hospitals and maternity wards, birth registries, and community health centers.
In the case of the purposes for which a grant under subsection (a) may be expended, the local educational agency will maintain expenditures of non-Federal amounts for such purposes at a level that is not less than the level of such expenditures maintained by the agency for the fiscal year preceding the first fiscal year for which the agency receives such a grant.
Required Prior Arrangements for Programs.-- ``(1) Provision by state of supply of vaccines.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) to a local educational agency only if the agency has entered into an agreement with the State involved under which the State will, for purposes of the program operated by the agency with the grant, provide to the agency a supply of vaccines that is satisfactory to the Secretary in terms of the quantity of vaccines supplied and the charge imposed for the vaccines.
Participants in program of public education.--With respect to the program of education described in subsection (c)(7), the Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the local educational agency involved has entered into such agreements as may be necessary to ensure that, for purposes of educating a substantial number of individuals, an appropriate number and variety of public and private entities participate in the program and that the activities of the program are coordinated among such entities.
Requirement of Application.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary containing the agreements required in this section, and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such other agreements, and such assurances and information, as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Certain Expenditures of Grant.-- ``(1) Certain permissible expenditures.--The purposes for which a grant under subsection (a) may be expended by a local educational agency include-- ``(A) carrying out the program of education described in subsection (c)(7); and ``(B) recruiting and retaining a school nurse, without regard to whether the functions of the nurse will include functions other than the functions of the program carried out under subsection (a).
General limitation.--In the case of the costs of establishing or operating a program under subsection (a), the Secretary may not authorize a local educational agency receiving a grant under such subsection to expend more than 15 percent of the grant for such costs that are not directly related to the provision of immunizations at participating schools.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `immunizations' means immunizations against vaccine-preventable diseases.
The term `local educational agency' has the meaning given such term in section 1471 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
The term `participating school' means a school described in subsection (b) at which an agency is providing immunizations with a grant under subsection (a).
The term `school nurse' means a nurse described in subsection (c)(2).
Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996.
Initial number of grants.--For the first fiscal year for which amounts are appropriated under paragraph (1), the Secretary may not make more than 10 grants under subsection (a).