This Act may be cited as the ``National Language Act of 1995''.
ENGLISH AS OFFICIAL LANGUAGE.
In General.--Title 4, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 6--LANGUAGE OF THE GOVERNMENT ``Sec.
Declaration of official language.
Official Government activities in English.
Declaration of official language ``English shall be the official language of the Government of the United States.
Official Government activities in English ``The Government of the United States shall conduct its official business in English, including publications, income tax forms, and informational materials.
Exceptions ``This chapter does not apply to the use of a language other than English-- ``(1) for religious purposes; ``(2) for training in foreign languages for international communication; ``(3) to programs in schools designed to encourage students to learn foreign languages; or ``(4) by persons over 62 years of age.
``This chapter does not prevent the Government of the United States from providing interpreters for persons over 62 years of age.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of chapters for title 4, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``6.
Language of the Government............................. 161''.
TERMINATION OF BILINGUAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
Repeal of Bilingual Education Act.--The Bilingual Education Act (20 United States Code 3281 et sequentes) is repealed.
Termination of Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs.--The Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs in the Department of Education, established by part D of the Bilingual Education Act (20 United States Code 3331 et sequentes), is terminated.
Recapture of Unexpended Funds.--Any funds that have been provided as grants under the Bilingual Education Act (20 United States Code 3281 et seq.
), and that have not been expended before the date of the enactment of this Act, shall be recaptured by the Secretary of Education and deposited in the general fund of the Treasury.
Transitional Provisions.-- (1) Completion of programs during current school year.-- Subsections (a) and (c) shall not apply to any program under part A of the Bilingual Education Act (20 United States Code 3291 et sequentes) until completion of the most recent school year of the program that commenced before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Assistance for transition to special alternative instructional programs.--During the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education may assist local educational agencies in the transition of children enrolled in programs assisted under the Bilingual Education Act (20 United States Code 3281 et sequentes) to Special Alternative Instructional Programs that do not make use of the native language of the student.
REPEAL OF BILINGUAL VOTING REQUIREMENTS.
In General.-- (1) Bilingual election requirements.-- Section 203 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 1973aa-1a) is repealed.
Voting rights.--Section 4 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 1973b) is amended by striking subsection (f).
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) References to section 203.--The Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 1973 et sequentes) is amended-- (A) in section 204, by striking ``or 203,''; and (B) in the first sentence of section 205, by striking ``, 202, or 203'' and inserting ``or 202''.
References to section 4.--The Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 1973 et sequentes) is amended-- (A) in sections 2(a), 3(a), 3(b), 3(c), 4(d), 5, 6, and 13, by striking ``, or in contravention of the guarantees set forth in section 4(f)(2)''; (B) in paragraphs (1)(A) and (3) of section 4(a), by striking ``or (in the case of a State or subdivision seeking a declaratory judgment under the second sentence of this subsection) in contravention of the guarantees of subsection (f)(2)''; and (C) in paragraphs (1)(B) and (5) of section 4(a), by striking ``or (in the case of a State or subdivision which sought a declaratory judgment under the second sentence of this subsection) that denials or abridgments of the right to vote in contravention of the guarantees of subsection (f)(2) have occurred anywhere in the territory of such State or subdivision''.
ENGLISH LANGUAGE REQUIREMENT FOR CEREMONIES FOR ADMISSION OF NEW CITIZENS.
Section 337(d) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1448(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``All public ceremonies in which the oath of allegiance is administered pursuant to this section shall be conducted solely in the English language.''.
This Act (and the amendments made by this Act) shall not preempt any law of any State.