This Act may be referred to as ``The Well America Act''.
Establishment.--There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Wellness Trust Fund''.
The Wellness Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as may be made and such amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to, such fund.
There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund for each year 4 percent of all health care premiums, as well as 4 percent of all Federal expenditures on health care for populations served outside of health care plans.
Wellness Voucher.--The Secretary shall issue to each enrollee satisfying the conditions of paragraph (b) a wellness voucher card which may be used for identification, verifying eligibility for benefits under this section, and processing of payments under this section to participating wellness providers selected by the enrollee.
The wellness voucher card shall bear an indication of its total value as computed under paragraph (g), the portion of its value used and the portion remaining at any time.
The wellness voucher card function may be incorporated into the health security card.
Eligibility.--Those eligible for wellness benefits are: (1) Any enrollee thirty years of age or older; (2) Any enrollee under thirty years of age who is certified by his or her primary care provider as in special need of wellness benefits as a result of unusual physical characteristics or conditions; or (3) Any enrollee under thirty years of age who uses tobacco, for the purpose of a tobacco-use-cessation program; or whose cholesterol condition is certified by his primary care provider to place him or her at high health risk, for the purpose of a weight-loss, nutrition, or exercise program; or whose body weight is certified by his primary care physician to place him or her at high health risk, for the purpose of a weight-loss, nutrition or exercise program.
Benefits.--Benefits provided under this section are intended to promote greater health and reduced injury and illness through programs which increase general health status, or promote healthier lifestyles by changing health related behaviors, such as hygiene or nutritional education programs.
They are not intended to duplicate or substitute for therapeutic or rehabilitative services more properly included in treatments for illnesses, injuries or conditions covered by medical benefits.
In addition to the activities specified in paragraph (b)(3), States shall periodically determine the range of other services eligible for reimbursement from wellness voucher funds.
Enrollees eligible under paragraph (b)(2) are eligible only for such benefits related to the characteristic or condition certified by the primary care provider.
Enrollee Use.--An eligible enrollee obtains benefits under this section by presenting the wellness voucher card to a participating wellness provider in return for covered benefits up to the total value remaining on the card.
Covered benefits costing more than the value remaining on the card may be purchased, but the enrollee is personally responsible for the portion of the cost which exceeds the value remaining on the voucher card.
Participating Providers.-- (1) Wellness providers must be licensed under any applicable State laws relating to the activities provided.
The States may establish standards for minimum solvency and insurance (which may include bonding) for participating providers.
As a condition of participation in the program established by this section, providers agree to provide a defined course of covered benefits in return for the payment made by the Secretary under this section, to provide covered benefits in return for payment in full by the Secretary from a portion of the value of the wellness voucher, or to provide covered benefits to be paid in part by payment from the Secretary under this section.
As a condition of participation in the program established by this section, providers must agree to inform the enrollee's primary care physician of the services rendered and consult with the primary care physician if requested on any ongoing course of services.
Each State shall maintain a list of wellness providers satisfying the requirements of this Act, which it shall make public and shall transmit to the Secretary, and shall promptly notify the Secretary of any additions thereto or deletions therefrom.
Payment.--The Secretary shall establish a mechanism for paying to participating providers from the Wellness Trust Fund the cost of covered benefits under this section as they are provided, and as claims for same are made.
In no event shall the Secretary be liable for so much of claims which individually or in the aggregate exceed the value of the enrollee's wellness voucher.
Computation of Wellness Voucher Value.--Prior to the beginning of each year, the Secretary shall project the total income to the Wellness Trust Fund for the coming year, and shall divide this figure, less a contingency reserve not to exceed 2 percent, by the number of enrollees whom the Secretary projects will be eligible for benefits under this section in that year.
The quotient is the value of the wellness voucher of each eligible enrollee for that year, except that the Secretary may adjust the value of wellness vouchers relative to each other to take into consideration differences in the cost of services among States or alliance service areas.
Such process of adjustment shall not increase the total aggregate value of all wellness vouchers.
DEFINITIONS.-- For purposes of this title: (a) ``Enrollee'' means an individual-- (i) who is entitled to participate in an alliance or who is provided health benefits through a Federal health care program outside of an alliance, and (ii) who is entitled to receive services under this Act.
``Primary care providers'' means a primary care physician with the training and experience to assess and treat the full range of basic health care needs, and properly coordinate and refer to others for specialized treatment, or, if licensed or certified as such under State law, a nurse practitioner with equivalent training and experience.
``Provider'' means any person who provides services to enrollees or to other providers for enrollees within the meaning of this Act.
``Participating provider'' means providers who have agreed to abide by the conditions and requirements of this Act.
``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury unless otherwise specified.
``Services'' includes goods, such as equipment.