This Act may be cited as the ``Anti-Money Laundering and Paycheck Accountability Act''.
BAN ON NON-FEDERAL FUNDS OF POLITICAL PARTIES.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``ban on use non-federal funds of political parties ``Sec.
Ban Described.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, no funds may be solicited, contributed, or expended by any political party committee for purposes of any activity influencing an election for Federal office (without regard to whether the activity involved also influences any other election) unless the funds are subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act.
Examples of activities covered.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the following activities shall be considered to be examples of activities influencing an election for Federal office: ``(A) Voter registration.
The making or disseminating of any communication which identifies (by name, likeness, or representation) any candidate for election for Federal office.
Political Party Committee Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `political party committee' means a political committee which is a national, State, district, or local political party committee (including any subordinate committee thereof).''.
PERMITTING INDIVIDUALS TO ELECT TO NOT HAVE PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS USED FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes), as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``permitting individuals to elect to not have payroll deductions used for political activities ``Sec.
Right of Individuals To Make Election.-- ``(1) In general.--No amounts withheld from an individual's wages or salary during a month may be used by any person receiving the withheld amounts for any political activity if the individual has in effect an election to prohibit the withholding of such amounts during the month for such activities.
Period for which election is in effect.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), an individual's election to prohibit the withholding of amounts for political activities shall be in effect for all months beginning after the expiration of the 30- day period which begins on the date the individual notifies the person involved of the election.
Right of revocation and renewal.--An individual with an election in effect under paragraph (1) may revoke the election at any time, and the election shall no longer be in effect beginning with the first month which begins after the expiration of the 30-day period which begins on the date the individual notifies the person involved of the revocation of the election.
An individual who revokes an election under this paragraph may at any time renew the election in accordance with paragraphs (1) and (2).
Information Provided by Withholding Person to New Employees and Members.--Each person who first withholds wages or salary from an individual after December 1, 1998, shall provide the individual (at the time the person first withholds wages or salary from the individual) with a statement explaining the individual's right under this section to have an election in effect and to revoke the election.
Political Activity Defined.--In this section, the term `political activity' means-- ``(1) attempting to influence legislation; ``(2) participating or intervening in (including the publishing or distributing of statements) any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for public office; or ``(3) influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any Federal, State, or local public office or to any office in a political party, committee, association or fund.''.
REQUIRING REPORTING WITHIN 24 HOURS OF ALL CONTRIBUTIONS RECEIVED WITHIN 20 DAYS OF ELECTION.
In General.--Section 304(a)(6)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(a)(6)(A)) is amended to read as follows: ``(6)(A) Each political committee shall notify the Secretary or the Commission, and the Secretary of State, as appropriate, in writing, of any contribution received by the committee during the period which begins on the 20th day before an election and ends at the time the polls close for such election.
This notification shall be made within 24 hours (or, if earlier, by midnight of the day on which the contribution is deposited) after the receipt of such contribution and shall include the name of the candidate and the office sought by the candidate, the identification of the contributor, and the date of receipt and amount of the contribution.''.
Availability of Information on Internet.--Section 304(a)(6) of such Act (2 United States Code 434(a)(6)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C)(i) The Commission shall make the information contained in the reports submitted under this paragraph available on the Internet and publicly available at the offices of the Commission as soon as practicable (but in no case later than 24 hours) after the information is received by the Commission.
In this subparagraph, the term `Internet' means the international computer network of both Federal and non-Federal interoperable packet-switched data networks.''.
MODIFICATION OF PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITATION OF CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS BY FEDERAL OFFICIALS IN FEDERAL BUILDINGS.
Solicitation of Non-Federal Funds.--Section 607 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``within the meaning of section 301(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) In this section, the term `contribution' means any payment of any gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything of value made in support of the activities of a political committee established and maintained by a national political party or the party, or otherwise made for purposes of influencing directly or indirectly any election for Federal office.''.
Clarification of Applicability to Solicitation of Persons Outside of Building and Persons Who Are Not Federal Employees.--Section 607(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking the period at the end of the first sentence and inserting the following: ``, without regard to whether such person or the person to whom the solicitation is directed is mentioned in such section, or to whether the person to whom the solicitation is directed is in such room, building, navy yard, fort, or arsenal at the time the solicitation is made.''.
Treatment of All Areas of White House and Vice Presidential Mansion as Federal Building.--The first sentence of section 607(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``any room or building'' and inserting ``any room in the White House (including the Executive Residence) or the official residence of the Vice President, or in any room or building''.
Except where otherwise provided, the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to elections occurring after December 1998.