SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Child Savings Account Act''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
TITLE I--SAVINGS INCENTIVES FOR AMERICA'S CHILDREN SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CHILD SAVINGS ACCOUNTS WITHIN ROTH IRAS.
In General.--Section 408A (relating to Roth IRAs) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Child Savings Account.-- ``(1) In general.--If the individual on whose behalf a Roth IRA was established has not attained the age of 17 before the close of any calendar year-- ``(A) the Roth IRA shall be treated as a Child Savings Account for the taxable year, and ``(B) this section shall be applied to the Roth IRA for the taxable year with the modifications provided in paragraphs (2) and (3).
Waiver of earned income requirement.--For purposes of subsection (c)(2)(A), the maximum amount allowable as a deduction under section 219 shall be computed without regard to the compensation limitation of section 219(b)(1)(B).
Rollover where account holder dies before age 30.--If an individual on whose behalf a Roth IRA was established dies before attaining the age of 30-- ``(A) the transfer of the individual's interest in a Roth IRA to a member of the individual's family (within the meaning of section 529(e)(2)) shall not be considered a taxable transfer for purposes of this title, and ``(B) such interest shall, on and after the date of the transfer, be treated as a Roth IRA maintained for the benefit of the family member and not of the individual.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 408(a)(1) is amended by striking ``or 403(b)(8)'' and inserting ``, 403(b)(8), or 408A(g)(3)''.
Section 408(d)(3)(C)(ii)(II) is amended by inserting ``or in the case of a Roth IRA, a member of the same family of such other individual''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.
ADDITIONAL CHILD CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CHILD SAVINGS ACCOUNTS BY TAXPAYERS NOT ELIGIBLE FOR ENTIRE CHILD CREDIT.
In General.--Section 24 (relating to child tax credit) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Additional Refundable Credit for Contributions to Child Savings Accounts.-- ``(1) In general.--The aggregate credits allowed under subpart C shall be increased by the lesser of-- ``(A) the credit which would be allowed under this section without regard to this subsection and subsection (d) and the limitation under section 26(a), or ``(B) the amount of the contributions to child savings accounts of qualifying children of the taxpayer for the taxable year to the extent such contributions do not exceed $100 multiplied by the number of qualifying children.
Limitation.--In no event shall the amount of the increase under paragraph (1) exceed-- ``(A) the aggregate amount of credits allowed by this subpart in excess of the limitation imposed by section 26(a), reduced by ``(B) any additional credits allowed by subsection (d).
Coordination.--The credit under this subsection shall not be taken into account in applying subsection (d) and section 32(n) (relating to supplemental child credit).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.
TAX-FREE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR ELEMENTARY, SECONDARY, AND COLLEGE EDUCATION.
In General.--Section 408A(d)(5) (defining qualified special purpose distribution) is amended to read as follows: ``(5) Qualified special purpose distribution.--For purposes of this section-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified special purpose distribution' means any of the following distributions: ``(i) Distributions described in subparagraph (F) of section 72(t)(2) (relating to first home purchases).
Distributions to the extent such distributions do not exceed the qualified education expenses of the taxpayer for the taxable year.
Qualified education expenses.-- ``(i) In general.--The term `qualified education expenses' means-- ``(I) qualified higher education expenses (as defined in section 72(t)(7)), ``(II) qualified elementary and secondary education expenses, and ``(III) amounts paid or incurred during the taxable year to purchase tuition credits or certificates, or to make contributions to an account, under a qualified State tuition program (as defined in section 529(b)) for the benefit of the beneficiary of the account, the beneficiary's spouse, or any child (as defined in section 151(c)(3)) or grandchild of the beneficiary or spouse.
Limitation.--The aggregate amount treated as qualified education expenses for any taxable year shall not exceed an amount equal to the excess (if any) of-- ``(I) ____ percent of the fair market value of the assets in the Roth IRA as of the close of the calendar year preceding the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, over ``(II) distributions described in subparagraph (F) of section 72(t)(2) (relating to first home purchases) for the taxable year.
Qualified elementary and secondary education expenses.-- ``(i) In general.--The term `qualified elementary and secondary education expenses' means-- ``(I) expenses for tuition, fees, academic tutoring, special needs services, books, supplies, computer equipment (including related software and services), and other equipment which are incurred in connection with the enrollment or attendance of the designated beneficiary of the trust, or of the child or grandchild of the beneficiary of the account or beneficiary's spouse, as an elementary or secondary school student at a public, private, or religious school, or ``(II) expenses for room and board, uniforms, transportation, and supplementary items and services (including extended day programs) which are required or provided by a public, private, or religious school in connection with such enrollment or attendance.
Special rule for home- schooling.--Such term shall include expenses described in clause (i) required for education provided for homeschooling if the requirements of any applicable State or local law are met with respect to such education.
School.--The term `school' means any school which provides elementary education or secondary education (kindergarten through grade 12), as determined under State law.''
Additional Tax Not To Apply to Education Expenses.--Section 72(t)(2) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(G) Certain education expenses in case of a roth ira.--Distributions to an individual from a Roth IRA which are described in subclause (II) or (III) of section 408A(d)(5)(B)(i).
Distributions shall not be taken into account under the preceding sentence if such distributions are described in subparagraphs (A), (C), (D), (E), or (F) or to the extent paragraph (1) does not apply to such distributions by reason of subparagraph (B).
Repeal of Education IRAs.-- (1) In general.--Section 530 (relating to education individual retirement accounts) is repealed.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 25A(e) is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Election To Have Section Apply.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for a taxable year with respect to the qualified and tuition-related expenses of an individual unless the taxpayer elects to have this section apply to the individual for the taxable year.''
Section 26(b)(2) is amended by striking subparagraph (E) and by redesignating subparagraphs (F) through (Q) as subparagraphs (E) through (P), respectively.
Section 72(e)(9) is amended to read as follows: ``(9) Extension of paragraph (2)(b) to qualified state tuition programs.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, paragraph (2)(B) shall apply to amounts received under a qualified State tuition program (as defined in section 529(b)).
The rule of paragraph (8)(B) shall apply for purposes of this paragraph.''
Section 135(c)(2)(C) is amended-- (i) by striking ``, or to an education individual retirement account (as defined in section 530) on behalf of an account beneficiary,'', and (ii) by striking ``and education individual retirement accounts'' in the heading thereof.
Section 135(d)(2) is amended by striking ``by-- '' and all that follows and inserting ``by the amount of such expenses which are taken into account in determining the credit allowable to the taxpayer or any other person under section 25A with respect to such expenses.''
Section 221(e)(2)(A) is amended by striking ``, 135, or 530'' and inserting ``or 135''.
Section 4973(a) is amended by inserting ``or'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (3), and by striking paragraph (4).
Section 4973 is amended by striking subsection (e) and by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (e).
Section 4975(c) is amended by striking paragraph (5).
Section 4975(e)(1) is amended by inserting ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by striking subparagraph (E), and by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (E).
Section 6693(a)(2) is amended by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking ``, and'' at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting a period, and by striking subparagraph (D).
The table of sections for part VIII of subchapter F of chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to section 530.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999 (and earnings allocable thereto).
Rollovers from education iras to roth iras.--For purposes of section 530(d)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect before its repeal by this section), any amount received from an education individual retirement account which is paid into a Roth IRA within the prescribed time shall be treated as if it were paid into another education individual retirement account.
TITLE II--EXPANSION OF AVAILABILITY OF IRAS SEC.
INFLATION ADJUSTMENT FOR DEDUCTIBLE AMOUNT.
In General.--Section 219 is amended by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i) and by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection: ``(h) Cost-of-Living Adjustments.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 1998, the $2,000 amount under subsection (b)(1)(A) shall be increased by an amount equal to the product of $2,000 and the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, except that subparagraph (B) thereof shall be applied by substituting `1998' for `1992'.
If the amount to which $2,000 would be increased under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $500, such amount shall be rounded to the next lower multiple of $500.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 408(a)(1) is amended by striking ``in excess of $2,000 on behalf of any individual'' and inserting ``on behalf of any individual in excess of the amount in effect for such taxable year under section 219(b)(1)(A)''.
Section 408(b)(2)(B) is amended by striking ``$2,000'' and inserting ``the dollar amount in effect under section 219(b)(1)(A)''.
Section 408(b) is amended by striking ``$2,000'' in the matter following paragraph (4) and inserting ``the dollar amount in effect under section 219(b)(1)(A)''.
Section 408(j) is amended by striking ``$2,000''.
Section 408(p)(8) is amended by striking ``$2,000'' and inserting ``the dollar amount in effect under section 219(b)(1)(A)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.
REPEAL OF ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME LIMITATIONS ON CONTRIBUTIONS AND ROLLOVERS TO ROTH IRAS.
In General.--Section 408A(c) is amended by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (7) as paragraphs (3) through (6), respectively.
Repeal of Nondeductible Contributions.-- (1) Subsection (f) of section 219 is amended by striking paragraph (7).
Paragraph (5) of section 408(d) is amended by striking the last sentence.
Section 408(o) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Termination.--This subsection shall not apply to any designated nondeductible contribution for any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1999.''
Subsection (b) of section 4973 is amended by striking the last sentence.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.