Section 1105(c) of the Sandy Recovery Improvement Act of 2013 (42 United States Code 5189a note) is amended by striking ``2015'' and inserting ``2022''.
Notwithstanding section 125(d)(4) of title 23, United States Code, no limitation on the total obligations for projects under section 125 of such title shall apply to the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands with respect to fiscal years 2018 and 2019.
TITLE III--AGENCY MANAGEMENT, OVERSIGHT, AND ACCOUNTABILITY SEC.
UNIFIED FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION REVIEW.
Review and Analysis.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall review the Unified Federal Environmental and Historic Preservation review process established pursuant to section 429 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5189g), and submit a report to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate that includes the following: (1) An analysis of whether and how the unified process has expedited the interagency review process to ensure compliance with the environmental and historic requirements under Federal law relating to disaster recovery projects.
A survey and analysis of categorical exclusions used by other Federal agencies that may be applicable to any activity related to a Presidentially declared major disaster or emergency under such Act.
Recommendations on any further actions, including any legislative proposals, needed to expedite and streamline the review process.
Regulations.--After completing the review, survey, and analyses under subsection (a), but not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, and after providing notice and opportunity for public comment, the Administrator shall issue regulations to implement any regulatory recommendations, including any categorical exclusions identified under subsection (a), to the extent that the categorical exclusions meet the criteria for a categorical exclusion under section 1508.4 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, and section II of DHS Instruction Manual 023-01-001--01.
Facilitating Closeout.--Section 705 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5205) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Facilitating Closeout.-- ``(1) Incentives.--The Administrator may develop incentives and penalties that encourage State, Tribal, or local governments to close out expenditures and activities on a timely basis related to disaster or emergency assistance.
Agency requirements.--The Agency shall, consistent with applicable regulations and required procedures, meet its responsibilities to improve closeout practices and reduce the time to close disaster program awards.''.
Regulations.--The Administrator shall issue regulations to implement this section.
Section 306 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5149) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) The Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency is authorized to appoint temporary personnel, after serving continuously for 1 year, to positions in the Agency in the same manner that competitive service employees are considered for transfer, reassignment, or promotion to such positions.
An individual appointed under this subsection shall become a career-conditional employee, unless the employee has already completed the service requirements for career tenure.''.
STUDY TO STREAMLINE AND CONSOLIDATE INFORMATION COLLECTION.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall-- (1) in coordination with the Small Business Administration, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and other appropriate agencies, conduct a study and develop a plan, consistent with law, under which the collection of information from disaster assistance applicants and grantees will be modified, streamlined, expedited, efficient, flexible, consolidated, and simplified to be less burdensome, duplicative, and time consuming for applicants and grantees; (2) in coordination with the Small Business Administration, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and other appropriate agencies, develop a plan for the regular collection and reporting of information on provided Federal disaster assistance, including the establishment and maintenance of a website for presenting the information to the public; and (3) submit the plans to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate.
Title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Public Assistance.--Not later than 5 days after an award of a public assistance grant is made under section 406 that is in excess of $1,000,000, the Administrator shall publish on the Agency's website the specifics of each such grant award, including-- ``(1) identifying the Federal Emergency Management Agency Region; ``(2) the disaster or emergency declaration number; ``(3) the State, county, and applicant name; ``(4) if the applicant is a private nonprofit; ``(5) the damage category code; ``(6) the amount of the Federal share obligated; and ``(7) the date of the award.
Mission Assignments.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 5 days after the issuance of a mission assignment or mission assignment task order, the Administrator shall publish on the Agency's website any mission assignment or mission assignment task order to another Federal department or agency regarding a major disaster in excess of $1,000,000, including-- ``(A) the name of the impacted State or Tribe; ``(B) the disaster declaration for such State or Tribe; ``(C) the assigned agency; ``(D) the assistance requested; ``(E) a description of the disaster; ``(F) the total cost estimate; ``(G) the amount obligated; ``(H) the State or Tribal cost share, if applicable; ``(I) the authority under which the mission assignment or mission assignment task order was directed; and ``(J) if applicable, the date a State or Tribe requested the mission assignment.
Recording changes.--Not later than 10 days after the last day of each month until a mission assignment or mission assignment task order described in paragraph (1) is completed and closed out, the Administrator shall update any changes to the total cost estimate and the amount obligated.
Disaster Relief Monthly Report.--Not later than 10 days after the first day of each month, the Administrator shall publish on the Agency's website reports, including a specific description of the methodology and the source data used in developing such reports, including-- ``(1) an estimate of the amounts for the fiscal year covered by the President's most recent budget pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, including-- ``(A) the unobligated balance of funds to be carried over from the prior fiscal year to the budget year; ``(B) the unobligated balance of funds to be carried over from the budget year to the budget year plus 1; ``(C) the amount of obligations for non- catastrophic events for the budget year; ``(D) the amount of obligations for the budget year for catastrophic events delineated by event and by State; ``(E) the total amount that has been previously obligated or will be required for catastrophic events delineated by event and by State for all prior years, the current fiscal year, the budget year, and each fiscal year thereafter; ``(F) the amount of previously obligated funds that will be recovered for the budget year; ``(G) the amount that will be required for obligations for emergencies, as described in section 102(1), major disasters, as described in section 102(2), fire management assistance grants, as described in section 420, surge activities, and disaster readiness and support activities; and ``(H) the amount required for activities not covered under section 251(b)(2)(D)(iii) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 901(b)(2)(D)(iii)); and ``(2) an estimate or actual amounts, if available, of the following for the current fiscal year shall be submitted not later than the fifth day of each month, published by the Administrator on the Agency's website not later than the fifth day of each month: ``(A) A summary of the amount of appropriations made available by source, the transfers executed, the previously allocated funds recovered, and the commitments, allocations, and obligations made.
A table of disaster relief activity delineated by month, including-- ``(i) the beginning and ending balances; ``(ii) the total obligations to include amounts obligated for fire assistance, emergencies, surge, and disaster support activities; ``(iii) the obligations for catastrophic events delineated by event and by State; and ``(iv) the amount of previously obligated funds that are recovered.
A summary of allocations, obligations, and expenditures for catastrophic events delineated by event.
The cost of the following categories of spending: ``(i) Public assistance.
Any other relevant category (including emergency measures and disaster resources) delineated by disaster.
The date on which funds appropriated will be exhausted.
Contracts.-- ``(1) Information.--Not later than 10 days after the first day of each month, the Administrator shall publish on the Agency's website the specifics of each contract in excess of $1,000,000 that the Agency enters into, including-- ``(A) the name of the party; ``(B) the date the contract was awarded; ``(C) the amount of the contract, the scope of the contract; ``(D) if the contract was awarded through competitive bidding process; ``(E) if no competitive bidding process was used, the reason why competitive bidding was not used; and ``(F) the authority used to bypass the competitive bidding process.
The information shall be delineated by disaster, if applicable, and specify the damage category code, if applicable.
Report.--Not later than 10 days after the last day of the fiscal year, the Administrator shall provide a report to the appropriate committees of Congress summarizing the following information for the preceding fiscal year: ``(A) The number of contracts awarded without competitive bidding.
The reasons why a competitive bidding process was not used.
The total amount of contracts awarded with no competitive bidding.
The damage category codes, if applicable, for contracts awarded without competitive bidding.''.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall not reimburse a State, Tribe, or local government or the owner or operator of a private nonprofit facility for any activities made pursuant to a contract entered into after August 1, 2017, that prohibits the Administrator or the Comptroller General of the United States from auditing or otherwise reviewing all aspects relating to the contract.
INSPECTOR GENERAL AUDIT OF FEMA CONTRACTS FOR TARPS AND PLASTIC SHEETING.
In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the inspector general of the Department of Homeland Security shall initiate an audit of the contracts awarded by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (in this section referred to as ``FEMA'') for tarps and plastic sheeting for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands of the United States in response to Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria.
Considerations.--In carrying out the audit under subsection (a), the inspector general shall review-- (1) the contracting process used by FEMA to evaluate offerors and award the relevant contracts to contractors; (2) FEMA's assessment of the past performance of the contractors, including any historical information showing that the contractors had supported large-scale delivery quantities in the past; (3) FEMA's assessment of the capacity of the contractors to carry out the relevant contracts, including with respect to inventory, production, and financial capabilities; (4) how FEMA ensured that the contractors met the terms of the relevant contracts; and (5) whether the failure of the contractors to meet the terms of the relevant contracts and FEMA's subsequent cancellation of the relevant contracts affected the provision of tarps and plastic sheeting to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands of the United States.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of initiation of the audit under subsection (a), the inspector general shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report on the results of the audit, including findings and recommendations.
Section 309 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5152) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``and other relief or'' and inserting ``long-term recovery groups, and other relief, domestic hunger relief, or''; and (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``and other relief or'' and inserting ``long-term recovery groups, and other relief, domestic hunger relief, or''.
GUIDANCE ON INUNDATED AND SUBMERGED ROADS.
The Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in coordination with the Administrator of the Federal Highway Administration, shall develop and issue guidance for State, local, and Tribal governments regarding repair, restoration, and replacement of inundated and submerged roads damaged or destroyed by a major disaster, and for associated expenses incurred by the Government, with respect to roads eligible for assistance under section 406 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5172).