This Act may be cited as the ``United States Cruise Ship Tourism Act of 1998''.
In this Act: (1) Coastwise trade.--The term ``coastwise trade'' means transportation of a passenger between points in the United States, either directly or by way of a foreign point.
Cruise ship.--The term ``cruise ship'' means a self- propelled ship that-- (A) is of at least 9,000 gross tons (as measured under chapter 143 of title 46, United States Code) and has a stateroom or berth capacity of at least 200 passengers; (B) provides a full range of accommodations, entertainment, dining, and other services for its passengers; and (C) does not operate as a ferry providing intrastate or interstate commuter service for passengers, vehicles or other cargo for compensation.
Documented vessel.--The term ``documented vessel'' has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 2101 of title 46, United States Code.
Person.--The term ``person'' means a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, or other entity, the controlling interest of which is owned by citizens of the United States within the meaning of section 2(a) of the Shipping Act, 1916 (46 United States Code App.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
EMPLOYMENT OF FOREIGN-BUILT, United States Reports-FLAG CRUISE SHIPS IN THE COASTWISE TRADE.
In General.--Notwithstanding section 12106(a)(2) of title 46, United States Code, section 27 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1920 (46 United States Code App.
883), and section 8 of the Act of June 19, 1886 (46 United States Code App.
289), the Secretary may issue a certificate of documentation with coastwise endorsement for a cruise ship not built in the United States, or if rebuilt, not rebuilt in the United States, to a person that is an owner or operator of such cruise ship.
Limitations.-- (1) A certificate of documentation with coastwise endorsement may be issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section only for a cruise ship that was built or rebuilt not more than 10 years before the date of enactment of this Act.
A certificate of documentation with coastwise endorsement may be issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section only for a cruise ship that-- (A) is of at least 20,000 gross tons (as measured under chapter 143 of title 46, United States Code); or (B) has a stateroom or berth capacity of at least 800 passengers.
Certificates of documentation with coastwise endorsement may be issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section for not more than 3 cruise ships.
The Secretary may require any additional appropriate conditions the Secretary deems necessary.
Construction Standards.-- (1) Certificate of inspection.--A cruise ship issued a certificate of documentation with coastwise endorsement pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be eligible for a certificate of inspection (as prescribed by 46 United States Code 3309) if the Secretary determines that-- (A) the cruise ship is classed by and designed in accordance with the rules of a classification society accepted by the Secretary; (B) the cruise ship complies with applicable international agreements and associated guidelines, as determined by the Secretary.
Additionally, such cruise ship shall be equipped with automatic sprinkler and fire detection systems meeting the requirements of the 1992 Amendments to the Safety of Life at Sea Convention of 1974 (SOLAS 74) throughout all service and accommodation spaces; and (2) Continued eligibility for certificate.--Paragraph (1) of this subsection does not apply to any cruise ship after any date on which the cruise ship fails to comply with the applicable international agreements and associated guidelines described in paragraph (1)(B) of this subsection.
Reliance on classification society.--The Secretary may rely on a certification from a classification society accepted by the Secretary to establish that the cruise ship is in compliance with the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection.
Foreign transfer.--Notwithstanding section 9(c) of the Shipping Act, 1916 (46 United States Code App.
808), a coastwise qualified United States- flag, foreign-built cruise ship may be placed under foreign registry without the approval of the Secretary any time after its documentation under subsection (a)(1) of this section.
The Secretary shall revoke the coastwise endorsement of any such cruise ship when it is placed under foreign registry.
LIMITED EMPLOYMENT OF FOREIGN-FLAG CRUISE SHIPS IN THE COASTWISE TRADE OF THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--Notwithstanding section 12106 of title 46, United States Code, section 27 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1920 (46 United States Code App.
883), and section 8 of the Act of June 19, 1886 (46 United States Code App.
289), the Secretary may approve the employment in the coastwise trade of the United States of a cruise ship that is not a documented vessel (hereinafter referred to as a ``coast-wise qualified foreign-flag cruise ship'') (b) Limitations.-- (1) Repositionings.
A coastwise qualified foreign-flag cruise ship may be employed in the coastwise trade during each calendar year for not more than 2 voyages, the coastwise trade portion of which does not exceed 2 weeks and includes transportation of passengers for hire-- (A) from one coast of the United States through the Panama Canal to another coast of the United States; or (B) along one coast of the United States during a voyage between 2 foreign countries.
Charters.-- (A) 30-day limit.--Not more than 30 coastwise qualified foreign-flag cruise ships may be employed in the coastwise trade for not more than 30 days per cruise ship during a calendar year.
Eligible charterers.--A coastwise qualified foreign-flag cruise ship may only be employed in the coastwise trade under subparagraph (A) if such coastwise qualified foreign-flag cruise ship is time- chartered to a charterer that-- (i) does not own or operate a cruise ship; or (ii) is not affiliated with an owner or operator of a cruise ship.
Exception to 30-day limit.--A coastwise qualified foreign-flag cruise ship may be authorized to be employed in the coastwise trade for more than 30 days during a calendar year if fewer than 30 requests for coastwise trade employment authority under subparagraph (A) are received by the Secretary for a calendar year.
Not later than January 1, 2004, the Secretary shall report to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives on the development of the domestic cruise ship trade since the date of enactment of this Act and make recommendations concerning the expansion or termination of authorities enacted by this Act.