NATIONAL CENTER FOR SLEEP DISORDERS RESEARCH.
Part C of title IV (42 United States Code 285 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subpart: ``Subpart 17--National Center for Sleep Disorders Research ``SEC.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR SLEEP DISORDERS RESEARCH.
``There shall be in the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute an agency to be known as the National Center for Sleep Disorders Research (hereafter referred to in this subpart as the `Center') to be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by and report directly to the Director of the Institute.
PURPOSE OF THE CENTER.
``The general purpose of the Center is the conduct and support of biomedical and related research and research training, the dissemination of health information, and the conduct of other programs with respect to various sleep disorders, the basic understanding of sleep, biological and circadian rhythm research, chronobiology and other sleep related research.
``In carrying out the purpose described in section 464X, the Director of the Center may-- ``(1) award grants and enter into cooperative agreements and contracts; ``(2) provide for clinical trials with respect to sleep disorders treatment and sleep medications; ``(3) support sleep disorders research and training centers; ``(4) support sleep disorders research conducted or supported by more than one such agency; ``(5) support and conduct the collection of epidemiology data on sleep disorders; ``(6) conduct a National Education Campaign and establish a National Sleep Disorders Information Clearinghouse; ``(7) in consultation with the Directors of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the National Institute of Mental Health, and other Institutes, support and coordinate ongoing research, centers, training and other grant activities; ``(8) coordinate the activities of the Center with similar activities of other agencies of the Federal Government, including the other agencies of the National Institutes of Health, and with similar activities of other public entities and of private entities; and ``(9) with the approval of the Director of the National Institutes of Health and advisory board established under section 464BB, appoint technical and scientific peer review groups in addition to any such groups appointed under section 492.
Development.--After consultation with the Director of the Center, the advisory board established under section 464BB, and the coordinating committee established under section 464AA, the Director of the National Institutes of Health shall develop a comprehensive plan for the conduct and support of sleep disorders research.
Contents.--The plan developed under subsection (a) shall identify priorities with respect to such research and shall provide for the coordination of such research conducted or supported by the agencies of the National Institutes of Health.
Revision.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health (after consultation with the Director of the Center, the advisory board established under section 464BB, and the coordinating committee established under section 464AA) shall revise the plan developed under subsection (a) as appropriate.
Establishment.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health shall establish a committee to be known as the Sleep Disorders Coordinating Committee (hereafter in this subpart referred to as the `Coordinating Committee').
Composition.--The Coordinating Committee shall be composed of the directors of the National Institutes of Health, the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the National Institute of Mental Health, and of such other national research institutes as the Director of the National Institutes of Health determines to be appropriate, and shall include representation from other Federal departments and agencies whose programs involve sleep disorders.
Duties.--The Coordinating Committee shall make recommendations to the Director of the National Institutes of Health and the Director of the Center with respect to the content of the plan required in section 464Z, with respect to the activities of the Center that are carried out in conjunction with other agencies of the National Institutes of Health, and with respect to the activities of the Center that are carried out in conjunction with other agencies of the Federal Government.
Establishment.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health shall establish a board to be known as the Sleep Disorders Research Advisory Board (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Advisory Board').
Duties.--The Advisory Board shall advise, assist, consult with, and make recommendations to the Director of the National Institutes of Health and the Director of the Center concerning matters relating to the scientific activities carried out by and through the Center and the policies respecting such activities, including recommendations with respect to the plan required in section 464Z.
Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health shall appoint to the Advisory Board 12 appropriately qualified representatives of the public who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Of such members, eight shall be representatives of health and scientific disciplines with respect to sleep disorders and four shall be individuals representing the interests of individuals with or undergoing treatment for sleep disorders.
Ex Officio Members.--The following officials shall serve as ex officio members of the Advisory Board: ``(A) The Director of the National Institutes of Health.
The Director of the Center.
The Director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.
The Director of the National Institute of Mental Health.
The Director of the National Institute on Aging.
The Director of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
The Director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
The Assistant Secretary for Health.
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs).
The Chief Medical Director of the Veterans' Administration.
Chairperson.--The members of the Advisory Board shall, from among the members of the Advisory Board, designate an individual to serve as the chairperson of the Advisory Board.
Construction.--Except as inconsistent with, or inapplicable to, this section, the provisions of section 406 shall apply to the advisory board established under this section in the same manner as such provisions apply to any advisory council established under such section.
Secretary of Transportation.--The Secretary of Transportation is authorized to collect data, conduct studies and disseminate public information concerning the impact of sleep disorders and sleep deprivation on transportation safety.
The Secretary of Transportation is authorized to coordinate these activities with the Center.
Secretary of Defense.--The Secretary of Defense is authorized to collect data, conduct studies and disseminate public information concerning the impact of sleep disorders and sleep deprivation on military readiness.
The Secretary of Defense is authorized to coordinate these activities with the Center.
Secretary of Education.--The Secretary of Education is authorized to collect data, conduct studies and disseminate public information concerning the impact of sleep disorders and sleep deprivation on learning and education.
The Secretary of Education is authorized to coordinate these activities with the Center.
Secretary of Labor.--The Secretary of Labor is authorized to collect data, conduct studies and disseminate public information concerning the impact of sleep disorders and sleep deprivation in the workplace and in industry with a particular emphasis on shiftwork, hours of service and other scheduling issues.
The Secretary of Labor is authorized to coordinate these activities with the Center.
Secretary of Commerce.--The Secretary of Commerce is authorized to collect data, conduct studies and disseminate public information concerning the impact of sleep disorders and sleep deprivation on the commerce and industrial capacity of the United States.
The Secretary of Commerce is authorized to coordinate these activities with the Center.