Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the 1954 United States Supreme Court decision of Brown v. Board of Education, which mandated an end to the segregation of public schools, was one of the most significant court decisions in the history of the United States; (2) the admission of 9 African-American students, known as the ``Little Rock Nine'', to Little Rock's Central high School as a result of the Brown decision, was the most prominent national example of the implementation of the Brown decision, and served as a catalyst for the integration of other, previously segregated public schools in the United States; (3) 1997 marked the 70th anniversary of the construction of Central High School, which has been named by the American Institute of Architects as ``the most beautiful high school building in America''; (4) Central High School was included on the National Register of Historic Places in 1977 and designated by the Secretary of the Interior as a national historic landmark in 1982 in recognition of its national significance in the development of the civil rights movement in the United States; and (5) the designation of Little Rock Central High School as a unit of the National Park System will recognize the significant role the school played in the desegregation of public schools in the South and will interpret for future generations the events associated with early desegregation of Southern schools.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to preserve, protect, and interpret for the benefit, education, and inspiration of present and future generations, Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas, and its role in the integration of public schools and the development of the civil rights movement in the United States.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CENTRAL HIGH SCHOOL NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
Establishment.--The Little Rock Central High School national historic site in the State or Arkansas (hereinafter referred to as the ``historic site'') is hereby established as a unit of the National Park System.
The historic site shall consist of lands and interests therein comprising the Central High School campus in Little Rock, Arkansas, as generally depicted on a map entitled ____________ and dated June 1998.
Such map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
Administration of Historic Site.--The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall administer the historic site in accordance with this Act and the laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1, 2-4) and the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461-467): Provided, That nothing in this Act shall affect the authority of the Little Rock School District to administer Little Rock Central High School.
Cooperative Agreements.--(1) The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with appropriate public and private agencies, organizations, and institutions (including, but not limited to, the State of Arkansas, the city of Little Rock, the Little Rock School District, Central High Museum, Inc., Central High Neighborhood, Inc., or the University of Arkansas) in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
The Secretary shall coordinate visitor interpretation of the historic site with the Little Rock School District and the Central High School Museum, Inc. (d) General Management Plan.--Within 2 years after the date funds are made available, the Secretary shall prepare a general management plan for the historic site.
Continuing Educational Use.--The Secretary shall consult and coordinate with the Little Rock School District in the development of the general management plan and in the administration of the historic site so as to not interfere with the continuing use of Central High School as an educational institution.
Acquisition of Property.--The Secretary is authorized to acquire by purchase with donated or appropriated funds, by exchange, or donation the lands and interests therein located within the boundaries of the historic site, except that the Secretary may only acquire lands or interests therein with the consent of the owner thereof and lands or interests therein owned by the State of Arkansas or a political subdivision thereof, may only be acquired by donation or exchange.
DESEGREGATION IN PUBLIC EDUCATION THEME STUDY.
Theme Study.--Within 2 years after the date funds are made available, the Secretary shall prepare and transmit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives a national historic landmark theme study (hereinafter referred to as the ``theme study'') on the history of desegregation in public education.
The purpose of the theme study shall be to identify sites, districts, buildings, structures, and landscapes that best illustrate or commemorate key events or decisions in the historical movement to provide for racial desegregation in public education.
On the basis of the theme study, the Secretary shall identify possible new national historic landmarks appropriate to this theme and prepare a list in order of importance or merit of the most appropriate sites for national historic landmark designation.
Opportunities for Education and Research.--The theme study shall identify appropriate means to establish linkages between sites identified in subsection (a) and between those sites and the Central High School National Historic Site established in section 2, and with other existing units of the National Park System to maximize opportunities for public education and scholarly research on desegregation in public education.
The theme study also shall recommend opportunities for cooperative arrangements with State and local governments, educational institutions, local historical organizations, and other appropriate entities to preserve and interpret key sites in the history of desegregation in public education.
Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with 1 or more major educational institutions, public history organizations, or civil rights organizations knowledgeable about desegregation in public education to prepare the theme study and to ensure that the theme study meets scholarly standards.
Theme Study Coordination With General Management Plan.--The theme study shall be prepared as part of the preparation and development of the general management plan for the Little Rock Central High School National Historic Site established in section 2.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.