This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Home Health Services Equity Act of 1999''.
Congress finds that the payment system for home health services covered under Medicare as enacted by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 is having the following unintended consequences: (1) Many of the sickest, most frail Medicare beneficiaries are being deprived of access to medically necessary home health services which are covered under the Medicare Program.
The amount of reductions in reimbursement for home health services furnished under the Medicare Program significantly exceeds the amount of reduction in reimbursement for any other service furnished under the Medicare Program at a time when the need for home health services by the Nation's elderly citizens is growing.
The per beneficiary limits imposed on home health agencies do not, for a majority of such agencies, accurately reflect the costs necessarily incurred in the efficient delivery of needed home health services to the individuals treated by those agencies, as required under section 1861(v)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(A)).
Residents of certain States and regions of the country are being afforded access to far fewer home health services under the Medicare Program than residents of other States or regions who have similar medical conditions.
The prospective payment system scheduled for implementation by October 1, 2000, is in danger of being based on data which excludes many of the costs of providing covered services to the sickest, most frail Medicare beneficiaries.
The additional 15 percent reduction in reimbursement currently scheduled for October 1, 2000, will result in reductions in Medicare spending for home health services that are far in excess of those intended by Congress when it passed the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and are unrelated to needs of the patients.
The home health interim payment system enacted as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 is not providing for a smooth transition from reasonable cost reimbursement to prospective payment.
INTERIM PAYMENT SYSTEM OVERPAYMENT RECOUPMENT.
In General.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)), as amended by section 5101(a) of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-277), is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(x)(I) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subparagraph, there shall be no recovery of any payments for reasonable costs made before the cost reporting period describe in subclause (II) to a home health agency in excess of the per beneficiary limitation applicable to that agency.
The cost reporting period referred to in subclause (I) with respect to a home health agency is the cost reporting period beginning during the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the home health agency received written notice from the Secretary of its agency- specific per beneficiary limitation.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
ELIMINATION OF AUTOMATIC 15 PERCENT REDUCTION IN PAYMENT LIMITS.
Prospective Payment System.-- (1) Elimination of reduction.--Section 1895(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(3)(A)) is amended-- (A) in clause (i)-- (i) by striking ``but if the reduction in limits described in clause (ii) had been in effect''; and (ii) by striking ``(i) In general.--'' and adjusting the margin accordingly; and (B) by striking clause (ii).
Conforming amendment.--Section 1895(d)(3) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(d)(3)) is amended by striking ``(including the reduction described in clause (ii) of such subsection)''.
Interim Payment System.--Section 4603 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33), as amended by section 5101(c)(3) of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-277), is amended by striking subsection (e).
REVISION OF PER VISIT LIMITS.
Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(i)) is amended-- (1) in subclause (IV), by striking ``or''; (2) in subclause (V)-- (A) by inserting ``and before October 1, 1999'' after ``October 1, 1998,''; and (B) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subclause: ``(VI) October 1, 1999, 108 percent of such median.''.
ENSURING BENEFICIARY CHOICE OF PROVIDER WITH PRORATED LIMITS.
In General.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(vi)(II) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v) (1)(L)(vi)(II)) is amended by inserting ``only if the Secretary determines that the agency knew or should have known that the individual, to whom home health services were furnished, used home health services furnished by more than one home health agency'' before the period.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1999.
EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS; OUTLIERS.
Exceptions and Exemptions.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(ii)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``With respect to the limits under clauses (v) through (ix), the Secretary shall provide for the following exceptions and exemptions: ``(I) Home health agencies furnishing home health services exclusively in medically underserved areas shall be exempt from such limits.
The Secretary shall provide for a payment amount (in an amount determined by the Secretary) in addition to the amounts applicable under such limits for a home health agency that demonstrates to the Secretary that it incurred costs above such limits due to costs attributable to additional Federal regulatory requirements imposed after fiscal year 1994.''.
Expenditure limits on exceptions.--The aggregate amount of additional payments or payment adjustments made under section 1861(v)(1)(L)(ii)(II), as added by paragraph (1), with respect to a fiscal year may not exceed 5 percent of the aggregate payments projected or estimated by the Secretary to be made under section 1861(v)(1)(L) for such fiscal year.
Additional Payments for Outliers.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)), as amended by section 3(a), is further amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(xi) Notwithstanding clauses (v) through (ix), the Secretary shall provide for an additional payment amount to a provider equal to the difference between the reasonable cost incurred by the provider and the limit under such clauses applicable to the provider if the provider demonstrates to the Secretary that-- ``(I) the provider incurred costs in excess of the limits applicable under such clauses with respect to an individual described in subclause (II); ``(II) with respect to an individual to whom the provider furnished home health services under this title, the individual requires the most expensive home health services (case outliers) or requires such services for a far longer than average period of time (case and duration outliers), such outliers determined by the Secretary; and ``(III) such incurred costs are reasonable.
No payment shall be made under this clause to a provider that, as of October 1, 1999, has ceased furnishing home health services for which payment may be made under this title.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.