DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS TO INCREASE QUALITY OF INFORMATION PROVIDED TO MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES WITH RESPECT TO TREATMENT OPTIONS.
Establishment of Project.-- (1) In general.--Not later than January 1, 2001, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish demonstration projects (in this section referred to as the ``projects'') under which the Secretary shall furnish to providers of services and physicians participating in the Medicare Program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act informational videotapes (as described in subsection (b)) to present to a Medicare beneficiary diagnosed with a particular disease or injury (as identified by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (c)) before the beneficiary elects a course of treatment for that disease or injury.
The Secretary shall furnish such informational videotapes at no cost to such providers and physicians.
Project areas.--The projects shall be conducted in five separate counties of which 3 shall be in urban areas and 2 shall be in rural areas.
Informational Videotape Described.-- (1) In general.--The Institute of Medicine, in consultation with the National Institutes of Health and other medical experts (as determined by the Secretary), shall develop a videotape presentation to provide a Medicare beneficiary diagnosed as having the disease or injury identified under subsection (c) with the following information: (A) A description of the disease or injury.
The possible courses of treatment for the disease or injury.
The likely consequences of each such course of treatment or of the decision not to pursue any course of treatment.
Concluding statement.--Any such videotape presentation shall conclude with a statement that the Medicare beneficiary may elect any course of treatment or not to pursue any course of treatment, that the Medicare beneficiary should consult with a physician, and that the Medicare beneficiary may seek a referral to a physician who furnishes services consisting of the course of treatment that the beneficiary elects.
Updating of videotape.--Any such videotape presentation shall be updated to reflect new findings based on the best scientific evidence available, as determined by the Institute of Medicine, in consultation with the National Institutes of Health and such other medical experts, about the disease or injury, and various courses of treatment.
Selection of Disease or Injury.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of selecting a particular disease or injury for which a informational videotape shall be provided under the projects, the Secretary shall identify diseases or injuries for which there is a wide variation in treatment of that disease throughout the United States.
Mandatory Designation of Prostate Enlargement for One Project.--The disease or injury for which a informational videotape is provided in one of the projects conducted under this section shall be benign and malignant prostate enlargement.
Payment.--(1) The Secretary shall establish a payment amount to be made to a provider of services or a physician under title XVIII of the Social Security Act to reflect services consisting of the presentation of a informational videotape to and consultation with a Medicare beneficiary after such presentation.
For purposes of the payment amount under paragraph (1), no payment may be made for the purchase or rental of equipment or office space for purposes of making such presentation.
Waiver Authority.--The Secretary may waive such requirements of title XVIII of such Act as may be necessary for the purposes of carrying out the project.
Reports.--Not later than June 1, 2004, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the following matters: (1) A description of courses of treatment for the diseases or illnesses identified under subsection (c) selected by Medicare beneficiaries during the three year period ending on December 31, 2003.
A comparison between courses of treatment described in paragraph (1) and courses of treatment selected by the Medicare beneficiaries participating in the project.
An analysis of the effect on costs to the Medicare program due to any change in selection of courses of treatment.
Duration.--A demonstration project under this section shall be conducted for a 3-year period.