This Act may be cited as the ``Healthy America Commission Act of 2003''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Healthy America Commission'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'') .
The Commission shall conduct a study and, under section 6(b), submit a report on the following: (1) The total predicted societal costs of preventable diseases in the United States, disagreggated by the incidence and societal costs of each such disease.
The Federal Government's share of paying for the total predicted societal costs of preventable diseases in the United States during, at a minimum, the next 20 years.
The impact of preventable disease on society relative to the quality and affordability of health care.
The estimated costs and likely long-term savings resulting from a long-term disease prevention program, taking into consideration a series of scenarios regarding the program's scope and effectiveness.
Economic and other incentives throughout society for encouraging behavioral changes and personal responsibility.
Cost-benefit ratios for a broad series of disease prevention initiatives, including how far-reaching each initiative would be.
Target goals against which the Nation's progress under a long-term disease prevention program may be measured based on biannual achievement evaluations.
Procedures for monitoring the Nation's progress under a long-term disease prevention program and changes that may need to be made as the program proceeds.
Whether a series of pilot demonstration programs of various intensities should be undertaken before initiating a full-scale, comprehensive long-term disease prevention program for the Nation.
The efficiency of existing disease prevention programs and any corresponding need for expanded efforts.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members, appointed by the President in consultation with the Speaker and the minority leader of the House of Representatives and the majority leader and the minority leader of the Senate.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Pay.--Each member of the Commission shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Chairperson.--The President shall designate the Chairperson of the Commission from among the 11 members of the Commission.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services, which may include the services of the Rand Corporation, under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--To the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, and devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
Interim Report.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the Congress, the President, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services an interim report that contains such information as the Commission considers appropriate.
Final Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit a final report to the Congress, the President, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services that contains a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative action as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate 90 days after submitting its final report under section 6(b).
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $7,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2005 through 2007.