The Congress makes the following findings: (1) According to the Surgeon General of the United States, the epidemic of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) will soon become the worst epidemic of infectious disease in recorded history, eclipsing the bubonic plague of the 1300's and the influenza epidemic of 1918-1919, the latter killing more than 20,000,000 people worldwide.
The gap between rich and poor countries in terms of transmission of HIV from mother to child has been increasing, threatening to reverse years of steady progress of child survival in developing countries to the point that UNAIDS believes that by the year 2010 AIDS may have increased mortality of children under 5 years of age by more than 100 percent in regions most affected by the virus.
At current infection and growth rates for HIV/AIDS, the National Intelligence Council estimates that the number of AIDS orphans worldwide will increase dramatically, potentially increasing threefold or more in the next 10 years, contributing to economic decay, social fragmentation, and political destabilization in already volatile societies as children without care or hope are drawn into prostitution, crime, substance abuse, or child soldiery.
A January 2000 United States National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) report on the global infectious disease threat concluded that the economic costs of infectious diseases-- especially HIV/AIDS--are already significant and could reduce gross domestic product by 20 percent or more by 2010 in some sub-Saharan African nations.
Despite the discouraging statistics on the spread of HIV/AIDS, some developing nations, such as Uganda, Senegal, and Thailand, have implemented prevention programs that have substantially curbed the rate of HIV infection.
Accordingly, because infectious diseases do not respect international boundaries, United States financial support for medical research, education, and disease containment as a global strategy has enormous benefits for all Americans.
Given the cost of combating AIDS and other infectious diseases worldwide, a contribution to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria of all Special Drawing Rights authorized to be allocated to the United States under a proposed Fourth Amendment to the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund would be a significant step in combating this epidemic.
In September 1997, the international community endorsed the proposed Fourth Amendment, but the amendment has not been implemented because the Executive Branch has not requested Congressional authorization for United States approval of the Fourth Amendment.
The proposed Fourth Amendment has been accepted by 109 of the 110 members of the International Monetary Fund, representing 72.18 percent of the total voting power of the International Monetary Fund.
Whereas approval of the proposed Fourth Amendment by the United States, which holds 17.16 percent of the voting power at the International Monetary Fund, would enable the Special Drawing Rights to be allocated to the United States.
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria is a method for leveraging resources from donor nations to meet the extraordinary need for resources by creating a much stronger multilateral ``burden-sharing'' approach to combating the HIV/AIDS crisis.
ACCEPTANCE OF FOURTH AMENDMENT TO THE ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT OF THE FUND; CONTRIBUTION OF SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS TO THE GLOBAL FUND TO FIGHT AIDS, TUBERCULOSIS AND MALARIA.
The Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286-286nn) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ACCEPTANCE OF FOURTH AMENDMENT TO THE ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT OF THE FUND; CONTRIBUTION OF SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS TO THE GLOBAL FUND TO FIGHT AIDS, TUBERCULOSIS AND MALARIA.
Acceptance of Fourth Amendment to the Articles of Agreement.--The United States Governor of the Fund shall, on behalf of the United States, accept the amendments to the Articles of Agreement of the Fund approved in resolution numbered 52-4 of the Board of Governors of the Fund.
Contribution of Special Drawing Rights to the Global Fund To Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.-- ``(1) Instruction to seek agreement to allow the global fund to hold special drawing rights.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director at the Fund to seek an agreement to include the Bank, in its capacity as administrator of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as a prescribed holder of Special Drawing Rights.
Contributions.--On achieving the agreement described in paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Treasury shall provide for the contribution to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, in each of fiscal years 2004 through 2006, of \1/3\ of the Special Drawing Rights received by the United States pursuant to the amendments referred to in subsection (a).
Negotiations To Urge Other Fund Members To Make Similar Contributions to the Global Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall seek to enter into negotiations for the purpose of inducing the member countries of the Fund to contribute to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria the Special Drawing Rights allocated pursuant to the amendments referred to in subsection (a).