MISSOURI AND MIDDLE MISSISSIPPI RIVERS ENHANCEMENT PROJECT.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Middle mississippi river.--The term ``middle Mississippi River'' means the reach of the Mississippi River from the mouth of the Ohio River (river mile 0, Upper Mississippi River) to the mouth of the Missouri River (river mile 195).
Missouri river.--The term ``Missouri River'' means the reach of the Missouri River from the mouth of the Missouri River (river mile 0, Missouri River) to river mile 742.
Project.--The term ``project'' means the project authorized by this section.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
Protection and Enhancement Activities.-- (1) Plan.-- (A) Development.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a plan for a project to protect and enhance fish and wildlife habitat of the Missouri River and the middle Mississippi River.
Activities.-- (i) In general.--The plan shall provide for such activities as are necessary to protect and enhance fish and wildlife habitat without adversely affecting-- (I) the water-related needs of the region surrounding the Missouri River and the middle Mississippi River, including flood control, navigation, and enhancement of water supply; and (II) private property rights.
Required activities.--The plan shall include-- (I) modification and improvement of navigation training structures to protect and enhance fish and wildlife habitat; (II) modification and creation of side channels to protect and enhance fish and wildlife habitat; (III) restoration and creation of island fish and wildlife habitat; (IV) creation of riverine fish and wildlife habitat; (V) establishment of criteria for prioritizing the type and sequencing of activities based on cost-effectiveness and likelihood of success; and (VI) physical and biological monitoring for evaluating the success of the project.
Implementation of activities.-- (A) In general.--Using funds made available to carry out this section, the Secretary shall carry out the activities described in the plan.
Use of existing authority for unconstructed features of the project.--Using funds made available to the Secretary under other law, the Secretary shall design and construct any feature of the project that may be carried out using the authority of the Secretary to modify an authorized project, if the Secretary determines that the design and construction will-- (i) accelerate the completion of activities to protect and enhance fish and wildlife habitat of the Missouri River or the middle Mississippi River; and (ii) be compatible with the project purposes described in this section.
Integration of Other Activities.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out the activities described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall integrate the activities with other Federal and State activities.
Effect on authority.-- (A) Existing authority.--Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, nothing in this section affects-- (i) the authority to carry out the project for mitigation of fish and wildlife losses, Missouri River Bank Stabilization and Navigation Project, Missouri, Kansas, Iowa, and Nebraska, authorized by section 601(a) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (100 United States Statutes at Large 4143); (ii) the authority provided by section 1103 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 652); or (iii) any other authority in effect on the date of enactment of this Act or any requirement of the authority.
New authority.--Nothing in this section confers any new regulatory authority on any Federal or non- Federal entity that carries out any activity authorized by this section.
Public Participation.--In developing and carrying out the plan under subsection (b) and the activities described in subsection (c), the Secretary shall provide for public review and comment in accordance with applicable Federal law, including-- (1) providing advance notice of meetings; (2) providing adequate opportunity for public input and comment; (3) maintaining appropriate records; and (4) compiling a record of the proceedings of meetings.
Compliance With Applicable Law.--In carrying out the activities described in subsections (b) and (c), the Secretary shall comply with any applicable Federal law, including the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes).
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost of the project (including design and construction described in subsection (b)(2)(B)) shall not exceed 25 percent.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of any 1 activity described in subsection (b) shall not exceed $5,000,000.
Operation and maintenance.--The operation and maintenance of the project shall be a Federal responsibility.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to pay the Federal share of the cost of carrying out activities under this section $50,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 1999 through 2004.
Management of funds.--Funds made available under this subsection shall be managed by the Mississippi Valley Division of the Army Corps of Engineers and distributed to the appropriate Districts of the Army Corps of Engineers.