SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Victim Rights and Domestic Violence Prevention Act of 1995''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--EQUAL PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS Sec.
Right of the victim to an impartial jury.
Rebuttal of attacks on the victim's character.
Victim's right of allocution in sentencing.
Right of the victim to fair treatment in legal proceedings.
Use of notice concerning release of offender.
Balance in the composition of rules committees.
TITLE II--DOMESTIC VIOLENCE Sec.
Death penalty for fatal domestic violence offenses.
Evidence of defendant's disposition toward victim in domestic violence cases and other cases.
Battered women's syndrome evidence.
HIV testing of defendants in sexual assault cases.
TITLE I--EQUAL PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS SEC.
RIGHT OF THE VICTIM TO AN IMPARTIAL JURY.
Rule 24(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure is amended by striking ``the government is entitled to 6 peremptory challenges and the defendant or defendants jointly to 10 peremptory challenges'' and inserting ``each side is entitled to 6 peremptory challenges''.
REBUTTAL OF ATTACKS ON THE VICTIM'S CHARACTER.
Rule 404(a)(1) of the Federal Rules of Evidence is amended by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, or, if an accused offers evidence of a pertinent trait of character of the victim of the crime, evidence of a pertinent trait of character of the accused offered by the prosecution''.
VICTIM'S RIGHT OF ALLOCUTION IN SENTENCING.
Rule 32 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure is amended-- (1) in subdivision (c)(3)(E), by striking ``if sentence is to be imposed for a crime of violence or sexual abuse,''; and (2) by amending subdivision (f) to read as follows: ``(f) Definition.--For purposes of this rule, `victim' means any individual against whom an offense has been committed for which a sentence is to be imposed, but the right of allocution under subdivision (c)(3)(E) may be exercised instead by-- ``(1) a parent or legal guardian if the victim is below the age of 18 years or is incompetent; or ``(2) one or more family members or relatives designated by the court if the victim is deceased or incapacitated, if such person or persons are present at the sentencing hearing, regardless of whether the victim is present.''.
RIGHT OF THE VICTIM TO FAIR TREATMENT IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
The following rules, to be known as the Rules of Professional Conduct for Lawyers in Federal Practice, are enacted as an appendix to title 28, United States Code: ``RULES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT FOR LAWYERS IN FEDERAL PRACTICE ``Rule 1.
Abuse of Victims and Others Prohibited.
Duty of Enquiry in Relation to Client.
Duty To Expedite Litigation.
Duty To Prevent Commission of Crime.
Scope ``(a) These rules apply to the conduct of lawyers in their representation of clients in relation to proceedings and potential proceedings before Federal tribunals.
For purposes of these rules, `Federal tribunal' and `tribunal' mean a court of the United States or an agency of the Federal Government that carries out adjudicatory or quasi-adjudicatory functions.
Abuse of Victims and Others Prohibited ``(a) A lawyer shall not engage in any action or course of conduct for the purpose of increasing the expense of litigation for any person, other than a liability under an order or judgment of a tribunal.
A lawyer shall not engage in any action or course of conduct that has no substantial purpose other than to distress, harass, embarrass, burden, or inconvenience another person.
A lawyer shall not offer evidence that the lawyer knows to be false or attempt to discredit evidence that the lawyer knows to be true.
Duty of Enquiry in Relation to Client ``A lawyer shall attempt to elicit from the client a truthful account of the material facts concerning the matters in issue.
In representing a client charged with a crime or civil wrong, the duty of enquiry under this rule includes-- ``(1) attempting to elicit from the client a materially complete account of the alleged criminal activity or civil wrong if the client acknowledges involvement in the alleged criminal activity or civil wrong; and ``(2) attempting to elicit from the client the material facts relevant to a defense of alibi if the client denies such involvement.
Duty To Expedite Litigation ``(a) A lawyer shall seek to bring about the expeditious conduct and conclusion of litigation.
A lawyer shall not seek a continuance or otherwise attempt to delay or prolong proceedings in the hope or expectation that-- ``(1) evidence will become unavailable; ``(2) evidence will become more subject to impeachment or otherwise less useful to another party because of the passage of time; or ``(3) an advantage will be obtained in relation to another party because of the expense, frustration, distress, or other hardship resulting from prolonged or delayed proceedings.
Duty To Prevent Commission of Crime ``(a) A lawyer may disclose information relating to the representation of a client, including information obtained from the client, to the extent necessary to prevent the commission of a crime or other unlawful act.
A lawyer shall disclose information relating to the representation of a client, including information obtained from the client, when disclosure is required by law.
A lawyer shall disclose information relating to the representation of a client, including information obtained from the client, to the extent necessary to prevent-- ``(1) the commission of a crime involving the use or threatened use of force against a person, or a substantial risk of death or serious bodily injury to a person; or ``(2) the commission of a crime of sexual assault or child molestation.
For purposes of this rule, `crime' means a crime under the law of the United States or the law of a State, and `unlawful act' means an act in violation of the law of the United States or the law of a State.''.
USE OF NOTICE CONCERNING RELEASE OF OFFENDER.
Section 4042(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking paragraph (4).
BALANCE IN THE COMPOSITION OF RULES COMMITTEES.
Section 2073 of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(2), by adding at the end the following: ``On each such committee that makes recommendations concerning rules that affect criminal cases, including the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Federal Rules of Evidence, the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, the Rules Governing Section 2254 Cases, and the Rules Governing Section 2255 Cases, the number of members who represent or supervise the representation of defendants in the trial, direct review, or collateral review of criminal cases shall not exceed the number of members who represent or supervise the representation of the Government or a State in the trial, direct review, or collateral review of criminal cases.
''; and (2) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following: ``The number of members of the standing committee who represent or supervise the representation of defendants in the trial, direct review, or collateral review of criminal cases shall not exceed the number of members who represent or supervise the representation of the Government or a State in the trial, direct review, or collateral review of criminal cases.''.
TITLE II--DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SEC.
DEATH PENALTY FOR FATAL DOMESTIC VIOLENCE OFFENSES.
Sections 2261(b)(1) and 2262(b)(1) of title 18, United States Code, are each amended by inserting ``or may be sentenced to death'' after ``years,''.
EVIDENCE OF DEFENDANT'S DISPOSITION TOWARD VICTIM IN DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CASES AND OTHER CASES.
Rule 404(b) of the Federal Rules of Evidence is amended by striking ``or absence of mistake or accident'' and inserting ``absence of mistake or accident, or a disposition toward a particular individual''.
BATTERED WOMEN'S SYNDROME EVIDENCE.
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Testimony that may be admitted pursuant to this rule includes testimony concerning the behavior, and mental or emotional conditions of victims to explain a victim's failure to report or delay in reporting an offense, recantation of an accusation, or failure to cooperate in the investigation or prosecution.''.
HIV TESTING OF DEFENDANTS IN SEXUAL ASSAULT CASES.
In General.--Chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Testing for human immunodeficiency virus; disclosure of test results to victim; effect on penalty ``(a) Testing at Time of Pretrial Release Determination.--In a case in which a person is charged with an offense under this chapter, upon request of the victim, a judicial officer issuing an order pursuant to section 3142(a) shall include in the order a requirement that a test for the human immunodeficiency virus be performed upon the person, and that followup tests for the virus be performed 6 months and 12 months following the date of the initial test, unless the judicial officer determines that the conduct of the person created no risk of transmission of the virus to the victim, and so states in the order.
The order shall direct that the initial test be performed within 24 hours, or as soon thereafter as feasible.
The person shall not be released from custody until the test is performed.
Testing at Later Time.--If a person charged with an offense under this chapter was not tested for the human immunodeficiency virus pursuant to subsection (a), the court may at a later time direct that such a test be performed upon the person, and that followup tests be performed 6 months and 12 months following the date of the initial test, if it appears to the court that the conduct of the person may have risked transmission of the virus to the victim.
A testing requirement under this subsection may be imposed at any time while the charge is pending, or following conviction at any time prior to the person's completion of service of the sentence.
Termination of Testing Requirement.--A requirement of followup testing imposed under this section shall be canceled if any test is positive for the virus or the person obtains an acquittal on, or dismissal of, all charges under this chapter.
Disclosure of Test Results.--The results of any test for the human immunodeficiency virus performed pursuant to an order under this section shall be provided to the judicial officer or court.
The judicial officer or court shall ensure that the results are disclosed to the victim (or to the victim's parent or legal guardian, as appropriate), the attorney for the Government, and the person tested.
Test results disclosed pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to section 40503(b) (5) through (7) of the Violent Crime Control Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 14011(b)).
Any test result of the defendant given to the victim or the defendant must be accompanied by appropriate counseling, unless the recipient does not wish to receive such counseling.
Effect on Penalty.--The United States Sentencing Commission shall amend existing guidelines for sentences for offenses under this chapter to enhance the sentence if the offender knew or had reason to know that the offender was infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, except where the offender did not engage or attempt to engage in conduct creating a risk of transmission of the virus to the victim.''.
Technical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting at the end the following new item: ``2249.
Testing for human immunodeficiency virus; disclosure of test results to victim; effect on penalty.''.
Amendments to Testing Provisions.--Section 40503(b) of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 14011(b)) is amended-- (1) by amending the heading to read as follows: ``(b) Testing of Defendants.--''; (2) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by inserting ``, or the Government in such a case,'' after ``subsection (a)''; (B) by inserting ``(or to the victim's parent or legal guardian, as appropriate)'' after ``communicated to the victim''; and (C) by inserting ``, unless the recipient does not wish to receive such counseling'' after ``counseling''; and (3) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by striking ``To obtain an order under paragraph (1), the victim must demonstrate that'' and inserting ``The victim or the Government may obtain an order under paragraph (1) by showing that''; (B) in subparagraph (A)-- (i) by striking ``the offense'' and inserting ``a sexual assault involving alleged conduct that poses a risk of transmission of the etiologic agent for acquired immune deficiency syndrome''; and (ii) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon; (C) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``after appropriate counseling; and'' and inserting a period; and (D) by striking subparagraph (C).