This Act may be cited as the ``Ethics Reform Act of 1995''.
TITLE I--TERMINATION OF COMMITTEE ON STANDARDS OF OFFICIAL CONDUCT IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SEC.
EXERCISE OF CONGRESSIONAL RULEMAKING POWER.
The provisions of this title amending the Rules of the House of Representatives are enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such they shall be considered a part of the rules of the House of Representatives and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of the House of Representatives to change such rules at any time in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of such House.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMITTEE ON STANDARDS OF OFFICIAL CONDUCT.
Termination.-- (1) Rules.--Rule X of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended-- (A) in clause 1-- (i) by striking paragraph (p); and (ii) by redesignating paragraphs (q), (r), and (s) as paragraphs (p), (q), and (r), respectively; and (B) in clause 4-- (i) by striking paragraph (e); and (ii) by redesignating paragraphs (f), (g), (h), and (i) as paragraphs (e), (f), (g), and (h), respectively.
Law.--The Ethics Reform Act of 1989 (Public Law 101- 194) is amended by striking subsections (b), (c), (d), and (i) of section 803 (2 United States Code 29d).
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Rules.-- (A) Clause 3(e) of rule VI of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended -- (i) by striking ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and inserting ``Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics''; and (ii) by striking ``clause 4(e)(1)(C) of rule X'' and inserting ``section 203(3) the Ethics Reform Act of 1995''.
Clause 1(m)(1) of rule X of such Rules is amended by striking ``(other than rules or joint rules relating to the Code of Official Conduct)''.
Clause 6(a) of rule X of such Rules is amended-- (i) by striking subparagraph (2); and (ii) by striking ``(1)''.
Clause 2(e)(2) of rule XI of such Rules is amended by striking ``, except that in the case of records in the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and all that follows through ``prior approval of the committee''.
Clause 2(g)(2) of rule XI of such Rules is amended by striking ``, with the exception of the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct,''.
Clause 2(i)(1) of rule XI of such Rules is amended by striking ``the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct,''.
Clause 4(a) of rule XI of such Rules is amended-- (i) by striking ``and the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and all that follows; (ii) by inserting ``and'' before ``the Committee on Rules''; and (iii) by striking the semicolon after ``order of business'' and inserting a period.
Clause 6(a)(2) of rule XI of such Rules is amended by striking ``the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct and''.
Clause 7(d) of rule XIII is amended-- (i) by striking ``and the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct,''; and (ii) by inserting ``and'' before ``the Committee on Rules''.
Clause 1 of rule XXXII of such Rules is amended by striking ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and inserting ``Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics''.
Clause 4 of rule XLIII of such Rules is amended by striking ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct pursuant to clause 4(e)(1)(E) of rule X'' and inserting ``Committee on Rules''.
Clause 12(b) of rule XLIII of such Rules is amended by striking ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and inserting ``Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics''.
Clause (1) of rule XLIV of such Rules is amended by striking ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and inserting ``Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics''.
Clause 2(5) of rule XLVII of such Rules is amended by striking ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and inserting ``Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics''.
Clause 5 of rule XLVIII of such Rules is amended by striking ``of the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct and''.
Clause 7(d) of rule XLVIII of such Rules is amended by striking ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and inserting ``Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics''.
Clause 7(e) of rule XLVIII of such Rules is amended by striking ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct'' and inserting ``Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics''.
Clause 13 of rule LI of such Rules is amended by striking ``and the Rules of the House Committee on Standards of Official Conduct''.
Law.--The following provisions are each amended by striking ``the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives'' and inserting ``the Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics'': (A) Section 5(e) of Public Law 93-191 (2 United States Code 501(e)).
Section 7342(a)(6)(A) of title 5, United States Code.
Section 7353(d)(1) of title 5, United States Code.
Section 103(j)(1) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
Section 109(1) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
Section 109(18)(B) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
Section 111(2) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
Section 503(1)(A) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.).
REFERENCE TO COMMITTEE ON STANDARDS OF OFFICIAL CONDUCT.
Any reference in a law, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United States to the ``Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives'' shall be deemed to be a reference to the ``Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics''.
In the case of investigations pending before the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act, the proceedings shall be continued by the Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics.
TITLE II--ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION SEC.
There is established an independent commission within the legislative branch of the Federal Government to be known as the Independent Commission on Congressional Ethics (in this title referred to as the ``Commission'').
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of five retired or senior Federal judges as follows: (1) Two individuals appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two individuals appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
One individual appointed by the individuals appointed under paragraphs (1) and (2).
Terms.--The term of office for a member of the Commission shall be four years.
A member shall be eligible for two terms of office.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Removal.--Any member of the Commission may be removed from office by a majority decision of the appointing authorities described in subsection (a), but only for-- (1) disability that substantially prevents the member from carrying out the duties of the member; (2) incompetence; (3) neglect of duty; or (4) malfeasance, including a felony or conduct involving moral turpitude.
Compensation.-- (1) Rate of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall serve without pay or benefits.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission may receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Chairperson.-- (1) Election.--The Commission shall elect a Chairperson of the Commission from among its members at its first meeting.
Term.--The term of the Chairperson shall be two years.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Initial meeting.--The Commission shall hold its initial meeting not later than 60 days after the date on which appointments are completed.
The Commission is authorized-- (1) to recommend to the House of Representatives, from time to time, such administrative actions as it may deem appropriate to establish or enforce standards of official conduct for Members, officers, and employees of the House of Representatives; (2) to investigate any alleged violation, by a Member, officer, or employee of the House of Representatives, of any law, rule, regulation, or other standard of conduct applicable to the conduct of such Member, officer, or employee in the performance of his duties or the discharge of his responsibilities, and after notice and hearing (unless the right to a hearing is waived by the Member, officer, or employee), shall report to the House of Representatives its findings of fact and recommendations, if any, upon the final disposition of any such investigation, and such action as the Commission may deem appropriate in the circumstances; (3) to report to the appropriate Federal or State authorities, with the approval of the House of Representatives, any substantial evidence of a violation, by a Member, officer, or employee of the House of Representatives, of any law applicable to the performance of his duties or the discharge of his responsibilities, which may have been disclosed in a Commission investigation; (4) to give consideration to the request of any Member, officer, or employee of the House of Representatives for an advisory opinion with respect to the general propriety of any current or proposed conduct of such Member, officer, or employee and, with appropriate deletions to assure the privacy of the individual concerned, to publish such opinion for the guidance of other Members, officers, and employees of the House of Representatives; and (5) to provide information and guidance to Members, officers and employees of the House of Representatives regarding any laws, rules, regulations, and other standards of conduct applicable to such individuals in their official capacities, and develop and carry out periodic educational briefings for Members, officers, and employees of the House of Representatives on those laws, rules, regulations, or other standards.
Majority Approval.--No resolution, report, recommendation, or advisory opinion relating to the official conduct of a Member, officer, or employee of the House shall be made by the Commission, and no investigation of such conduct shall be undertaken by the Commission, unless approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.
Investigations.--Except in the case of an investigation undertaken by the Commission on its own initiative, the Commission may undertake an investigation relating to the official conduct of an individual Member, officer, or employee of the House of Representatives only-- (i) upon receipt of a complaint, in writing and under oath, made by or submitted to a Member of the House of Representatives and transmitted to the Commission by such Member, or (ii) upon receipt of a complaint, in writing and under oath, directly from an individual not a Member of the House of Representatives if the Commission finds that such complaint has been submitted by such individual to not less than three Members of the House who have refused, in writing, to transmit such complaint to the Commission.
Prohibition of Certain Investigations.--No investigation shall be undertaken by the Commission of any alleged violation of a law, rule, regulation, or standard of conduct not in effect at the time of the alleged violation; nor shall any investigation be undertaken by the Commission of any alleged violation which occurred before the third previous Congress unless the Commission determines that the alleged violation is directly related to any alleged violation which occurred in a more recent Congress.
Disclosure.--No information or testimony received, or the contents of a complaint or the fact of its filing, shall be publicly disclosed by any member of the Commission or staff of the Commission unless specifically authorized in each instance by a vote of the full Commission.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the compensation of such staff as the Commission considers necessary to perform its duties.
Detailed Personnel.--The Commission may, with the prior consent of the department or agency of the Federal Government concerned, use on a reimbursable or nonreimbursable basis the services of personnel of any such department or agency, including the services of members or personnel of the General Accounting Office Personnel Appeals Board.
Consultants.--In carrying out the functions of the Commission, the Commission may procure the temporary (not to exceed one year) or intermittent services of consultants.
TITLE III--DISCHARGE OF COMMISSION REPORT FROM COMMITTEE ON RULES IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SEC.
If the Rules Committee in the House of Representatives to which the report has been referred has not reported it at the end of 30 legislative days after the introduction, it is in order to move either to discharge the committee from further consideration of the report or to discharge the committee from further consideration of any other resolution introduced with respect to the same matter, except that a motion to discharge-- (A) may only be made on the second legislative day after the calendar day on which the Member making the motion announces to the House his intention to do so; and (B) is not in order after the Committee has reported a resolution with respect to the same matter.
A motion to discharge under paragraph (1) may be made only by an individual favoring the resolution, and is highly privileged in the House; and debate thereon shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, the time to be divided in the House equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
An amendment to the motion is not in order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of the resolution shall be highly privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the House of Representatives on a resolution shall be limited to not more than 6 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring the resolution and those opposing the resolution.
A further motion to limit debate shall not be debatable.
No amendment to, or motion to recommit, the resolution shall be in order.
It shall not be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which a resolution is agreed to or disagreed to.