This Act may be cited as the ``Housing Voucher Act of 1993''.
TERMINATION OF ASSISTANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC HOUSING.
Loan Authority.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may not enter into any new commitment to make loans under section 4 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 to public housing agencies for the development or acquisition of public housing projects by such agencies.
Contribution Authority.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may not enter into any new contract to make contributions under section 5 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 to public housing agencies for the development or acquisition of public housing projects by such agencies.
Existing Commitments.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may make contributions and loans for the development or acquisition of public housing projects only pursuant to legally binding commitments to make such loans or contracts for such contributions entered into on or before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Inapplicability to Indian Housing.--The provisions of this section shall not apply to public housing developed pursuant to a contract between the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and an Indian housing authority.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms ``Indian housing authority'', ``project'', ``public housing'', and ``public housing agency'' have the meanings given the terms in section 3(b) of the United States Housing Act of 1937.
TERMINATION OF ASSISTANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.
Authority.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may not enter into any new commitment to make capital advances under section 202(c)(1) of the Housing Act of 1959 for the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or acquisition of supportive housing for the elderly under such section 202.
Existing Commitments.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may make capital advances for the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or acquisition of supportive housing for the elderly under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 only pursuant to legally binding commitments to make such advances entered into on or before the date of the enactment of this Act.
TERMINATION OF ASSISTANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
Authority.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may not enter into any new commitment to make capital advances under section 811(d)(1) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act for the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or acquisition of supportive housing for the persons with disabilities under such section 811.
Existing Commitments.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may make capital advances for the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or acquisition of supportive housing for persons with disabilities under section 811 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act only pursuant to legally binding commitments to make such advances entered into on or before the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASE OF VOUCHER AUTHORITY AND SET-ASIDES FOR THE ELDERLY AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
Budget Authority.--Any budget authority available under section 5(c) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 for assistance under section 8(o) of such Act is authorized to be increased by $150,000,000 on or after October 1, 1993.
Set-Aside.--From any amount appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) in any fiscal year, the Secretary shall make available an amount for voucher assistance for elderly persons (as such term is defined in section 202(k) of the Housing Act of 1959) and for persons with disabilities (as such term is defined in section 811(k) of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act) that bears approximately the same ratio to such amount appropriated as-- (1) the actual need for such assistance for elderly persons and persons with disabilities bears to the total national need for such assistance, as determined by the Secretary; or (2) the total annual amount of assistance provided by the Secretary for construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or acquisition of housing for elderly persons and persons with disabilities bears to the total annual amount of housing assistance provided by the Secretary, as determined by the Secretary for recent years.
Permissible Uses.--Vouchers for rental assistance provided with the amounts made available under this section may be used for the rental of dwelling units or costs of residency as determined by qualified voucher recipients.