NATIONAL PARK RANGER SCHOOL PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM.
Program Established.-- (1) In general.--Part D of title V of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subpart 22--National Park Ranger School Partnerships ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Director of the National Park Service, may award grants, on a competitive basis, to schools and local educational agencies and education service agencies to carry out the authorized activities described in subsection (b).
Authorized Activities.--A school or local educational agency shall use funds provided under this subpart to enter into a partnership with the National Park Service, in cooperation where appropriate with a not-for-profit partner of the National Park Service, to carry out both of the following activities: ``(1) Providing, for students in kindergarten through grade 12, educational programs (including programs under which instruction is provided by National Park Service Rangers) that emphasize science, the environment, natural resources, mathematics, civics, and history.
Providing, for educators of students in kindergarten through grade 12, professional development opportunities (such as summer institutes) that emphasize science, the environment, natural resources, mathematics, civics, and history.
Grants.--Each grant under this subpart shall be for a period of 3 years, for an aggregate amount of not more than $25,000.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this subpart, a school or local educational agency must-- ``(1) either-- ``(A) have a partnership or be capable of partnering with a unit of the National Park Service or a Research and Learning Center of the National Park Service; or ``(B) have, or demonstrate that it will develop, a technology-based distance learning link to the National Park Service; ``(2) be identified for improvement under title I; and ``(3) have a significant percentage of low-income students.
Criteria.--Grants under this subpart shall be awarded on a competitive basis using criteria established jointly by the Secretary and the Director of the National Park Service.
Reports by Grantees.--Upon completing the period for which the grant was made, the school or local educational agency receiving the grant shall submit to the Secretary a report that-- ``(1) identifies the number of students participating in the activities described in subsection (b)(1) that were carried out under the grant and the achievement attained by those students in mathematics, science, and any other academic areas relevant to the activities carried out under the grant as measured against-- ``(A) Statewide scores for students on the academic assessments in mathematics or science under section 1111(b)(3); and ``(B) other benchmarks established by the Secretary, in coordination with the National Park Service; and ``(2) identifies the number of educators participating in the activities described in subsection (b)(2) that were carried out under the grant and the professional development received by those educators in mathematics, science, and any other academic areas relevant to the activities carried out under the grant.
Report by Secretary.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, in coordination with the Director of the National Park Service, shall submit a report to Congress on the implementation of this subpart.
The report shall include recommendations on whether and to what extent the program should be continued or expanded.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subpart $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2008, to be available until expended.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 2 of that Act is amended by adding after the items relating to subpart 21 of part D of title V the following: ``subpart 22--national park ranger school partnerships ``Sec.
National Park Service Eligibility for Certain Programs.-- (1) Math and science partnerships.--Section 2201(b)(1)(B) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6661(b)(1)(B)) is amended-- (A) by redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) as (iv) and (v), respectively; and (B) by adding after clause (ii) the following: ``(iii) the National Park Service;''.
Teaching of traditional american history.--Section 2351(b) of that Act (20 United States Code 6721(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) An educational service agency, including a Federal agency that serves as an educational service provider.