This Act may be cited as the ``Consistent Public Land Laws Enforcement Act of 2002''.
CONSISTENT ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY REGARDING NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM LANDS, NATIONAL FOREST LANDS, AND OTHER PUBLIC LANDS.
Lands Under Jurisdiction of Bureau of Land Management.--Section 303(a) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1733(a)) is amended by striking the second sentence and inserting the following new sentences: ``A violation of any such regulation shall be a Class B misdemeanor, except that a person who knowingly and willfully violates any such regulation shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, subject to fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
A person who violates any such regulation may also be adjudged to pay all costs of the proceedings.''.
National Park System Lands.-- (1) Enforcement.--Section 3 of the Act of August 25, 1916 (popularly known as the National Park Service Organic Act; 16 United States Code 3) is amended in the first sentence-- (A) by striking ``That the Secretary'' and inserting ``(a) Regulations for Use and Management of National Park System; Enforcement.--The Secretary''; and (B) by striking ``Service,'' and all that follows through ``proceedings.''
and inserting the following: ``Service.
A violation of any such rule or regulation shall be a Class B misdemeanor, except that a person who knowingly and willfully violates any such rule or regulation shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, subject to fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
A person who violates any such rule or regulation may also be adjudged to pay all costs of the proceedings.''.
Conforming amendments.--Such section is further amended-- (A) by striking ``He may also'' the first place it appears and inserting the following: ``(b) Special Management Authorities.--The Secretary of the Interior may''; (B) by striking ``He may also'' the second place it appears and inserting ``The Secretary may''; and (C) by striking ``No natural,'' and inserting the following: ``(c) Lease and Permit Authorities.--No natural''.
National Forest System Lands.--The eleventh undesignated paragraph under the heading ``surveying the public lands'' of the Act of June 4, 1897 (16 United States Code 551), is amended by striking ``destruction; and any'' and all that follows through ``or both.''
and inserting the following: ``destruction.
A violation of any such rule or regulation shall be a Class B misdemeanor, except that a person who knowingly and willfully violates any such rule or regulation shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, subject to fine as provided in section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or imprisonment as provided in section 3581 of that title, or both.
A person who violates any such rule or regulation may also be adjudged to pay all costs of the proceedings.''.
CONSISTENT AUTHORITIES REGARDING USE OF COLLECTED FINES.
Lands Under Jurisdiction of Bureau of Land Management.--Section 305 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1735), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Use of Collected Fines.-- ``(1) Availability and authorized use.--Any moneys received by the United States as a result of a fine imposed under section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, for a violation of a regulation prescribed under section 303(a) shall be available to the Secretary, without further appropriation and until expended, for the following purposes: ``(A) To cover the cost to the United States of any improvement, protection, or rehabilitation work on the public lands rendered necessary by the action which led to the fine.
To increase public awareness of regulations and other requirements regarding the use of the public lands.
Return of excess funds to treasury.--Moneys referred to in paragraph (1) that the Secretary determines are excess to the amounts necessary to carry out the purposes specified in such paragraph shall be transferred to miscellaneous receipts.''.
National Park System Lands.--Section 3 of the Act of August 25, 1916 (popularly known as the National Park Service Organic Act; 16 United States Code 3), as amended by section 2(b), is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Use of Collected Fines.-- ``(1) Availability and authorized use.--Any moneys received by the United States as a result of a fine imposed under section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, for a violation of a rule or regulation prescribed under this section shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior, without further appropriation and until expended, for the following purposes: ``(A) To cover the cost to the United States of any improvement, protection, or rehabilitation work on the National Park System lands rendered necessary by the action which led to the fine.
To increase public awareness of rules, regulations, and other requirements regarding the use of the such lands.
Return of excess funds to treasury.--Moneys referred to in paragraph (1) that the Secretary determines are excess to the amounts necessary to carry out the purposes specified in such paragraph shall be transferred to miscellaneous receipts.''.
National Forest System Lands.--Section 7 of the Act of June 20, 1958 (16 United States Code 579c), is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) Treatment of Certain Moneys Received on Behalf of Forest Service.--'' before ``Any funds''; (2) by striking ``contract or (2)'' and inserting ``contract, (2)''; (3) by inserting after ``improvements,'' the following: ``or (3) as a result of a fine imposed under section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, for a violation of a rule or regulation prescribed by the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to such lands,''; (4) by striking ``to cover'' and all that follows through the end of the section and inserting the following: ``for the purposes specified in subsection (b).
''; and (5) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Authorized Use.-- ``(1) In general.--The moneys referred to in subsection (a) shall be available to the Secretary of Agriculture for the following purposes: ``(A) To cover the cost to the United States of any improvement, protection, or rehabilitation work on National Forest System lands rendered necessary by the action which led to the fine, forfeiture, judgment, compromise, or settlement.
To increase public awareness of rules, regulations, and other requirements regarding the use of the such lands.
Return of excess funds to treasury.--Moneys referred to in subsection (a) that the Secretary determines are excess to the amounts necessary to carry out the purposes specified in paragraph (1) shall be transferred to miscellaneous receipts.