This Act may be cited as the ``Business Checking Freedom Act of 2003''.
INTEREST-BEARING TRANSACTION ACCOUNTS AUTHORIZED FOR ALL BUSINESSES.
Section 2 of Public Law 93-100 (12 United States Code 1832) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following: ``(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any depository institution may permit the owner of any deposit or account which is a deposit or account on which interest or dividends are paid and is not a deposit or account described in subsection (a)(2) to make up to 24 transfers per month (or such greater number as the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may determine by rule or order), for any purpose, to another account of the owner in the same institution.
An account offered pursuant to this subsection shall be considered a transaction account for purposes of section 19 of the Federal Reserve Act unless the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System determines otherwise.''.
PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON RESERVES AT FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS.
In General.--Section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12) Earnings on reserves.-- ``(A) In general.--Balances maintained at a Federal reserve bank by or on behalf of a depository institution may receive earnings to be paid by the Federal reserve bank at least once each calendar quarter at a rate or rates not to exceed the general level of short-term interest rates.
Regulations relating to payments and distribution.--The Board may prescribe regulations concerning-- ``(i) the payment of earnings in accordance with this paragraph; ``(ii) the distribution of such earnings to the depository institutions which maintain balances at such banks or on whose behalf such balances are maintained; and ``(iii) the responsibilities of depository institutions, Federal home loan banks, and the National Credit Union Administration Central Liquidity Facility with respect to the crediting and distribution of earnings attributable to balances maintained, in accordance with subsection (c)(1)(A), in a Federal reserve bank by any such entity on behalf of depository institutions.
Depository institutions defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `depository institution', in addition to the institutions described in paragraph (1)(A), includes any trust company, corporation organized under section 25A or having an agreement with the Board under section 25, or any branch or agency of a foreign bank (as defined in section 1(b) of the International Banking Act of 1978).''.
Authorization for Pass Through Reserves for Member Banks.-- Section 19(c)(1)(B) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(c)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``which is not a member bank''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--Section 19 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(4) (12 United States Code 461(b)(4)), by striking subparagraph (C) and redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and (2) in subsection (c)(1)(A) (12 United States Code 461(c)(1)(A)), by striking ``subsection (b)(4)(C)'' and inserting ``subsection (b)''.
INCREASED FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FLEXIBILITY IN SETTING RESERVE REQUIREMENTS.
Section 19(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)(2)(A)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``the ratio of 3 per centum'' and inserting ``a ratio not greater than 3 percent (and which may be zero)''; and (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``and not less than 8 per centum,'' and inserting ``(and which may be zero),''.
TRANSFER OF FEDERAL RESERVE SURPLUSES.
In General.--Section 7(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 289(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Additional transfers to cover interest payments for fiscal years 2003 through 2007.-- ``(A) In general.--In addition to the amounts required to be transferred from the surplus funds of the Federal reserve banks pursuant to subsection (a)(3), the Federal reserve banks shall transfer from such surplus funds to the Board for transfer to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury, such sums as are necessary to equal the net cost of section 19(b)(12) in each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
Allocation by federal reserve board.--Of the total amount required to be paid by the Federal reserve banks under subparagraph (A) for fiscal years 2003 through 2007, the Board shall determine the amount each such bank shall pay in such fiscal year.
Replenishment of surplus fund prohibited.-- During fiscal years 2003 through 2007, no Federal reserve bank may replenish such bank's surplus fund by the amount of any transfer by such bank under subparagraph (A).''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--Section 7(a) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 289(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Payment to treasury.--During fiscal years 2003 through 2007, any amount in the surplus fund of any Federal reserve bank in excess of the amount equal to 3 percent of the paid-in capital and surplus of the member banks of such bank shall be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury.