SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Tax Lien Simplification Act''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The present decentralized system for filing Federal tax liens in local property offices, which was established before the advent of modern computers, the Internet, and e-government programs, is inefficient, burdensome, and expensive.
Current technology permits the creation of a centralized Federal tax lien filing system which can provide for enhanced public notice of and access to accurate tax lien information in a manner that is more efficient, more timely, and less burdensome than the existing tax lien filing system; which would expedite the release of liens; and which would be less expensive for both taxpayers and users.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to simplify and modernize the process for filing notices of Federal tax liens, to improve public access to tax lien information, and to save taxpayer dollars by establishing a nationwide, Internet accessible, and fully searchable filing system for Federal tax liens which would replace the current system of local tax lien filings.
NATIONAL TAX LIEN FILING SYSTEM.
Filing of Notice of Lien.--Subsection (f) of section 6323 (relating to validity and priority against certain persons) is amended to read as follows: ``(f) Filing of Notice; Form.-- ``(1) Filing of notice.--The notice referred to in subsection (a) shall be filed in the national Federal tax lien registry established under subsection (k).
The filing of a notice of lien, or a certificate of release, discharge, subordination, or nonattachment of lien, in the national Federal tax lien registry shall be effective for purposes of determining lien priority regardless of the nature or location of the property interest to which the lien attaches.
Form.--The form and content of the notice referred to in subsection (a) shall be prescribed by the Secretary.
Such notice shall be valid notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the form or content of a notice of lien.
Other national filing systems.--The filing of a notice of lien shall be governed by this title and shall not be subject to any other Federal law establishing a place or places for the filing of liens or encumbrances under a national filing system.''.
Refiling of Notice.--Paragraph (2) of section 6323(g) (relating to refiling of notice) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Refiling.--A notice of lien may be refiled in the national Federal tax lien registry established under subsection (k).''.
Release of Tax Liens or Discharge of Property.-- (1) In general.--Section 6325(a) (relating to release of lien) is amended by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of release to be filed in the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k),'' after ``internal revenue tax''.
Release of tax liens expedited from 30 to 10 days.-- Section 6325(a) (relating to release of lien) is amended by striking ``not later than 30 days'' and inserting ``not later than 10 days''.
Discharge of property from lien.--Section 6325(b) (relating to discharge of property) is amended-- (A) by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of discharge to be filed in the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k),'' after ``under this chapter'' in paragraph (1), (B) by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of discharge to be filed in such national Federal tax lien registry,'' after ``property subject to the lien'' in paragraph (2), (C) by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of discharge to be filed in such national Federal tax lien registry,'' after ``property subject to the lien'' in paragraph (3), and (D) by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of discharge of property to be filed in such national Federal tax lien registry,'' after ``certificate of discharge of such property'' in paragraph (4).
Discharge of property from estate or gift tax lien.-- Section 6325(c) (relating to estate or gift tax) is amended by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of discharge to be filed in the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k),'' after ``imposed by section 6324''.
Subordination of lien.--Section 6325(d) (relating to subordination of lien) is amended by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of subordination to be filed in the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k),'' after ``subject to such lien''.
Nonattachment of lien.--Section 6325(e) (relating to nonattachment of lien) is amended by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of nonattachment to be filed in the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k),'' after ``property of such person''.
Effect of certificate.--Paragraphs (1) and (2)(B) of section 6325(f) (relating to effect of certificate) are each amended by striking ``in the same office as the notice of lien to which it relates is filed (if such notice of lien has been filed)'' and inserting ``in the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k)''.
Release following administrative appeal.--Section 6326(b) (relating to certificate of release) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and shall include'' and insert ``, shall include'', and (B) by inserting ``, and shall cause the certificate of release to be filed in the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k),'' after ``erroneous''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 6325 is amended by striking subsection (g) and by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (g).
National Federal Tax Lien Registry.-- (1) In general.--Section 6323 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) National Registry.--The national Federal tax lien registry referred to in subsection (f)(1) shall be established and maintained by the Secretary and shall be accessible to and searchable by the public through the Internet at no cost to access or search.
The registry shall identify the taxpayer to whom the Federal tax lien applies and reflect the date and time the notice of lien was filed, and shall be made searchable by, at a minimum, taxpayer name, the State of the taxpayer's address as shown on the notice of lien, the type of tax, and the tax period, and, when the Secretary determines it is feasible, by property.
The registry shall also provide for the filing of certificates of release, discharge, subordination, and nonattachment of Federal tax liens, as authorized in sections 6325 and 6326, and may provide for publishing such other documents or information with respect to Federal tax liens as the Secretary may by regulation provide.''.
Administrative action.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall issue regulations or other guidance providing for the maintenance and use of the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall take appropriate steps to secure and prevent tampering with the data recorded therein.
Prior to implementation of such registry, the Secretary of the Treasury shall review the information currently provided in public lien filings and determine whether any such information should be excluded or protected from public viewing in such registry.
Transition Rules.--The Secretary of the Treasury may by regulation prescribe for the continued filing of notices of Federal tax lien in the offices of the States, counties and other governmental subdivisions after December 31, 2008, for an appropriate period to permit an orderly transition to the national Federal tax lien registry established under section 6323(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to notices of lien filed after December 31, 2008.
The national Federal tax lien registry (established under section 6323(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) shall be made operational as of January 1, 2009, whether or not the Secretary of the Treasury has promulgated final regulations establishing such registry.