REPEAL OF PROVISION WHICH INCLUDES ONE-HALF OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND RAILROAD RETIREMENT BENEFITS IN GROSS INCOME.
Repeal of Provision Including Benefits in Gross Income.-- Section 86 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to inclusion of social security and tier 1 railroad retirement benefits in gross income) is hereby repealed.
Repeal of Return Requirement.--Section 6050F of such Code (relating to returns relating to Social Security benefits) is hereby repealed.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (3) of section 72(r) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Tier 1 railroad retirement benefit.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `tier 1 railroad retirement benefit' means a monthly benefit under section 3(a), 3(f)(3), 4(a), or 4(f) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974.''
Paragraph (1) of section 6050G(a) of such Code is amended by striking out ``86(d)(4)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``72(r)(3)''.
The table of sections for part II of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking out the item relating to section 86.
The table of sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by striking out the item relating to section 6050F.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to benefits received after December 31, 1989, in taxable years beginning after such date.
TAXATION OF ONE-HALF OF SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS PAID TO NONRESIDENT ALIENS CONTINUED.
In General.--Section 871 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax on nonresident alien individuals) is amended by redesignating subsection (j) as subsection (k) and by inserting after subsection (i) the following new subsection: ``(j) Social Security Benefit Defined.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `social security benefit' means any amount received by the taxpayer by reason of entitlement to-- ``(A) a monthly benefit under title II of the Social Security Act, or ``(B) a tier 1 railroad retirement benefit.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the amount received by any taxpayer shall be determined as if the Social Security Act did not contain section 203(i) thereof.
Adjustment for repayments during year.--For purposes of this section, the amount of Social Security benefits received during any taxable year shall be reduced by any repayment made by the taxpayer during the taxable year of a Social Security benefit previously received by the taxpayer (whether or not such benefit was received during the taxable year).
Workmen's compensation benefits substituted for social security benefits.--For purposes of this section, if, by reason of section 224 of the Social Security Act (or by reason of section 3(a)(1) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974), any Social Security benefit is reduced by reason of the receipt of a benefit under a workman's compensation act, the term `Social Security benefit' includes that portion of such benefit received under the workman's compensation act which equals such reduction.
Tier 1 railroad retirement benefit.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `tier 1 railroad retirement benefit' has the meaning given to such term by section 72(r)(3).''
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (8) of section 861(a) of such Code is amended by striking out ``86(d)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``871(j)''.
Paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of such section 871 is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Taxation of social security benefits.--For purposes of this section and section 1441, one-half of any Social Security benefit shall be included in gross income (notwithstanding section 207 of the Social Security Act).''
Paragraph (6) of section 6103(h) of such Code is amended by striking out ``86(d)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``871(j)''.
Subsection (e) of section 121 of the Social Security Amendments of 1983 is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1) by striking out ``sections 86 and'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``section'', and (B) in paragraph (3)(B) by striking out ``86(d)(1)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``871(j)(1)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to benefits received during the first taxable year after enactment of this Act.