This Act may be cited as the ``America's Youth Commission Act of 1999''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) American youth, up to 18 years of age, represent the freest, most educated, most affluent generation this Nation has known.
A majority will graduate from high school, will come from families in which the parents or guardians are employed and own property, and will come from a society which has achieved unparalleled national economic and social opportunity in a world largely at peace.
The potential for this generation of American youth to make lasting contributions to freedom's cause is unparalleled.
Yet, despite this favorable domestic and international climate, some serious flaws have appeared in America's social and cultural fabric, characterized by destructive behaviors among some of our youth that are damaging our Nation and the ability of this generation to achieve its full potential.
While most of America's youth are achieving academically and developing wholesome constructive pursuits, youth violence in places like Littleton, Colorado, Springfield, Oregon, and Jonesboro, Arkansas, and the rash of copycat incidents, threatened or real, across the Nation has brought to the fore a troubling lack of respect by some for other individuals that lies at the heart of a free society.
Across our Nation, school ``pranks'' have in many cases been destructive to schools and property and reveal a serious lack of understanding by the perpetrators of the true costs of their actions.
Equally serious are the consistently high and personally destructive levels of alcohol and drug use by American youth, sometimes coupled with gun violence, as well as increasing levels of teenage suicide and eating disorders, such as bulimia and anorexia.
Upholding human dignity faces challenges in the media as well.
By the time children in the United States have passed through the eighth grade, they will have witnessed an average of 8,000 murders and over 100,000 other acts of violence through the media.
In addition, many video games, music, films, and Internet websites present material so degrading to human dignity that they undermine the value of human life and elevate the bizarre to normal.
Some have characterized this as a ``culture of death'' that permeates the consciousness of American youth.
The structure of family, neighborhoods, work, and community in the United States has been transformed in the last 30 years as economic growth and mobility have impacted families' aspirations and livelihoods.
The static purchasing power of families, mergers, and dislocation of production, higher family mobility and suburbanization, rising levels of foster children, all have contributed to a more fluid social structure and less continuity for youth in permanent nurturing relationships with family and community.
The social consequences of these changes, along with the pervasive influence of media, demand attention, for developmental attachments by adults toward youth that characterized previous generations have become more tenuous in today's society.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission on the Impact of United States Culture on America's Youth'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall investigate and make findings and recommendations with respect to-- (1) the condition and status of contemporary youth in America compared to prior generations, with particular attention to family, neighborhood, schools, scholastic attainment, work, and community involvement; (2) the nature, origins, and trends of antisocial and violent behavior among American youth, including-- (A) an analysis of the trends in violent acts in families, neighborhoods, and schools; and (B) the influence of organizations, other cultural elements, and individuals contributing to the incitement or encouragement of violent behaviors; (3) identification of successful initiatives that involve youth in positive development and experiences that curb antisocial behavior among youth; (4) recommendations for averting and reducing violence among American youth; and (5) recommendations for parents, families, nongovernmental and private sector organizations and Federal, State, and local authorities in building positive developmental experiences among American youth.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members appointed as follows: (1) Two members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two members appointed by the majority Leader of the Senate.
Two members appointed by the minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Two members appointed by the minority Leader of the Senate.
Three members appointed by the President.
Qualifications.--The members shall-- (1) not be incumbent Members of Congress; and (2) be specially qualified to serve on the Commission by reason of education, training, or experience.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.--Members shall serve without pay.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chair.--The Chair of the Commission shall be designated by the President at the time of the appointment.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission shall ensure that its hearings and sessions are open to the public, with significant opportunities for testimony from members of the general public.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall cooperate with the Commission in providing that information.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate Government or private agencies or persons for supplies or services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Interim Report.--The Commission shall transmit an interim report to the President and the Congress not later than 180 days after the date the Commission is duly organized.
Final Report.--The Commission shall transmit a final report to the President and the Congress not later than one year after the date the Commission is duly organized.
The final report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for legislation.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after transmitting its final report pursuant to section 7(b).
There is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 to carry out this Act, to remain available until expended.
Any spending authority (as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 401(c)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 651(c)(2)(A) and (C))) authorized by this Act shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.