This Act may be cited as the ``Flight Attendant Duty Time Act''.
AMENDMENT TO THE FEDERAL AVIATION ACT.
In General.--Title VI of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code App.
1421-1433) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
DUTY TIME OF FLIGHT ATTENDANTS.
Rulemaking Proceeding.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding for the purpose of establishing limitations on duty time for flight attendants, including minimum rest requirements.
Final Regulations.--Except in any case in which the prohibitions referred to in subsection (c) take effect, the Secretary shall issue, not later than 240 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, final regulations establishing limitations on duty time for flight attendants, including minimum rest requirements as follows: ``(1) For a domestic flight, a maximum of 14 hours of actual duty time, plus a maximum of 2 additional hours spent deadheading to return to the flight attendant's domicile, and a minimum of at least 10 consecutive hours of rest after each duty period.
For an international flight, a maximum of 16 hours of actual duty time and minimum of at least 12 consecutive hours of rest after each duty period.
For a long-range international nonstop flight, a maximum period of actual duty time no more than 4 hours greater than the scheduled duty time, with a maximum period of actual duty time no greater than 20 hours, and a minimum consecutive rest period equal to at least twice the scheduled flight time.
For all flight attendants, a minimum of eight 24 consecutive hour periods of rest at their domicile per calendar month and at least one 24 hour consecutive period of rest within every 7 days.
For all flight attendants, at least a continuous 1 hour rest break on any flight scheduled for 8 hours or more of flight time in a designated rest area.
Mandated Prohibitions.--If the Secretary does not initiate a rulemaking proceeding under subsection (a) before the 60th day following the date of the enactment of this Act or does not issue final regulations under subsection (b) before the 240th day following such date of enactment, no air carrier may after such date operate an aircraft using a flight attendant who has been on duty more hours, or who has had fewer hours of rest, than those required by paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection (b).
Modification of Mandated Prohibitions.--The Secretary may issue regulations modifying the prohibitions contained in paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection (b) if the Secretary determines that such modifications are in the interest of safety and transmits a copy of the modifying regulations to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Public Works and Transportation of the House of Representatives.
The modifying regulations may not take effect until the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date of the transmittal of the modifying regulations to such committees.
Definitions.--In this section, the following definitions apply: ``(1) Air carrier.--The term `air carrier' means any air carrier which is subject to the provisions of part 121 or part 135 of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Debriefing time.--The term `debriefing time' means a time period of at least 30 minutes for domestic flight and of at least 45 minutes for international flight after the block-in time of the last flight or segment of a flight.
Designated rest area.--The term `designated rest area' means a passenger seat, sleeper seat, or bunk of an aircraft assigned for crew rest purposes.
Domestic flight.--The term `domestic flight' means any flight or segment of a flight worked by a flight attendant totally within the 48 contiguous States and the District of Columbia.
Duty time.--The term `duty time' means all time worked for an air carrier at any place and in any capacity and, with respect to flying, shall begin at the required report time and shall end at the conclusion of the debriefing time, or when released by the carrier, whichever is later.
Duty time accrues until the crewmember is given a required rest period by the carrier.
Time spent deadheading, either on an aircraft or by surface transportation, to or from an assignment by an air carrier, time spent ferrying, and time spent attending meetings and training shall also be considered duty time.
Duty time continues-- ``(A) throughout a rest period of a shorter duration than that contained in subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3), as the case may be; and ``(B) during in-flight rest periods contained in subsection (b)(5).
International flight.--The term `international flight' means any flight worked by a flight attendant for which a take off or landing is scheduled outside the 48 contiguous States and the District of Columbia.
Long-range international nonstop flight.--The term `long-range international nonstop flight' means a single nonstop international flight scheduled for 8 hours or more of flight time.
Report time.--The term `report time' means a time period of at least 30 minutes prior to the scheduled departure time of the first flight or segment of a flight in a flight attendant's duty period or the time the flight attendant is required to report to work, whichever is earlier.
Rest.--The term `rest' means uninterrupted time free from all duty.
Scheduled flight time.--The term `scheduled flight time' means the elapsed time based on the time shown in schedules given by an air carrier to a travel agent.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Treatment of Duty Period With Domestic and International Flight Segments.--A duty period with domestic and international flight segments shall be treated as domestic flying for the purpose of calculating duty and rest requirements under this section if the majority of the flight time during that duty period is on a domestic segment or shall be treated as international flying if the majority of the flight time during that duty period is on an international segment.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents contained in the first section of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 is amended by adding at the end of the matter relating to title VI the following: ``Sec.
Duty time of flight attendants.
Modification of mandated prohibitions.
Treatment of duty period with domestic and international flight segments.