SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Agricultural Response Act of 1998''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Use of disaster reserve authority to provide disaster assistance to certain producers.
Increase in loan rates for marketing assistance loans for certain crops.
Extension of marketing assistance loans.
Reinstatement of farmer-owned reserve program.
Strategic food reserve of loan commodities.
Improved delivery of Farm Service Agency services at local and area level.
Temporary conservation reserve to respond to disease infestations.
Special crop insurance rules for counties subject to disaster declaration.
Doubling of budget authority and appropriations for direct loan, loan guarantee, and interest rate reduction programs for fiscal year 1999.
USE OF DISASTER RESERVE AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE DISASTER ASSISTANCE TO CERTAIN PRODUCERS.
Provision of Assistance.--Section 813(a) of the Agricultural Act of 1970 (7 United States Code 1427a(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Secretary shall use funds appropriated for the purposes of this section to make cash payments to agricultural producers to augment crop insurance benefits for the purpose of alleviating distress caused by multiple year crop losses.''
Appropriations.--There is hereby appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $1,200,000,000 for the reserve established under section 813 of the Agricultural Act of 1970 (7 United States Code 1427a).
Designation of Emergency.--The amount appropriated under subsection (b) shall be available only to the extent that the President submits to Congress an official budget request for a specific dollar amount that includes designation of the entire amount of the request as an emergency requirement for the purposes of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 900 et sequentes).
The entire amount of the funds is designated by Congress as an emergency requirement under section 251(b)(2)(A) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 901(b)(2)(A)).
INCREASE IN LOAN RATES FOR MARKETING ASSISTANCE LOANS FOR CERTAIN CROPS.
Wheat.--Subsection (a) of section 132 of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7232) is amended by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(1) Loan rate.--Subject to paragraph (2), the loan rate for a marketing assistance loan under section 131 for wheat shall be equal to the greater of-- ``(A) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of wheat, as determined by the Secretary, during the marketing years for the immediately preceding 5 crops of wheat, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period; and ``(B) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of wheat, as determined by the Secretary, during the 1994 through 1998 marketing years, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period.''.
Feed Grains.--Subsection (b) of such section is amended by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(1) Loan rate for corn.--Subject to paragraph (2), the loan rate for a marketing assistance loan under section 131 for corn shall be equal to the greater of-- ``(A) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of corn, as determined by the Secretary, during the marketing years for the immediately preceding 5 crops of corn, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period; and ``(B) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of corn, as determined by the Secretary, during the 1994 through 1998 marketing years, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period.''.
Upland Cotton.--Subsection (c)(2) of such section is amended by striking ``or more than $0.5192 per pound''.
Extra Long Staple Cotton.--Subsection (d) of such section is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Extra Long Staple Cotton.--The loan rate for a marketing assistance loan under section 131 for extra long staple cotton shall be equal to the greater of-- ``(1) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of extra long staple cotton, as determined by the Secretary, during 3 years of the 5-year period ending July 31 of the year preceding the year in which the crop is planted, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period; and ``(2) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of extra long staple cotton, as determined by the Secretary, during the 1994 through 1998 marketing years, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period.''.
Rice.--Subsection (e) of such section is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Rice.--The loan rate for a marketing assistance loan under section 131 for rice shall be equal to the greater of-- ``(1) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of rice, as determined by the Secretary, during the marketing years for the immediately preceding 5 crops of rice, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period; and ``(2) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of rice, as determined by the Secretary, during the 1994 through 1998 marketing years, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period; and ``(3) $6.50 per hundredweight.''.
Oilseeds.--Subsection (f) of such section is amended by striking paragraphs (1) and (2) and inserting the following new paragraphs: ``(1) Soybeans.--The loan rate for a marketing assistance loan under section 131 for soybeans shall be equal to the greater of-- ``(A) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of soybeans, as determined by the Secretary, during the marketing years for the immediately preceding 5 crops of soybeans, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period; and ``(B) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of soybeans, as determined by the Secretary, during the 1994 through 1998 marketing years, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period.
Sunflower seed, canola, rapeseed, safflower, mustard seed, and flaxseed.--The loan rate for a marketing assistance loan under section 131 for sunflower seed, canola, rapeseed, safflower, mustard seed, and flaxseed, individually, shall be equal to the greater of-- ``(A) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of such oilseed, as determined by the Secretary, during the marketing years for the immediately preceding 5 crops of such oilseed, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period; and ``(B) 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of such oilseed, as determined by the Secretary, during the 1994 through 1998 marketing years, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period.''.
EXTENSION OF MARKETING ASSISTANCE LOANS.
Section 133 of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7233) is amended by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following: ``(c) Extension.--The Secretary may extend the term of marketing assistance loans made to producers under this subtitle for any loan commodity for a 6-month period if the Secretary determines that the extension will promote the orderly delivery of the loan commodity, materially reduce program costs to the Government, or result in a significant improvement in income for producers.''.
REINSTATEMENT OF FARMER-OWNED RESERVE PROGRAM.
Section 171(b)(1) of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7301(b)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraph (E).
STRATEGIC FOOD RESERVE OF LOAN COMMODITIES.
Subtitle C of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7231 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Reserve Required.--The Secretary shall build a reserve stock of a loan commodity whenever prices for that commodity fall below 75 percent of the loan rate for marketing assistance loans for that commodity.
Methods of Acquisition.--Loan commodities for inclusion in the reserve may be acquired-- ``(1) through purchases-- ``(A) from producers; or ``(B) in the market, if the Secretary determines that the purchases will not unduly disrupt the market; or ``(2) by designation by the Secretary of stocks of loan commodities of the Commodity Credit Corporation.
Release of Eligible Commodities.--The Secretary may release stocks of a loan commodity in the reserve only when there is such a domestic shortage of the loan commodity that-- ``(1) widespread concern exists about the supply of affordable food for residents of the United States; and ``(2) prices for the commodity exceed 200 percent of the loan rate for marketing assistance loans for the commodity.
Administration.--To the maximum extent practicable consistent with the fulfillment of the purposes of this section and the effective and efficient administration of this section, the Secretary shall use the usual and customary channels, facilities, arrangements, and practices of trade and commerce to release stocks of a loan commodity maintained in the reserve.
The Secretary shall administer the release of stocks from the reserve so as to ensure that the prices received by agricultural producers of that commodity are not depressed as a result of the release.
Limitation on Total Quantity Acquired.--The Secretary may not acquire for inclusion in the reserve more than 25 percent of the average annual production of a loan commodity.
Management of Commodities.--The Secretary shall provide-- ``(1) for the management of loan commodities in the reserve, including the selection of storage locations; and ``(2) for the periodic rotation or replacement of stocks of loan commodities in the reserve to avoid spoilage and deterioration of the commodities.
Use of Commodity Credit Corporation.--The funds, facilities, and authorities of the Commodity Credit Corporation shall be used by the Secretary in carrying out this section, except that any restriction applicable to the acquisition, storage, or disposition of commodities owned or controlled by the Commodity Credit Corporation shall not apply.''.
IMPROVED DELIVERY OF FARM SERVICE AGENCY SERVICES AT LOCAL AND AREA LEVEL.
Transfer of Funds for Fiscal Year 1999.--To ensure the prompt response of the Farm Service Agency during fiscal year 1999 to requests submitted by producers, the Secretary of Agriculture may transfer to the Farm Service Agency from other appropriations or funds available to the agencies or corporations of the Department of Agriculture an amount equal to not more than 25 percent of the operating budget for that fiscal year of local and area offices of the Farm Service Agency.
Amounts transferred under this subsection may be used only for activities at local and area offices of the Farm Service Agency.
Subsequent Years.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the materials submitted to Congress in support of the budget request for the Department of Agriculture for each fiscal year a certification that the amount requested for the operation of local and area offices of the Farm Service Agency will be sufficient to meet the expected needs of agricultural producers for services.
TEMPORARY CONSERVATION RESERVE TO RESPOND TO DISEASE INFESTATIONS.
Subtitle D of title XII of the Food Security Act of 1985 (16 United States Code 3801 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 1256 the following new section: ``SEC.
THREE-YEAR CONSERVATION RESERVE FOR DISEASED CROPLANDS.
Reserve Required.--Using the authority provided in subchapter B, the Secretary shall formulate and carry out the enrollment of lands described in subsection (b) in a conservation reserve program through the use of contracts to assist owners and operators of such lands to combat plant diseases that have devastated the lands.
Eligible Lands.--The Secretary shall include in the program only those croplands that have been devastated by a plant disease for which effective responses are reasonably anticipated within four years, but are otherwise suitable for the production of crops or livestock.
Term of Contract.--A contract under this section shall have a term of three years.''.
SPECIAL CROP INSURANCE RULES FOR COUNTIES SUBJECT TO DISASTER DECLARATION.
Multi-Peril Crop Insurance.--For purposes of administering the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et sequentes) for producers operating in a county described in subsection (c), the Secretary of Agriculture may not-- (1) include the producer in any nonstandard classification list on account of the inclusion of the county in a designated disaster area; or (2) determine, without the consent of the producer, the actual production history of the producer using production records of any crop year during which the county was included in a designated disaster area.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to a disaster that the Secretary of Agriculture determines is a reoccurring, frequent, and well-known risk of farming in the locale, and the risks cannot reasonably be expected to be controlled or eliminated by crop protection efforts within a 7-year period.
Covered Counties.--This section applies with respect to a county that is included in whole or in part in a designated disaster area.
Designated Disaster Area Defined.--In this section, the term ``designated disaster area'' means an area-- (1) covered by a Presidential declaration of major disaster issued under section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5170) on account of damaging weather or a related condition in the area; or (2) determined to be a disaster area by the Secretary of Agriculture under subpart A of part 1945 of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations, on account of damaging weather or a related condition in the area.
Effective Date.--This section shall apply beginning with the 1999 crop year for each commodity that is grown in a covered county and for which multi-peril crop insurance is generally available in the United States.
DOUBLING OF BUDGET AUTHORITY AND APPROPRIATIONS FOR DIRECT LOAN, LOAN GUARANTEE, AND INTEREST RATE REDUCTION PROGRAMS FOR FISCAL YEAR 1999.
Budget Authority.-- (1) Direct loan and loan guarantee programs.--Section 346(b)(1)(D) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 United States Code 1994(b)(1)(D)) is amended by striking ``$3,325,000,000'', ``$585,000,000'', ``$85,000,000'', ``$500,000,000'', $2,740,000,000'', ``$690,000,000'', and ``$2,050,000,000'' and inserting ``$6,650,000'', ``$1,170,000,000'', ``$170,000,000'', ``$1,000,000,000'', ``$5,480,000,000'', ``$1,380,000,000'', and ``$4,100,000,000'', respectively.
Interest rate reduction program.--Section 351 of such Act (7 United States Code 1999) is amended-- (A) in subsection (c), by striking ``4'' and inserting ``8''; and (B) in subsection (e)(2), by striking ``$490,000,000'' and inserting ``$980,000,000''.
Appropriations.--Out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1999: (1) For gross obligations for the principal amount of direct and guaranteed loans as authorized by sections 308 and 309 of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act, to be available from funds in the Agricultural Credit Insurance Fund, as follows: (A) Farm ownership loans, $1,021,298,000, of which $850,000,000 shall be for guaranteed loans.
Operating loans, $3,576,756,000, of which $1,985,812,000 shall be for unsubsidized guaranteed loans and $470,000,000 shall be for subsidized guaranteed loans.
For the cost of direct and guaranteed loans, including the cost of modifying loans as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, as follows: (A) Farm ownership loans, $39,160,000, of which $13,516,000 shall be for guaranteed loans.
Operating loans, $140,674,000, of which $23,036,000 shall be for unsubsidized guaranteed loans and $41,078,000 shall be for subsidized guaranteed loans.