This Act may be cited as the ``Fast and Efficient Tax Filing Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Internal Revenue Code of 1986 currently provides that the postmark on a tax document is deemed to be its delivery date (known as the ``timely-mailing-as-timely-filing'' rule).
A recent decision by the United States Court of Appeals has held that in order for a taxpayer to rely on this provision, he or she is required to use the United States Postal Service.
As a result, even if a taxpayer uses an overnight delivery service that guarantees earlier receipt by the Internal Revenue Service than first class mail, his or her tax documents are considered officially late.
It is in the best interests of the Internal Revenue Service that tax documents, including payments of tax liabilities, be delivered as promptly as possible.
Several major private delivery services in the United States are at least as timely and reliable on a regular basis as the United States Postal Service and are widely used for vital document delivery in virtually all other facets of our Nation's economic life.
It is inequitable that a taxpayer should be assessed penalties and interest even though his return arrives at the Internal Revenue Service prior to that of another taxpayer who is not penalized, and even though both taxpayers responsibly sent their returns at the same time.
In its recent interpretation of the ``timely-mailing- as-timely-filing'' rule, the United States Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit stated that there is ``a legitimate policy rationale for extending the rule to private delivery services,'' but stated further that ``it is for Congress, not the courts, to make such a change.''
Existing law should be changed to permit the Secretary of the Treasury to designate qualified delivery services in addition to the United States Postal Service for purposes of the ``timely-mailing-as-timely-filing'' rule, thereby increasing the efficiency of the Internal Revenue Service and making it easier for United States taxpayers to file their tax returns on time.
USE OF PRIVATE DELIVERY SERVICES FOR TIMELY-MAILING-AS-TIMELY- FILING RULE.
Section 7502 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to timely mailing treated as timely filing and paying) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Treatment of Private Delivery Services.-- ``(1) In general.--Any reference in this section to the United States mail shall be treated as including a reference to any designated delivery service, and any reference in this section to a postmark by the United States Postal Service shall be treated as including a reference to any date recorded or marked as described in paragraph (2)(C).
Designated delivery service.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `designated delivery service' means any delivery service provided by a trade or business if such service is designated by the Secretary for purposes of this section.
The Secretary may designate a delivery service under the preceding sentence only if the Secretary determines that such service-- ``(A) is available to the public, ``(B) is at least as timely and reliable on a regular basis as the United States mail, and ``(C) records electronically to its data base, kept in the regular course of its business, or marks on the cover in which any item referred to in this section is to be delivered, the date on which such item was given to such trade or business for delivery.
Equivalents of registered and certified mail.--The Secretary may provide a rule similar to the rule of paragraph (1) with respect to any service provided by a designated delivery service which is substantially equivalent to United States registered or certified mail.''
USE OF PRIVATE DELIVERY SERVICES.
In General.--Chapter 77 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to miscellaneous provisions) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
USE OF PRIVATE DELIVERY SERVICES.
In General.--Any reference in this title to the mailing of any notice, request, or other document shall be treated as including a reference to delivery by any designated delivery service.
Designated delivery service.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `designated delivery service' means a delivery service designated under paragraph (2) of section 7502(f).
Applicability to registered and certified mail.--Subsection (a) shall apply with respect to United States registered or certified mail only to the extent provided by the Secretary by regulation.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 77 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Use of private delivery services.''