This Act may be cited as the ``Great Lakes Federal Effectiveness Act''.
GREAT LAKES RESEARCH COUNCIL.
Subsection (d) of section 118 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1268) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Great Lakes Research Council.-- ``(1) Definitions.--As used in this subsection: ``(A) Council.--The term `Council' means the Great Lakes Research Council established under paragraph (2).
Great lakes.--The term `Great Lakes' means-- ``(i) Lake Erie, Lake Huron, Lake Michigan, Lake Ontario, and Lake Superior; ``(ii) the connecting waters of the lakes listed in clause (i), including the St. Mary's River, the St. Clair River, Lake St. Clair, the Detroit River, and the Niagara River; and ``(iii) the St. Lawrence River.
Great lakes research.--The term `Great Lakes research' means the application of scientific or engineering expertise to explain, understand, and predict the physical, chemical, biological, and socioeconomic processes, and their interactions, in the Great Lakes ecosystem.
Establishment.--There is established a Great Lakes Research Council.
Duties of the council.--The Council shall-- ``(A) not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this subparagraph, prepare and provide to Congress and other interested parties, a report that-- ``(i) promotes the coordination of Federal research activities to avoid unnecessary duplication and ensure greater effectiveness in achieving protection of the ecosystem of the Great Lakes and the goals of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement; ``(ii) assesses the research activities needed to fulfill the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement goals; ``(iii) assesses Federal expertise and capabilities existing on the date of enactment of this clause in activities needed to fulfill the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement goals, including an inventory of existing Federal Great Lakes research programs, projects, facilities, and personnel; ``(iv) recommends long-term and short-term research priorities for Federal research on the Great Lakes, based on a comparison of the assessments conducted under clauses (ii) and (iii), and programs existing on the date of enactment of this clause; and ``(v) describes coordination efforts with Canada; ``(B) identify topics for, and participate in, meetings, workshops, symposia, and conferences on Great Lakes research issues; ``(C) make recommendations for the uniform collection and storage of data for enhancing research and management protocols relating to the protection and restoration of the physical, biological, and chemical integrity of the Great Lakes ecosystem; ``(D) consider and make recommendations with respect to the establishment of a comprehensive, multimedia database for the Great Lakes ecosystem; and ``(E) ensure that the results, findings, and information regarding Great Lakes research programs conducted or sponsored by the Federal Government be disseminated in a timely manner, and in useful forms, to interested persons, using as much as possible existing mechanisms such as the Great Lakes Research Inventory prepared by the International Joint Commission.
Membership of the council.-- ``(A) In general.--The Council shall be comprised of 1 research manager with extensive knowledge, scientific expertise, and experience in the Great Lakes ecosystem from each of the following organizations: ``(i) The Environmental Protection Agency.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The Fish and Wildlife Service.
Any other relevant Federal department, agency, or instrumentality, as determined by the Council membership.
Non-voting members.--Any other person who is not a Federal employee may serve as a non-voting member of the Council, at the request of the Council membership.
Chairperson.--The members of the Council shall elect a Chairperson from among the members of the Council appointed pursuant to paragraphs (4)(A) (i), (ii), and (iii).
The Chairperson shall serve a term of 2 years but may not serve for more than 2 consecutive terms.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Council who is not an employee of the Federal Government shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the home or regular place of business of the member in the performance of services for the Council.
Interagency cooperation.--The head of each department, agency, or other instrumentality of the Federal Government that is represented on the Council-- ``(A) may, upon written request of the Chairperson, make available, on a reimbursable basis or otherwise, personnel, services, or facilities as may be necessary to assist the Council in achieving the purposes of this subsection; and ``(B) shall, upon written request from the Chairperson, furnish data or other information necessary to achieve the purposes of this subsection.
Effect on other laws.--Nothing in this subsection is intended to amend, restrict, or otherwise alter the authority of any Federal department, agency, or instrumentality, under any law, to undertake Great Lakes research activities.