This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Communications Commission Reform Act''.
There is established the Commission to Study the Structure and Reauthorization of the Federal Communications Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall study and report on the organizational structure of the Federal Communications Commission, with an emphasis on determining-- (1) whether that structure should be changed to reflect the current state of telecommunications, including the rise of the Internet; and (2) whether there should be a reduction in the number of commissioners.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 7 members, appointed as follows: (1) 2 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives in consultation with the Chairman of the Committee on Commerce of the House of Representatives and in accordance with subsection (c).
2 members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate in consultation with the Chairman of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and in accordance with subsection (c).
2 members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives in consultation with the ranking minority member of the Committee on Commerce of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the Chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on Commerce of the House of Representatives acting jointly.
Appointments Deadline.--All appointments under subsection (a) shall be made not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Appointments of Former Commissioners.--The Speaker of the House of Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate shall each, under subsection (a), appoint as a member of the Commission at least 1 former commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Members shall receive no pay for their service on the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--4 members shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.-- (1) In general.--Subject to section 552 of title 5, United States Code, popularly known as the Freedom of Information Act, and section 552a of title 5, United States Code, popularly known as the Privacy Act of 1974, the Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of such a department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Interviews.--Each commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission shall, upon request of the Commission, provide the Commission a reasonable opportunity to interview such commissioner for the purpose of facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of facilitating the work of the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
General Accounting Office Assistance.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Comptroller General of the United States shall assist the Commission in carrying out this Act.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies and other services.
Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall transmit to the Congress a report on the findings and conclusions of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate upon transmission of the report required by section 6.