This Act may be cited as the ``Free Market Grazing Fees Act''.
GRAZING FEES ESTABLISHED AT FAIR MARKET VALUE.
Fees Required.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior, with respect to public grazing lands subject to their respective jurisdiction, shall establish an annual domestic livestock grazing fee equal to the fair market value of the grazing lease or permit concerned.
Commencement of Fees.--The grazing fees required by this section shall apply beginning with the grazing season that commences on March 1, 1998.
Factors.--In determining the fair market value of a grazing lease or permit, the Secretary concerned shall take into account the following: (1) The amounts and conditions under which neighboring non- Federal lands are leased or sold for grazing purposes.
The improvements provided or to be provided by the lessee or permit holder.
The services to be provided by the United States.
Procedures.--In determining the fair market value of grazing permits, the Secretary concerned shall publish rules in accordance with chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, which ensure that whenever practicable fair market value is established through competitive bidding.
Small Family Ranch Exemption.-- (1) Certification for prevailing fees.--The holder of a Federal grazing lease or permit as of the date of the enactment of this section who makes a certification to the Secretary concerned in accordance with this subsection shall be charged the prevailing grazing fee on that date for the period beginning on that date and ending on February 28, 2008.
Content of certification.-- (A) Annual income.--The holder of the Federal grazing lease or permit shall certify that, for the immediately preceding calendar year-- (i) the holder derived more than half of the holder's annual income from the ranching operation associated with the Federal grazing lease or permit; and (ii) the holder-- (I) if an individual, has an adjusted gross annual income (as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) of less than $50,000; or (II) if a person other than an individual, has total assets of less than $1,000,000, including the value of Federal leases or permits of any kind, including the assets of any entity owned by, controlled by, or under common control of, directly or indirectly, the holder.
Substantial labor.--The holder of the Federal grazing lease or permit shall certify that, for the immediately preceding calendar year, the holder-- (i) if an individual, performed substantial labor in the ranching operation either personally or using members of the holder's immediate family; or (ii) if a person other than an individual, performed substantial labor in the ranching operation using the officers of the holder.
Submission of certification.--A certification under this subsection shall be submitted to the Secretary concerned before the beginning of each grazing season.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: (1) Public grazing lands.--The term ``public grazing lands'' means the following: (A) The National Forest lands (including the national grasslands) in the 16 contiguous Western States administered by the United States Forest Service where domestic livestock grazing is permitted under applicable law.
The public domain lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management where domestic livestock grazing is permitted under applicable law.
The lands within units of the National Park System on which grazing is permitted under applicable law.
Secretary concerned.--The term ``Secretary concerned'' means-- (A) the Secretary of Agriculture, with respect to public grazing lands subject to the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture; and (B) the Secretary of the Interior, with respect to public grazing lands subject to the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior.
Effect of Failure to Establish Fees.--No grazing shall be permitted on any public grazing lands after March 1, 1998, unless the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture each affirm to Congress that grazing fees for all public grazing lands have been established in compliance with this section.