This Act may be cited as the ``Authorization for Implementation of the Agreed Framework Between the United States and North Korea Act''.
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE; STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to set forth requirements, consistent with the Agreed Framework, for the United States implementation of the Agreed Framework.
Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this Act requires the United States to take any action which would be inconsistent with any provision of the Agreed Framework.
Subject to an Authorization of Appropriations Act and an Appropriations Act.--The United States may not exercise any action under the Agreed Framework that would require the obligation or expenditure of funds except to the extent and in the amounts provided in an Act authorizing appropriations and in an appropriations Act.
Prohibition.--No funds may be made available under any provision of law to carry out activities described in the Agreed Framework unless the President determines and certifies to Congress that North Korea is in full compliance with the terms of the Agreed Framework.
NORMALIZATION OF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS.
None of the funds made available to carry out any program, project, or activity funded under any provision of law may be used to maintain relations with North Korea at the ambassadorial level unless North Korea has satisfied the IAEA safeguards requirement described in section 7, the additional requirements set forth in section 8, and the nuclear nonproliferation requirements of section 9.
NORMALIZATION OF ECONOMIC RELATIONS.
Restriction on Termination of Economic Embargo.--The President shall not terminate the economic embargo of North Korea until North Korea has satisfied the IAEA safeguards requirement described in section 7, the additional requirements set forth in section 8, and the nuclear nonproliferation requirements of section 9.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``economic embargo of North Korea'' means the regulations of the Department of the Treasury restricting trade with North Korea under section 5(b) of the Trading With the Enemy Act (50 United States Code App.
RESTRICTION ON PETROLEUM SHIPMENTS.
Restriction.--If North Korea does not maintain the freeze of its graphite-moderated nuclear program as defined in the Agreed Framework, or if North Korea diverts heavy oil for purposes not specified in the Agreed Framework, then-- (1) no additional heavy oil may be exported to North Korea if such oil is subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, or is exported by a person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States; (2) the United States shall immediately cease any direct or indirect support for any exports of heavy oil to North Korea; and (3) the President shall oppose steps to export heavy oil to North Korea by all other countries in the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization.
Enforcement.--Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) having the requisite knowledge described in section 11 of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 United States Code App.
2410) shall be subject to the same penalties as are provided in that section for violations of that Act.
The requirement of this section is satisfied when the President determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that North Korea is in full compliance with its safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (INFCIRC/403), in accordance with part IV (3) of the Agreed Framework under the timetable set forth therein, as determined by the Agency after-- (1) conducting inspections of the two suspected nuclear waste sites at the Yongbyon nuclear complex; and (2) conducting such other inspections in North Korea as may be deemed necessary by the Agency.
The additional requirements referred to in sections 4 and 5 are the following, as determined and certified by the President to the appropriate congressional committees: (1) That progress has been made in talks between North Korea and the Republic of Korea, including implementation of confidence-building measures by North Korea as well as other concrete steps to reduce tensions.
That the United States and North Korea have established a process for returning the remains of United States military personnel who are listed as missing in action (MIAs) during the Korean conflict between 1950 and 1953, including field activities conducted jointly by the United States and North Korea.
That North Korea no longer meets the criteria for inclusion on the list maintained by the Secretary of State under section 6(j)(1)(A) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 of countries the governments of which repeatedly provide support for acts of international terrorism.
That North Korea has taken positive steps to demonstrate a greater respect for internationally recognized human rights.
That North Korea has agreed to control equipment and technology in accordance with the criteria and standards set forth in the Missile Technology Control Regime, as defined in section 74(2) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2797c).
The nuclear nonproliferation requirements referred to in sections 4 and 5 are the following, as determined and certified by the President to the appropriate congressional committees and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate: (1) All spent fuel from the graphite-moderated nuclear reactors of North Korea have been removed from the territory of North Korea as is consistent with the Agreed Framework.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has conducted any and all inspections that it deems necessary to account fully for the stocks of plutonium and other nuclear materials in North Korea, including special inspections of suspected nuclear waste sites, before any nuclear components controlled by the Nuclear Supplier Group Guidelines are delivered for a light water reactor for North Korea.
The dismantlement of all graphite-based nuclear reactors in North Korea, including reprocessing facilities, has been completed in accordance with the Agreed Framework and in a manner that effectively bars in perpetuity any reactivation of such reactors and facilities.
SUSPENSION OF UNITED STATES OBLIGATIONS.
The United States shall suspend actions described in the Agreed Framework if North Korea reloads its existing 5 megawatt nuclear reactor or resumes construction of nuclear facilities other than those permitted to be built under the Agreed Framework.
The President may waive the application of section 7, 8, 9, or 10 if the President determines, and so notifies in writing the appropriate congressional committees, that to do so is vital to the security interests of the United States.
Beginning 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 12 months thereafter, the President shall transmit to the appropriate congressional committees a report setting forth-- (1) an assessment of the extent of compliance by North Korea with all the provisions of the Agreed Framework and this Act; (2) a statement of the progress made on construction of light-water reactors, including a statement of all contributions, direct and indirect, made by any country to the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization from the date of signature of the Agreed Framework to the date of the report; (3) a statement of all contributions, direct or indirect, by any country which is not a member of the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization for implementation of the Agreed Framework; (4) a statement of all expenditures made by the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization, either directly or indirectly, for implementation of the Agreed Framework; (5) an estimate of the date by which North Korea is expected to satisfy the IAEA safeguards requirement described in section 7; (6) a statement whether North Korea is transferring missiles or missile technology to other countries, including those countries that are state sponsors of international terrorism; (7) a description of any new developments or advances in North Korea's nuclear weapons program; (8) a statement of the progress made by the United States in fulfilling its actions under the Agreed Framework, including any steps taken toward normalization of relations with North Korea; (9) a statement of any progress made on dismantlement and destruction of the graphite-moderated nuclear reactors of North Korea and related facilities; (10) a description of the steps being taken to implement the North-South Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula; (11) an assessment of the participation by North Korea in talks between North Korea and the Republic of Korea; and (12) a description of any action taken by the President under section 6(a)(2).
Form of Report.--To the maximum extent possible, the President should submit the report in unclassified form.
As used in this Act: (1) Agreed framework.--The term ``Agreed Framework'' means the document entitled ``Agreed Framework Between the United States of America and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea'', signed October 21, 1994, at Geneva, and the attached Confidential Minute.
Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committees on Foreign Relations and Armed Services of the Senate and the Committees on International Relations and National Security of the House of Representatives.
IAEA safeguards.--The term ``IAEA safeguards'' means the safeguards set forth in an agreement between a country and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as authorized by Article III(A)(5) of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
North korea.--The term ``North Korea'' means the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, including any agency or instrumentality thereof.
Inspections.--The term ``inspections'' means inspections conducted by the International Atomic Energy Agency pursuant to an IAEA safeguards agreement, including special inspection of undeclared information or locations if the IAEA cannot account for nuclear material and is therefore unable to verify that there has been no diversion of nuclear materials.