This Act may be cited as the ``Electronic Duck Stamp Act of 1998''.
ELECTRONIC ISSUANCE OF MIGRATORY BIRD HUNTING AND CONSERVATION STAMPS.
Section 2 of the Act of March 16, 1934 (16 United States Code 718b), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Electronic Issuance of Stamps.-- ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection: ``(A) Actual stamp.--The term `actual stamp' means a printed paper stamp that is issued and sold through a means in use on the day before the date of enactment of this subsection.
Electronic stamp.--The term `electronic stamp' means a representation of a stamp issued electronically under paragraph (2).
Stamp.--The term `stamp' means a migratory bird hunting and conservation stamp required by the first section.
Authorization.--The Department of the Interior, the Postal Service, or, subject to paragraph (7), a State or person authorized under subsection (a) to sell stamps, may issue representations of stamps electronically by endorsement affixed to licenses issued at points of sale or through other electronic media.
Size of electronic stamps.--An electronic stamp shall be of an area that is less than \3/4\, or more than 1\1/2\, of the area of an actual stamp.
Confirmation number and other identifying information.-- ``(A) Confirmation number.--An electronic stamp shall be assigned a unique confirmation number.
Other identifying information.--Each issuer of an electronic stamp and unique confirmation number shall print on the electronic stamp appropriate information that is sufficient to permit Federal, State, and other law enforcement officers to verify the electronic stamp, confirmation number, and sales transaction with the licensee.
Delivery of actual stamps.--An entity that issues electronic stamps shall have financial responsibility for the sale, delivery, and mailing of the corresponding actual stamp to the licensee within 14 calendar days after the date of issuance of the electronic stamp.
Recognition of electronic stamps.-- ``(A) In general.--An electronic stamp and its unique confirmation number shall-- ``(i) subject to the requirements of the first section, be given full recognition during the period beginning on the date of issuance of the electronic stamp until the date on which the corresponding actual stamp is received; and ``(ii) expire and be replaced by the actual stamp upon receipt of the actual stamp, but not later than 14 calendar days after the date of issuance of the electronic stamp, if the licensee complies with the requirements of the first section.
Plan.-- ``(A) Submission to secretary of the interior.--A State or person may participate in the issuance of an electronic stamp under this subsection only if the Secretary of the Interior has approved a plan submitted by the State or person that provides for-- ``(i) a satisfactory accounting process for the collection and transfer of revenue; ``(ii) distribution and law enforcement verification of the electronic transaction; and ``(iii) the subsequent distribution of the actual stamp.
Action by the secretary.--Not later than 60 days after the date of submission of a plan under subparagraph (A), the Secretary of the Interior shall-- ``(i) review the request of the State or person and all accompanying documentation and other information available to the Secretary; and ``(ii) make a determination to approve or disapprove the plan.
Electronic collection of electronic stamp sales revenue.--Not later than 14 days after the date of issuance of an electronic stamp under this subsection, a State or person shall transfer to the Department of the Interior or a designated agent the revenue collected from the issuance by means of an electronic fund transfer method approved by, and compatible with, the accounting system of the Department of the Interior or the designated agent.