This Act may be cited as the ``Safe and Responsible Handgun Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) certain handguns that are widely marketed across State lines are traced disproportionately to violent crimes, and in particular to crimes in States other than those in which they were manufactured or purchased; (2) many of these handguns are of dangerously poor quality and threaten the safety even of legitimate users for sport or self-defense; (3) States should be encouraged to restrict the sale of handguns that are unsafe, particularly suited for crime, and not useful for sporting, hunting, law enforcement, or self- defense purposes; and (4) accurate and uniform data on the use of guns is essential to formulating effective policy to reduce violent crime involving guns and deaths and injuries from such crimes.
REDUCTION OF BYRNE GRANTS FOR STATES NOT ELECTING TO ESTABLISH HANDGUN ROSTER BOARDS.
Handgun Roster Boards.-- (1) Establishment.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall establish guidelines for the establishment by each State of a Handgun Roster Board (in this Act referred to as the ``Board'') which, at a minimum, meets the following requirements: (A) The Board shall consist of 9 members, each of whom shall be eligible to vote in an election for officials of the State, and-- (i) 1 of whom shall be a representative of the police; (ii) 1 of whom shall be a representative of the State prosecutor's office; (iii) 1 of whom shall be a representative of a State organization, or a local chapter of a national organization, which advocates the rights of fireams owners; (iv) 1 of whom shall be a representative of handgun dealers or manufacturers; (v) 1 of whom shall be a representative of a State organization, or local chapter of a national organization, which advocates greater control of handguns; and (vi) 3 of whom shall not meet any requirement of clauses (i) through (v).
The Board shall designate 1 of its members as the chairman of the Board.
Publication of roster.--Not less frequently than annually, the Board shall publish a roster which specifies the types of handguns which may be lawfully manufactured, sold, owned, possessed, or used in the State, and any terms, conditions, or circumstances under which such types of handguns may be so manufactured, sold, owned, possessed, or used, and shall transmit a copy of the roster to each licensed dealer in the State who is not prohibited by State law from dealing in handguns.
Factors to be considered.--In deciding whether to include a type of handgun on the roster, the Board shall consider the following factors: (A) Concealability.
Detectability by the standard security equipment commonly used at airports or courthouses and approved by the Federal Aviation Administration for use at airports in the United States.
Utility for legitimate sporting activities, hunting, self-protection, or law enforcement.
Procedural rule.--The Board may include a type of handgun on the roster upon the Board's initiative, or upon the petition of any person.
Laws relating to handguns.-- (A) In general.--The State shall have in effect such laws as may be necessary to make unlawful in the State the manufacture, sale, ownership, possession, and use of-- (i) any handgun which is of a type not specified on the roster published by the Board pursuant to paragraph (2); and (ii) any handgun which is of a type specified on the roster published by the Board pursuant to paragraph (2), except under such terms and conditions as the Board may specify.
Penalties for certain violations.-- (i) Unlawful manufacture of handgun.--Such laws shall provide that any person who unlawfully manufactures a handgun for distribution or sale shall be fined not more than $10,000 and be subject to such other penalties as may be provided for by State law.
Unlawful sale or offer of handgun.-- Such laws shall provide that any person who unlawfully sells a handgun or offers a handgun for sale shall be fined not more than $2,500 and be subject to such other penalties as may be provided for by State law.
Separate violations.--Such laws shall provide that a violation of such laws involving 2 or more handguns shall constitute separate violations of such laws with respect to each handgun involved.
Exemption for certain lawfully possessed handguns.--Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed to require the State laws described in subparagraph (A) to apply to any handgun lawfully possessed on the date of the enactment of the law.
Definitions.--As used in this subsection: (A) Handgun.--The term ``handgun'' shall have the meaning given such term by section 921(a)(29) of title 18, United States Code.
Licensed dealer.--The term ``licensed dealer'' shall have the meaning given such term by section 921(a)(11) of title 18, United States Code.
Compliance.-- (1) Compliance date.--Each State shall have not more than 3 years from the date of enactment of this Act in which to comply with subsection (a), except that the Attorney General may grant an additional 2 years to a State that is making good faith efforts to implement subsection (a).
Ineligibility for funds.-- (A) In general.--A State that fails to comply with subsection (a) of this section within the period prescribed by or under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not receive 10 percent of the funds that would otherwise be allocated to the State under section 506 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968.
Reallocation of funds.--Any funds that are not allocated to a State because of the failure of the State to comply with subsection (a) shall be reallocated to States that comply with subsection (a).
Establishment.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in cooperation with the Attorney General, shall establish Independent Study Group (in this section referred to as the ``ISG'') for the purpose of devising an effective national firearms injury reporting system.
Membership.--The ISG shall be composed of representatives from the Consumer Product Safety Commission, the Centers for Disease Control, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the National Institute of Justice.
Duties.--The ISG shall study the feasibility of collecting data on the following, at a minimum: (1) Intentional and unintentional firearms injuries.
Fatal and nonfatal firearms injuries; (3) The date, time, type of location of firearms injuries, and whether they occurred during and in relation to the commission of another crime.
The type, make, model, caliber, serial number, and year of manufacture of the firearms involved.
The demographic characteristics of persons suffering firearm injuries and person causing the injuries.
The identity of the owner of the firearms involved, and how the firearms were stored.
Whether the firearms involved were stolen.
Whether and how drugs or alcohol were involved.
Report.--Within 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall prepare and submit to the Congress a report recommending how an effective national firearms injury reporting system could be established, including how to avoid duplication of effort, and who would administer such a system.