This Act may be cited as the ``Counter-Narcotics Policy Review Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The consumption of narcotics in the United States is a serious problem that is ravaging the United States, especially America's youth.
Despite the dedicated and persistent efforts of the United States and other nations, international narcotics trafficking and consumption remains a serious problem.
The total eradication of international narcotics trafficking requires a long-term strategy that necessitates close international cooperation.
The annual certification process relating to international narcotics control under section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2291j) is flawed because-- (A) the process fails to enhance international cooperation; (B) the process reviews narcotics control efforts only on an annual basis and fails to enumerate long- term goals and objectives; (C) the process is not a comprehensive review of all countries that contribute to international narcotics trafficking; and (D) the process fails to account for the divergent economic, political, and social circumstances of countries under review which can influence the decision by the United States to decertify a foreign nation, thereby leading to unpredictability, non-transparency, and lack of international credibility in the process.
The problem of international narcotics trafficking is not being effectively addressed by the annual certification process under section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2291j).
There is established a commission to be known as the High Level Commission on International Narcotics Control (hereinafter referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall conduct a review of the annual certification process relating to international narcotics control under section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2291j) to determine the effectiveness of such process in curtailing international drug trafficking, the effectiveness of such process in enhancing international counter-narcotics cooperation, and the effectiveness of such process in reducing drug use and consumption within the United States.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall consist of 12 members, as follows: (1) The Secretary of State or the Secretary's designee.
The Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's designee.
The Attorney General or the Attorney General's designee.
The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy or the Director's designee.
The Director of the Drug Enforcement Administration or the Director's designee.
The Director of Central Intelligence or the Director's designee.
The following Members of Congress appointed not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act as follows: (A)(i) 2 Members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
1 member of the House of Representatives appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
(i) 2 Members of the Senate appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
1 member of the Senate appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Chairperson.--The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy (or the Director's designee) shall serve as the Chairperson of the Commission until such time as the members of the Commission can elect a Chairperson.
Basic Pay.--Each member shall serve without pay.
Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall have a director who shall be appointed by the chairperson subject to rules prescribed by the Commission.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of such additional personnel as the chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the requirements of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Experts and Consultants.--The chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the chairperson, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties.
Obtaining Official Data.--The chairperson may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties.
Upon request of the chairperson, the head of the agency shall furnish such information to the Commission to the extent such information is not prohibited from disclosure by law.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the chairperson, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties.
Contract Authority.--The chairperson may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for the purpose of conducting research, surveys, and other services necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties.
Interim Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and the Congress an interim report on the following: (1) The overall effectiveness of the annual certification process relating to international narcotics control under section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C 2291j) in curtailing international drug trafficking.
The impact of such annual certification process in enhancing international counternarcotics cooperation.
The transparency and predictability of such annual certification process.
Final Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and the Congress a final report that, at a minimum, contains the following: (1) Information that meets the requirements of the information described in the initial report under subsection (a) and that has been updated since the date of the submission of the interim report, as appropriate.
Recommendations for actions that are necessary-- (A) to eliminate international narcotics trafficking; (B) to improve cooperation among countries in efforts to curtail international narcotics trafficking, including necessary steps to identify all areas in which inter-American cooperation can be initiated and institutionalized; and (C) to improve the transparency and predictability of the annual certification process relating to international narcotics control under section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2291j).
Any additional measures to win the war on drugs.
Any other related information that the Commission considers to be appropriate.
Additional Recommendations.--In the event the Commission determines the annual certification process relating to international narcotics control under section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2291j) to be ineffective in curtailing international narcotics trafficking or in enhancing international cooperation to combat such trafficking, the Commission shall include in the final report under subsection (b) its recommendation for alternatives to such process in either legislative or nonlegislative form that are designed to replace such process and to improve international cooperation in curtailing international narcotics trafficking.
The Commission shall terminate 6 months after the date on which the Commission submits its final report under section 8(b).
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
Availability.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated under subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.