This Act may be cited as the ``Ocean and Coastal Management Improvement Act of 1993''.
TRANSFER OF OFFICES OF NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION TO DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR.
Transfer of Offices.--There are transferred to the Department of the Interior the following offices and assets of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: (1) The National Ocean Service, other than the components of that Service transferred under section 3.
The National Marine Fisheries Service.
The Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research.
The fleet of research and survey vessels.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Corps.
Transfer of Functions.--The functions that, on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act, were performed by an individual in their capacity as an officer or employee of an office transferred by subsection (a) are transferred to the Secretary of the Interior.
Delegation of Functions.--The Secretary of the Interior shall delegate functions transferred by subsection (b) as follows: (1) The functions relating to the national marine sanctuaries program performed by the National Ocean Service shall be delegated to the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
The functions relating to mapping, charting, and geodesy performed by the National Ocean Service shall be delegated to the Director of the Geological Survey.
The functions performed by the National Marine Fisheries Service shall be delegated to the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
To the Director of the Biological Survey, the following functions: (A) Functions performed by the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, as follows: (i) Oceans and Great Lakes programs.
The National Sea Grant College Program.
The undersea research program.
Coastal ocean science functions performed by the National Ocean Service, other than functions required to be delegated under paragraphs (1) and (2).
Advisory Committees.--There are transferred to the Department of the Interior any advisory committee of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that gives advice or makes recommendations that primarily concern functions transferred by this section.
TRANSFER OF COMPONENTS OF NATIONAL OCEAN SERVICE TO DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.
Transfer of Offices.--There are transferred to the Department of Environmental Protection the following components of the National Ocean Service of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: (1) The components that carry out observation and assessment and estuarine and coastal assessment programs.
The components that carry out coastal management, including-- (A) the coastal zone management program; (B) the estuarine reserve research system; and (C) the coastal nonpoint pollution control program under section 6217 of the Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990 (16 United States Code 1455b).
Transfer of Functions.--The functions that, on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act, were performed by an individual in their capacity as an officer or employee of a component transferred by subsection (a) are transferred to the Secretary of the Environment.
Designation of Assistant Secretary and Delegation of Functions.--The Secretary of the Environment shall-- (1) designate an Assistant Secretary of the Department of Environmental Protection who shall be responsible for administering the components transferred under subsection (a); and (2) delegate to that Assistant Secretary the functions that are transferred to the Secretary under subsection (b).
Advisory Committees.--There are transferred to the Department of Environmental Protection any advisory committee of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that gives advice or makes recommendations that primarily concern functions transferred by this section.
TRANSFER OF PROPERTY, RECORDS, AND PERSONNEL.
Property and Records.--The contracts, liabilities, records, property, and other assets and interests of, or made available in connection with, the offices, components, and functions transferred by this Act to the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of the Environment are transferred to that Secretary for appropriate allocation.
Personnel.-- (1) In general.--The personnel employed in connection with the offices, components, and functions transferred by this Act to the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of the Environment are transferred to that Secretary for appropriate allocation.
Effect.--Any full-time or part-time personnel employed in permanent positions shall not, during the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, be separated or reduced in grade or compensation because of any transfer under this subsection.
Any reference in any other Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, or delegation of authority, or in any document of or pertaining to an office or component transferred by this Act to the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of the Environment-- (1) to the Secretary of Commerce, the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, or another officer of the office or component, is deemed to refer to the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of the Environment, as appropriate; and (2) to the Department of Commerce, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or any office or component of that Department or Administration is deemed to refer to the Department of the Interior or the Department of Environmental protection, as appropriate.
Legal Documents.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, grants, loans, agreements, contracts, certificates, licenses, and privileges-- (1) that have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by the President, the Secretary of Commerce, the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, any officer or employee of an office or component transferred by this Act, or any other Government official, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, with respect to functions that are transferred by this Act, and (2) that are in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act (or become effective after such date pursuant to their terms as in effect on such date), shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Environment, another authorized official, or a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Proceedings.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect any proceedings or any application for any benefits, service, license, permit, certificate, or financial assistance pending before an office or component transferred by this Act on the date of the enactment of this Act, but such proceedings and applications shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this Act had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceeding shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this subsection shall be considered to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this Act had not been enacted.
Suits.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect suits commenced before the date of the enactment of this Act, and in all such suits, proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Nonabatement of Actions.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against the Secretary of Commerce or the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, or by or against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer or employee of an office or component transferred by this Act, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act.
Continuance of Suits.--If, before the date of the enactment of this Act, any office or component or officer thereof in the official capacity of such officer, is party to a suit, and under this Act any function of such office, component, or officer is transferred to the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Environment, or any other official of the Department of the Interior or the Department of Environmental Protection, then such suit shall be continued with the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Environment, or another appropriate official of the Department of the Interior or the Department of Environmental Protection substituted or added as a party.
In this Act-- (1) the term ``function'' includes any duty, obligation, power, authority, responsibility, right, privilege, activity, or program; and (2) the term ``office'' includes any office, institute, council, unit, organizational entity, or component thereof.