This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Information Technology Workforce and Acquisition Improvement Act of 2002''.
EXTENSION OF PROGRAM APPLYING SIMPLIFIED PROCEDURES TO CERTAIN COMMERCIAL ITEMS.
Section 4202 of the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 (divisions D and E of Public Law 104-106; 110 United States Statutes at Large 652; 10 United States Code 2304 note) is amended-- (1) in subsection (e), by striking ``January 1, 2003'' and inserting ``January 1, 2008''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2004, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on the effectiveness of the implementation of the provisions enacted by this section and any recommendations for improving such effectiveness.''.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXCHANGE PROGRAM.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) unless action is taken soon, there will be a crisis in the government's ability to deliver essential services to the American people; (2) by 2006, over 50 percent of the Federal Government's information technology workforce will be eligible to retire, creating a huge demand in the Federal Government for high-skill workers; (3) despite a 44 percent decrease in the demand for information technology workers in the private sector, the Information Technology Association of America reported in 2001 that employers will need to fill over 900,000 new information technology jobs and will be unable to find qualified workers for 425,000 of those jobs; (4) to highlight the urgency of this situation, in January 2001, the General Accounting Office added the Federal Government's human capital management to its list of high-risk problems for which an effective solution must be found; (5) despite efforts to increase flexibility in Federal agencies' employment practices, compensation issues continue to severely restrain recruitment for Federal agencies; and (6) an effective, efficient, and economical response to this crisis would be to create a vibrant, ongoing exchange effort designed to share talent, expertise, and advances in management between leading-edge businesses and Federal agencies engaged in best practices.
Information Technology Exchange Program.-- (1) In general.--Subpart B of part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``CHAPTER 37--INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXCHANGE PROGRAM ``Sec.
Assignment of employees to private sector organizations.
Assignment of employees from private sector organizations.
Authority of the Office of Personnel Management.
Definitions ``For purposes of this chapter-- ``(1) the term `agency' means an Executive agency, but does not include the General Accounting Office; and ``(2) the term `detail' means-- ``(A) the assignment or loan of an employee of an agency to a private sector organization without a change of position from the agency that employs the individual; or ``(B) the assignment or loan of an employee of a private sector organization to an agency without a change of position from the private sector organization that employs the individual, whichever is appropriate in the context in which such term is used.
General provisions ``(a) On request from or with the agreement of a private sector organization, and with the consent of the employee concerned, the head of an agency may arrange for the assignment of an employee of the agency to a private sector organization or an employee of a private sector organization to the agency.
An eligible employee is an individual who-- ``(1) works in the field of information technology management; ``(2) is considered an exceptional performer by the individual's current employer; and ``(3) is expected to assume increased information technology management responsibilities in the future.
An employee of an agency shall be eligible to participate in this program only if the employee is employed at the GS-11 level or above (or equivalent) and is serving under a career or career-conditional appointment or an appointment of equivalent tenure in the excepted service.
Each agency that exercises its authority under this chapter shall provide for a written agreement between the agency and the employee concerned regarding the terms and conditions of the employee's assignment.
In the case of an employee of the agency, the agreement shall-- ``(1) require the employee to serve in the civil service, upon completion of the assignment, for a period equal to the length of the assignment; and ``(2) provide that, in the event the employee fails to carry out the agreement (except for good and sufficient reason, as determined by the head of the agency from which assigned) the employee shall be liable to the United States for payment of all expenses (excluding salary) of the assignment.
The amount shall be treated as a debt due the United States.
Assignments may be terminated by the agency or private sector organization concerned for any reason at any time.
Assignments under this chapter shall be for 1 year and may be extended for an additional period not to exceed 1 year.
The Chief Information Officers Council, by agreement with the Office of Personnel Management, may assist in the administration of this chapter, including by maintaining lists of potential candidates for assignment under this chapter, establishing mentoring relationships for the benefit of individuals who are given assignments under this chapter, and publicizing the program.
Assignment of employees to private sector organizations ``(a) An employee of an agency assigned to a private sector organization under this chapter is deemed, during the period of the assignment, to be on detail to a regular work assignment in his agency.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an employee of an agency assigned to a private sector organization under this chapter is entitled to retain coverage, rights, and benefits under subchapter I of chapter 81, and employment during the assignment is deemed employment by the United States, except that, if the employee or the employee's dependents receive from the private sector organization any payment under an insurance policy for which the premium is wholly paid by the private sector organization, or other benefit of any kind on account of the same injury or death, then, the amount of such payment or benefit shall be credited against any compensation otherwise payable under subchapter I of chapter 81.
The assignment of an employee to a private sector organization under this chapter may be made with or without reimbursement by the private sector organization for the travel and transportation expenses to or from the place of assignment, subject to the same terms and conditions as apply with respect to an employee of a Federal agency or a State or local government under section 3375, and for the pay, or a part thereof, of the employee during assignment.
Any reimbursements shall be credited to the appropriation of the agency used for paying the travel and transportation expenses or pay.
The Federal Tort Claims Act and any other Federal tort liability statute apply to an employee of an agency assigned to a private sector organization under this chapter.
The supervision of the duties of an employee of an agency so assigned to a private sector organization may be governed by an agreement between the agency and the organization.
Assignment of employees from private sector organizations ``(a) An employee of a private sector organization assigned to an agency under this chapter is deemed, during the period of the assignment, to be on detail to such agency.
An employee of a private sector organization assigned to an agency under this chapter-- ``(1) may continue to receive pay and benefits from the private sector organization from which he is assigned; ``(2) is deemed, notwithstanding subsection (a), to be an employee of the agency for the purposes of-- ``(A) chapter 73, except for section 7353(a)(1); ``(B) sections 203, 205, 207, 208, 603, 606, 607, 643, 654, 1905, and 1913 of title 18; ``(C) sections 1343, 1344, and 1349(b) of title 31; ``(D) the Federal Tort Claims Act and any other Federal tort liability statute; ``(E) the Ethics in Government Act of 1978; ``(F) section 1043 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and ``(G) section 27(p)(8) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act; and ``(3) is subject to such regulations as the President may prescribe.
The supervision of an employee of a private sector organization assigned to an agency under this chapter may be governed by agreement between the agency and the private sector organization concerned.
Such an assignment may be made with or without reimbursement by the agency for the pay, or a part thereof, of the employee during the period of assignment, or for any contribution of the private sector organization to employee benefit systems.
An employee of a private sector organization assigned to an agency under this chapter who suffers disability or dies as a result of personal injury sustained while performing duties during the assignment shall be treated, for the purpose of subchapter I of chapter 81, as an employee as defined by section 8101 who had sustained the injury in the performance of duty, except that, if the employee or the employee's dependents receive from the private sector organization any payment under an insurance policy for which the premium is wholly paid by the private sector organization, or other benefit of any kind on account of the same injury or death, then, the amount of such payment or benefit shall be credited against any compensation otherwise payable under subchapter I of chapter 81.
Authority of the Office of Personnel Management ``The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations for the administration of this chapter.''.
Clerical amendment.--The analysis for part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 35 the following: ``37.
Information Technology Exchange Program............... 3701''.
Allowability of Costs.--Within 120 days after the enactment of this Act, the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council shall amend the Federal Acquisition Regulation to recognize the costs associated with an employee's participation in the program authorized by subsection (b) as allowable training and education costs.
Such costs-- (1) include the employee's salary and fringe benefits for a period not to exceed the period of the employee's assignment under the program authorized by subsection (b), as well as moving and travel expenses; and (2) may be treated, for accounting purposes-- (A) as an indirect cost and accounted for in-- (i) an established overhead account; or (ii) an overhead account established specifically for the program authorized by subsection (b) and allocated exclusively to the contractor's Federal Government contracts; or (B) as a direct cost chargeable to fixed price or time and material contracts.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Amendments to title 5, united states code.--Title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in section 3111 by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, the head of an agency may accept voluntary service for the United States under chapter 37 of this title and regulations of the Office of Personnel Management.
''; and (B) in section 4108 by striking subsection (d).
Other amendments.--Section 125(c)(1) of Public Law 100- 238 (5 United States Code 8432 note) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``or'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (C) by striking ``and'' at the end and inserting ``or''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(D) an individual assigned from a Federal agency to a private sector organization under chapter 37 of title 5, United States Code; and''.
AUTHORIZATION OF TELECOMMUTING FOR FEDERAL CONTRACTORS.
Amendment to the Federal Acquisition Regulation.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Federal Acquisition Regulation issued in accordance with sections 6 and 25 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 405 and 421) shall be amended to permit the use of telecommuting by employees of Federal contractors in the performance of contracts with executive agencies.
Content of Amendment.--The amendment issued pursuant to subsection (a) shall, at a minimum, provide that solicitations for the acquisition of goods or services shall not set forth any requirement or evaluation criteria that would-- (1) render an offeror ineligible to receive a contract award based on the offeror's plan to allow its employees to telecommute; or (2) reduce the scoring of an offeror's proposal based upon the contractor's plan to allow its employees to telecommute, unless the contracting officer first-- (A) determines that the needs of the agency, including the security needs of the agency, cannot be met without any such requirement; and (B) explains in writing the basis for that determination.
GAO Report.--Not later than one year after the date on which the amendment required by subsection (a) is published in the Federal Register, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress an evaluation of-- (1) compliance by executive agencies with the regulations; and (2) conformance of the regulations with existing law, together with any recommendations that the Comptroller General considers appropriate.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``executive agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 105 of title 5, United States Code.