This Act may be cited as the ``Mandates Information Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Before acting on proposed private sector mandates, the Congress should carefully consider the effects on consumers, workers, and small businesses.
The Congress has often acted without adequate information concerning the costs of private sector mandates, instead focusing only on the benefits.
The costs of private sector mandates are often borne in part by consumers, in the form of higher prices and reduced availability of goods and services.
The costs of private sector mandates are often borne in part by workers, in the form of lower wages, reduced benefits, and fewer job opportunities.
The costs of private sector mandates are often borne in part by small businesses, in the form of hiring disincentives and stunted growth.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To improve the quality of the Congress' deliberation with respect to proposed mandates on the private sector, by-- (A) providing the Congress with more complete information about the effects of such mandates; and (B) ensuring that the Congress acts on such mandates only after focused deliberation on the effects.
To enhance the ability of the Congress to distinguish between private sector mandates that harm consumers, workers, and small businesses, and mandates that help those groups.
FEDERAL PRIVATE SECTOR MANDATES.
In General.-- (1) Estimates.--Section 424(b)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 658c(b)(2)) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; and (B) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C), and inserting after subparagraph (A) the following: ``(B) the impact (including any disproportionate impact in particular regions or industries) on consumers, workers, and small businesses, of the Federal private sector mandates in the bill or joint resolution, including-- ``(i) an analysis of the effect of the Federal private sector mandates in the bill or joint resolution on consumer prices and on the actual supply of goods and services in consumer markets; ``(ii) an analysis of the effect of the Federal private sector mandates in the bill or joint resolution on worker wages, worker benefits, and employment opportunities; and ``(iii) an analysis of the effect of the Federal private sector mandates in the bill or joint resolution on the hiring practices, expansion, and profitability of businesses with 100 or fewer employees; and''.
Point of order.--Section 424(b)(3) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 658c(b)(3)) is amended by adding after the period ``If such determination is made by the Director, a point of order under this part shall lie only under section 425(a)(1) and as if the requirement of section 425(a)(1) had not been met.''.
Threshold amounts.--Section 425(a)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 658d(a)(2)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``Federal intergovernmental mandates by an amount that causes the thresholds specified in section 424(a)(1)'' and inserting ``Federal mandates by an amount that causes the thresholds specified in section 424 (a)(1) or (b)(1)''; and (B) by inserting ``, in the case of Federal intergovernmental mandates exceeding the thresholds specified in section 424(a)(1)'' after ``unless''.
Application relating to appropriations committees.-- Section 425(c)(1)(B) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 658d(c)(1)(B)) is amended-- (A) in clause (i) by striking ``intergovernmental''; (B) in clause (ii) by striking ``intergovernmental''; (C) in clause (iii) by striking ``intergovernmental''; and (D) in clause (iv) by striking ``intergovernmental''.
Application relating to congressional budget office.-- Section 427 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 658f) is amended by striking ``intergovernmental''.
Rules of the House of Representatives.--Clause 5 of rule XXIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives (as added by section 107 of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (2 United States Code 1514)) is amended by striking ``section 424(a)(1)'' and inserting ``section 424 (a)(1) or (b)(1)''.
Exercise of Rulemaking Powers.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and the House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it shall be considered as part of the rules of such House, respectively, and shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change such rules (so far as relating to such House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of each House.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that any unfunded mandates that are determined by the Director of the Congressional Budget Office to exceed the applicable threshold under section 424 (a)(1) or (b)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 658f(a)(1), 658f(b)(1)) should be financed through reduced taxes, tax abatements, or direct compensation by the Federal Government.