This Act may be cited as the ``Voyageurs National Park Intergovernmental Council Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds and declares that-- (1) intergovernmental cooperation (local, State, and Federal) is essential to optimize the sustainable development of natural, cultural, and recreational resources of Voyageurs National Park; and (2) the national interest is served by-- (A) preserving, protecting, and improving the long- term perpetuation of such diverse resources for the benefit of the people of the United States; and (B) improving the coordination among all levels of government in the Voyageurs region.
VOYAGEURS NATIONAL PARK INTERGOVERNMENTAL COUNCIL.
The Act entitled ``An Act to authorize the establishment of the Voyageurs National Park in the State of Minnesota, and for other purposes'' (16 United States Code 160 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 305 the following new section: ``SEC.
VOYAGEURS NATIONAL PARK INTERGOVERNMENTAL COUNCIL.
Establishment.-- ``(1) Membership.--There is hereby established the Voyageurs National Park Intergovernmental Council (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Council'').
The Council shall be composed of 11 members, as follows: ``(A) The Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks, ex officio, or his designee.
Four individuals, appointed by the Secretary after consideration of recommendations by the Governor, to represent the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Department of Transportation, the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board, and the Minnesota Office of Tourism.
One individual appointed by the Secretary to represent the Minnesota Historical Society.
The Chair of the St. Louis County Commissioners, or the designee of the Chair, ex officio.
The Chair of the Koochiching County Commissioners, or the designee of the Chair, ex officio.
One State Senator, chosen by the Governor, who represents the area in which the park is located, or the designee of the State Senator, ex officio.
One State Representative, chosen by the Governor, who represents the area in which the park is located, or the designee of the State Representative, ex officio.
One member of the Native American community to represent the 1854 Treaty Authority, appointed by the Secretary.
Terms.--A member of the Council appointed under paragraph (1), other than ex officio members, shall be appointed for a term of four years.
Any member of the Council appointed for a definite term may serve after the expiration of his term until his successor is appointed.
Compensation.--Members of the Council who are not employed by the Federal Government shall serve without pay.
While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services of the Council, members of the Council shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Federal Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Provisions Relating to the Conduct of Council Business.-- ``(1) Quorum.--Eight members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
Chairperson.--The members of the Council shall elect a chairperson of the Council from among the members of the Council.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy in the Council shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.--The Council shall meet at the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members.
Staff.--The Secretary shall provide the Council with such staff and technical assistance as the Secretary, after consultation with the Council, considers appropriate to enable the Council to carry out its duties.
Upon request of the Secretary, any Federal agency may provide information, personnel, property, and services, on a reimbursable basis, to the Council to assist in carrying out its duties under this section.
The Secretary may accept the services of personnel detailed from the State of Minnesota or any political subdivision of the State and may reimburse the State or such political subdivision for such services.
Procedural matters.-- ``(A) FACA.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Council.
Guidelines for conduct of business.--The following guidelines apply with respect to the conduct of business at meetings of the Council: ``(i) Each regular meeting and each emergency meeting shall be open to the public.
Emergency meetings shall be held at the call of the chair or equivalent presiding officer.
Timely public notice of each regular meeting and each emergency meeting, including the time, place, and agenda of the meeting, shall be published in local newspapers and such notice may be given by such other means as will result in wide publicity.
Interested persons shall be permitted to present oral or written statements regarding the matters on the agenda at meetings.
Minutes of each meeting shall be kept and shall contain a record of the persons present, an accurate description of matters discussed and conclusions reached, and copies of all statements filed.
The administrative record, including minutes required under clause (v), of each meeting, and records or other documents which were made available to or prepared for or by the Council incident to the meeting, shall be available for public inspection and copying at a single location in the offices of the Council.
New information.--At any time when the Council determines it appropriate to consider new information from a State or Federal agency or from a Council advisory body, the Council shall give comparable consideration to new information offered at that time by interested members of the public.
Interested parties shall have a reasonable opportunity to respond to new data or information before the Council takes final action on management measures.
Functions.--The Council shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Act-- ``(1) prepare and submit to the Secretary comprehensive draft amendments to the management plan and, from time to time, such amendments to the plan as are necessary, which provides for as broad a range of sustainable land and water uses and scenic and recreational activities as are compatible with the laws and regulations governing Voyageurs National Park and other local, State, or Federal public lands; ``(2) analyze the economic and environmental costs and benefits of implementing sustainable practices for Voyageurs National Park; ``(3) conduct public hearings, at appropriate times and in appropriate locations, so as to allow all interested persons an opportunity to be heard in the development of amendments to the plan, and with respect to the administration and implementation of the provisions of this Act; ``(4) after considering public comment and comment from the Secretary, prepare and submit to the Secretary proposed revisions to the draft management plan; ``(5) establish an ongoing process of review and evaluation of local, State, and Federal actions, plans, ordinances, regulations, laws, and land use decisions for the purpose of assessing their effect on the long-term sustainability of the economic and environmental values and resources of the region; ``(6) submit to the Secretary such periodic reports as the Council deems appropriate, and any other relevant report which may be requested by the Secretary; and ``(7) conduct other activities which are required by, or provided for in, this Act or which are necessary and appropriate to the functions specified in paragraphs (1) through (6).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.''.
REVISION OF VOYAGEURS NATIONAL PARK MANAGEMENT PLAN.
Management Plan.--Section 303 of the Act entitled ``An Act to authorize the establishment of the Voyageurs National Park in the State of Minnesota, and for other purposes'' (16 United States Code 160h) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``303.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b)(1) The Secretary shall prepare in accordance with this section and implement amendments to the management plan for the park.
Where appropriate, such amendments shall provide for recreational opportunities, including (but not limited to) access and use of boats, aircraft, snowmobiles, hiking, and skiing on all major lakes and bays within the park.
The Secretary shall receive the draft amendments to the management plan prepared and submitted by the Voyageurs National Park Intergovernmental Council under section 306(c)(1), together with public comments on the draft amendments, and shall review and, if necessary, submit to the Council such recommendations as the Secretary determines appropriate for revising the draft amendments.
The Secretary shall receive revised draft amendments prepared and submitted by the Council under section 306(c)(1).
(1) If the Secretary determines that the revised amendments to the management plan are not inconsistent with other provisions of this Act or applicable laws, treaties, executive orders, and that the revised amendments to the management plan are in the public interest, the Secretary shall adopt the revised amendments to the management plan.
(A) If the Secretary decides not to adopt the revised amendments to the management plan, the amendments to the management plan shall be made by the Secretary in accordance with subparagraph (C) pursuant to recommendations made by a management plan board appointed under subparagraph (B).
(i) The management plan board shall consist of three members, appointed as follows: ``(I) One member appointed by the Secretary.
One member appointed by the Secretary from a list of 5 or more individuals submitted by the Voyageurs National Park Intergovernmental Council, by majority vote.
The Secretary may request additional lists.
One member appointed by the Secretary from a list of 5 or more individuals submitted by the 2 members appointed under subclauses (I) and (II).
The Secretary may request additional lists.
Members of a management plan board who are not employed by the Federal Government shall serve without pay.
While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services of the board, members of the board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Federal Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to a management plan board.
The management plan board shall review the revised amendments to the management plan submitted by the Council to the Secretary under section 306(c)(1), and such comments on the revised amendments and recommendations for such amendments as the Secretary submits to the board.
Following such review, the board shall submit to the Secretary such amendments as the board finds to be appropriate under the provisions of this Act.
The Secretary shall revise the management plan in a manner based on the amendments submitted by the board.
If the Secretary fails to approve or disapprove revised amendments to the management plan submitted under this section within 95 days after the date of the submission of the amendments, no amendment to the plan shall be implemented by the Secretary until the Secretary complies with subsections (b) and (c).
If the Council declines to submit to the Secretary revised amendments to the management plan, or revisions of the amendments, the Secretary may make such amendments as the Secretary considers necessary or appropriate and implement the plan.
The management plan of the park may not be changed except in accordance with this section.