SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Forest Fire and Pest Emergency Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
Strategic fire plan and budget.
FINDINGS AND PURPOSE: (a) Findings.-- (1) Congress accepts the report and findings of the National Commission on Wildlife Disasters, created through the Wildfire Disaster Recovery Act of 1989 in response to the destructive western fire season of 1987 and the Yellowstone fires of 1988.
The commission found: (A) Millions of acres of forest, grassland, and desert in the United States face abnormally high risks of wildfire due to altered species composition, excessive fuel buildup, and increased ignition opportunity.
The problem is exceptionally severe on the public lands of the western states, where dangerous conditions exist over very large areas and wildfires can attain a size and intensity that defies control.
Preventing disaster in such situations can no longer be limited to suppression with engines, air tankers (fixed-wing aircraft that drop chemical retardant), and other firefighting paraphernalia.
In many forest situations, fuel reduction by mechanical removal through careful salvage logging, thinning, or other means will be needed before prescribed fire can be safely utilized.
The Southern California firestorm of 1993 burned nearly 200,000 acres, destroyed over 1,100 structures, killed three people and injured over 160, and cost an estimated $1 billion in suppression efforts, damages, and restoration.
Soil erosion, mud slides, wildlife habitat loss, and other damage will leave an unforgotten legacy for years to come.
In California, 3,500 homes were destroyed by wildlife between 1920-89, but well over 4,200 were destroyed between 1990-93.
In 1992, when 24,500 acres of prime timber and recreation lands in the Sierra-typical mixed conifer forest, ladened with heavy fuels, bone dry from the six-year drought, and suffering from drought stress and insect and disease attack, ignited into a raging firestorm, it turned into the most expensive rural wildfire in California history in just four days.
Total estimated value lost was $245 million dollars, $16.5 million in suppression costs, 2 lives and 72 firefighting injuries.
After an optimistic salvage recovery, estimated value loss is $5,670 per acre.
Cost for prevention fuels treatment average less than $200 per acre.
Based on recent scientific reports, including the California Spotted Owl Report (CASPO) and the Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project Progress Report (SNEP), Congress finds: (A) The enormous wildfires awaiting ignition on the public lands of the west can no longer be seen as an uncontrollable act of nature; they will be the direct result of negligence in land management, much of which can be traced to the long-standing aversion to fire in all forms.
Major reductions in wildfire extent, damage and cost are possible if effective prevention actions are taken in time.
Wildfire must be mitigated by preventive land treatments that reduce fuels, break up large contiguous areas of dangerous conditions, improve building standards, and create defensible spaces between flammable fuels and susceptible buildings.
Outstanding late-successional forest areas are often found in the less accessible locations, and the potential for losing them to catastrophic wildfire is very high.
Stands once kept open by frequent, low- intensity lightning fires have been, as a consequence of fire suppression, highly altered both in structure and function by the development of dense, shade tolerant understories that now place them at risk of high-intensity stand- replacing fire.
Efforts to reduce catastrophic fire risk to late-successional forest stands, and to maintain key ecosystem processes and biodiversity, are much more likely to require active management in the Sierra Nevada.
Activities which reduce forest fuels will provide interim employment and availability of men and equipment for forest fire suppression.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to immediately reduce the risk of wildlife on federal forest lands in California, immediately reduce the number of dead and dying trees, provide access to needed funding contained in the Emergency Firefighting Funds ($190,222,000 for Forest Service and $116,674,000 for Department of Interior in FY 94), provide access to needed funding contained in the Forest Service Emergency Pest Suppression Fund ($15,000,000 in FY 94) and to develop a Strategic fire protection plan with associated budget for Congressional consideration.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Natural fuels.--Fuels not directly generated or altered by management activity.
This includes fuels that have accumulated as a result of fire exclusion.
Extreme fire risk.--Areas determined to be extremely vulnerable to wildfire based on a combination of fire history, weather patterns, topography, accessibility, visitor intensity, and fuel loads.
Secretaries.--The term ``Secretaries'' means the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior.
The United States Congress declares the reduction of natural fuels, on Federal lands within the State of California identified as extreme fire risk, to constitute an emergency action to prevent or to reduce risk to public health or safety or to serious resource loss, for the duration of the drought as determined by the Secretaries.
Notwithstanding direction in land management plans, Congress directs the Federal agencies to work cooperatively with State agencies to immediately identify areas of extreme fire risk and take immediate action to reduce natural fuels.
Congress authorizes the use of emergency fire suppression funds to reduce natural fuels in such areas provided reductions in the Sierra forests are consistent with the fuels management guidelines of the California Spotted Owl EA or subsequent EIS.
In areas identified as requiring additional treatments due to drought or pest infestation on National forest lands, the Forest Service is directed to prepare a budget request declaring an emergency, pursuant to section 251(b)(2)(D) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
STRATEGIC FIRE PLAN AND BUDGET.
The Federal agencies are further directed to prepare, in consultation and coordination with other federal agencies and the State of California, a strategic fire plan and annual budget.
The plan and budget shall be submitted to Congress by March 1, 1995 for inclusion in the 1996 appropriations request with a supplemental appropriations request, if needed, for 1995 funding of natural fuels treatment.