This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Hospital Outpatient Payment Equality (HOPE) Act of 1999''.
REFINEMENTS TO MEDICARE PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR OUTPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES.
Special Payment Adjustment for Certain Visits.--Section 1833(t) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395l(t)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (9) as paragraph (10) and inserting after paragraph (8) the following: ``(9) Special payment adjustment for certain visits.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, the amount of payment made under this part for covered OPD services that are classified within an ambulatory patient classification group for-- ``(i) emergency room visits, or ``(ii) clinic visits, shall be equal to the product of the amount of payment determined under paragraph (4) for services classified within such group and the adjustment factor determined under subparagraph (B) or (C).
Adjustment factor for er visits.--The adjustment factor for covered OPD services that are classified within ambulatory patient classification groups for emergency room visits shall be determined as follows: ``(i) Estimate of aggregate reasonable costs.--The Secretary shall estimate the total amount that would be payable under this part for all covered OPD services that are classified within such groups and furnished in 2000 if payment for such services was based on the reasonable costs incurred in furnishing such services.
Estimate of aggregate payments under opd pps.--The Secretary shall estimate the total amount that would be payable under this subsection for all covered OPD services that are classified within such groups and furnished in 2000, determined without regard to this paragraph.
Determination of adjustment factor.--The adjustment factor determined under this subparagraph shall equal the quotient obtained by dividing the amount determined under clause (i) by the amount determined under clause (ii).
Adjustment factor for clinic visits.--In determining the adjustment factor for covered OPD services that are classified within ambulatory patient classification groups for clinic visits, subparagraph (B) shall be applied-- ``(i) by substituting `clinic' for `er' and `emergency room' each place either appears, and ``(ii) by substituting `94.2 percent of reasonable costs' for `reasonable costs' in clause (i) of such subparagraph.
Relation to other rules.-- ``(i) Part b, blood deductibles.--In applying the deductibles described in subsection (b), the amount of payment determined under this paragraph for a covered OPD service shall be substituted for the amount determined under paragraph (4) for such service.
Inapplicability of budget neutrality requirement.--The adjustments required by this paragraph shall not be subject to the budget neutrality requirements of paragraph (2)(E).
No effect on certain determinations.--The amounts payable by reason of this paragraph shall not be taken into account in determining-- ``(I) copayment amounts under paragraph (3)(B), ``(II) medicare OPD fee schedule amounts under paragraph (3)(D), ``(III) pre-deductible payment percentages under paragraph (3)(E), or ``(IV) compliance with the volume control mechanism established pursuant to paragraph (2)(F).
Hold harmless.--The adjustments required by this paragraph shall be taken into account in applying the temporary limits on payment reductions established under subsection (e) of section 4523 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.''.
Elimination of Reduction in Market Basket.--Section 1833(t)(3)(C)(iii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395l(t)(3)(C)(iii)) is amended by striking ``, reduced by 1 percentage point for such factor for services furnished in each of 2000, 2001, and 2002''.
Temporary Limitation on Reductions.-- (1) In general.--Section 4523 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Temporary Limit on Reductions in Federal Payments.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 1833(t) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395l(t)), as added by subsection (a), the amount that is paid from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund for covered OPD services furnished by a hospital during a calendar year (or portion thereof) specified in paragraph (2)(A) may not be less than the applicable percentage of the case mix adjusted average amount that would have been payable to such hospital for such services (including cost sharing) if the prospective payment system established under such section did not apply.
Such average amount may be determined on a prospective basis using the Secretary's best estimate of the reasonable costs incurred in furnishing covered OPD services or on a retrospective basis using cost reports submitted by a hospital.
Definitions.--For purposes of paragraph (1): ``(A) Applicable percentage.--Subject to paragraph (3), the term `applicable percentage' means-- ``(i) with respect to covered OPD services furnished during the first full calendar year (and any portion of the immediately preceding calendar year) for which the prospective payment system established under section 1833(t) of such Act is in effect, 95 percent, ``(ii) with respect to the second full calendar year for which such system is in effect, 90 percent, and ``(iii) with respect to the third full calendar year for which such system is in effect, 85 percent.
Covered opd services.--The term `covered OPD services' has the meaning given to such term in section 1833(t)(1)(B) of such Act.
Application to certain hospitals.--In the case of hospitals described in section 1833(t)(8) of such Act, the `applicable percentage' for a calendar year (or portion thereof) shall be the same applicable percentage that applies to covered OPD services furnished by hospitals that are not described in such section during such calendar year (or portion thereof).
Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as affecting the amount of cost sharing paid by individuals enrolled under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act for covered OPD services.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 1833(t)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395l(t)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting ``except as provided in section 4523(e) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997,'' after ``1999,''.
Effective Date.-- (1) Special adjustments for certain visits.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 2000.
Market basket; temporary limits on reductions.--The amendments made by subsections (b) and (c) are effective as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.