This Act may be cited as the ``Legislative Line Item Veto Act''.
EXPEDITED CONSIDERATION OF CERTAIN PROPOSED RESCISSIONS AND REPEALS OF TAX EXPENDITURES AND DIRECT SPENDING.
In General.--Title X of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 621 et sequentes) is amended by adding after section 1012 the following new section: ``expedited consideration of certain proposed rescissions and repeals of tax expenditures and direct spending ``Sec.
Proposed Cancellation of Budget Item.--The President may propose, at the time and in the manner provided in subsection (b), the cancellation of any budget item provided in any Act.
Transmittal of Special Message.-- ``(1)(A) Subject to the time limitations provided in subparagraph (B), the President may transmit to Congress a special message proposing to cancel budget items and include with that special message a draft bill that, if enacted, would only cancel those budget items as provided in this section.
The bill shall clearly identify each budget item that is proposed to be canceled including, where applicable, each program, project, or activity to which the budget item relates.
The bill shall specify the amount, if any, of each budget item that the President designates for deficit reduction as provided in paragraph (4).
A special message may be transmitted under this section-- ``(i) during the 20-calendar-day period (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) commencing on the day after the date of enactment of the provision proposed to be rescinded or repealed; or ``(ii) at the same time as the President's budget.
In the case of an Act that includes budget items within the jurisdiction of more than one committee of a House, the President in proposing to cancel such budget item under this section shall send a separate special message and accompanying draft bill for each such committee.
Each special message shall specify, with respect to the budget item proposed to be canceled-- ``(A) the amount that the President proposes be canceled; ``(B) any account, department, or establishment of the Government to which such budget item is available for obligation, and the specific project or governmental functions involved; ``(C) the reasons why the budget item should be canceled; ``(D) to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal, economic, and budgetary effect (including the effect on outlays and receipts in each fiscal year) of the proposed cancellation; and ``(E) all facts, circumstances, and considerations relating to or bearing upon the proposed cancellation and the decision to effect the proposed cancellation, and to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated effect of the proposed cancellation upon the objects, purposes, and programs for which the budget item is provided.
(A) Not later than 5 days after the date of enactment of a bill containing an amount designated by the President for deficit reduction under paragraph (1), the President shall-- ``(i) with respect to a rescission bill, reduce the discretionary spending limits under section 601 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 for the budget year and each outyear to reflect such amount; and ``(ii) with respect to a repeal of a tax expenditure or direct spending, adjust the balances for the budget year and each outyear under section 252(b) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 to reflect such amount.
Not later than 5 days after the date of enactment of a bill containing an amount designated by the President for deficit reduction under paragraph (1), the chairs of the Committees on the Budget of the Senate and the House of Representatives shall revise levels under section 311(a) and adjust the committee allocations under section 602(a) to reflect such amount.
Procedures for Expedited Consideration.-- ``(1)(A) Before the close of the second day of session of the Senate and the House of Representatives, respectively, after the date of receipt of a special message transmitted to Congress under subsection (b), the majority leader or minority leader of each House shall introduce (by request) the draft bill accompanying that special message.
If the bill is not introduced as provided in the preceding sentence in either House, then, on the third day of session of that House after the date of receipt of that special message, any Member of that House may introduce the bill.
The bill shall be referred to the appropriate committee or (in the House of Representatives) committees.
The committee shall report the bill without substantive revision and with or without recommendation.
The committee shall report the bill not later than the seventh day of session of that House after the date of receipt of that special message.
If the committee fails to report the bill within that period, the committee shall be automatically discharged from consideration of the bill, and the bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
A vote on final passage of the bill shall be taken in the Senate and the House of Representatives on or before the close of the 10th day of session of that House after the date of the introduction of the bill in that House.
If the bill is passed, the Clerk of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, shall cause the bill to be engrossed, certified, and transmitted to the other House within one calendar day of the day on which the bill is passed.
(A) During consideration under this subsection in the House of Representatives, any Member of the House of Representatives may move to strike any proposed cancellation of a budget item if supported by 49 other Members.
A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of a bill under this subsection shall be highly privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the House of Representatives on a bill under this subsection shall not exceed 4 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill.
A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable.
It shall not be in order to move to recommit a bill under this subsection or to move to reconsider the vote by which the bill is agreed to or disagreed to.
Appeals from decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to a bill under this section shall be decided without debate.
Except to the extent specifically provided in this section, consideration of a bill under this section shall be governed by the Rules of the House of Representatives.
It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives to consider any rescission bill introduced pursuant to the provisions of this section under a suspension of the rules or under a special rule.
(A) During consideration of a bill under this subsection in the Senate, any Member of the Senate may move to strike any proposed cancellation of a budget item if supported by 11 other Members.
It shall not be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the Senate on a bill under this subsection, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith (including debate pursuant to subparagraph (D)), shall not exceed 10 hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection with a bill under this subsection shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of a bill, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
A motion in the Senate to further limit debate on a bill under this subsection is not debatable.
A motion to recommit a bill under this subsection is not in order.
If the Senate proceeds to consider a bill introduced in the House of Representatives under paragraph (1)(A), then any Senator may offer as an amendment the text of the companion bill introduced in the Senate under paragraph (1)(A) as amended if amended (under subparagraph (A)).
Debate in the Senate on such bill introduced in the House of Representatives, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith (including debate pursuant to subparagraph (D)), and any amendment offered under this subparagraph, shall not exceed 10 hours minus such times (if any) as Senators consumed or yielded back during consideration of the companion bill introduced in the Senate under paragraph (1)(A).
Debate in the House of Representatives or the Senate on the conference report on any bill considered under this section shall be limited to not more than 2 hours, which shall be divided equally between the majority leader and the minority leader.
A motion further to limit debate is not debatable.
A motion to recommit the conference report is not in order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the conference report is agreed to or disagreed to.
Amendments and Divisions Prohibited.--Except as otherwise provided by this section, no amendment to a bill considered under this section shall be in order in either the Senate or the House of Representatives.
It shall not be in order to demand a division of the question in the House of Representatives (or in a Committee of the Whole).
No motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in order in the House of Representatives, nor shall it be in order in the House of Representatives to suspend the application of this subsection by unanimous consent.
Requirement To Make Available for Obligation.--Any budget item proposed to be canceled in a special message transmitted to Congress under subsection (b) shall not be made available for obligation or take effect until the day after the date on which either House rejects the bill transmitted with that special message.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) the term `appropriation Act' means any general or special appropriation Act, and any Act or joint resolution making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations; ``(2) the term `direct spending' shall have the same meaning given such term in section 250(c)(8) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985; ``(3) the term `budget item' means-- ``(A) an amount, in whole or in part, of budget authority provided in an appropriation Act; ``(B) an amount of direct spending; or ``(C) a targeted tax benefit; ``(4) the term `cancellation of a budget item' means-- ``(A) the rescission of any budget authority provided in an appropriation Act; ``(B) the repeal of any amount of direct spending; or ``(C) the repeal of any targeted tax benefit; and ``(5) the term `targeted tax benefit' means any provision which has the practical effect of providing a benefit in the form of a different treatment to a particular taxpayer or a limited class of taxpayers, whether or not such provision is limited by its terms to a particular taxpayer or a class of taxpayers.
Such term does not include any benefit provided to a class of taxpayers distinguished on the basis of general demographic conditions such as income, number of dependents, or marital status.''.
Exercise of Rulemaking Powers.--Section 904 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 621 note) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``and 1017'' and inserting ``1012A, and 1017''; and (2) in subsection (d), by striking ``section 1017'' and inserting ``sections 1012A and 1017''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections for subpart B of title X of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1012 the following: ``Sec.
Expedited consideration of certain proposed rescissions and repeals of tax expenditures and direct spending.''.
Effective Period.--The amendments made by this Act shall-- (1) take effect on the date of enactment of this Act; (2) apply only to budget items provided in Acts enacted on or after the date of enactment of this Act; and (3) cease to be effective on September 30, 1998.