TITLE I--NATIONAL BOARD CERTIFICATION ASSISTANCE SEC.
NATIONAL BOARD CERTIFICATION ASSISTANCE.
Part A of title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6621 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
NATIONAL BOARD CERTIFICATION ASSISTANCE.
Short Title.--This section may be cited as the `Teaching Excellence in America's Classrooms and Homerooms Act' (TEACH).
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: ``(1) Accomplished teachers are an essential resource for schools and key to the success of any effective education reform initiative.
What teachers know and can do are the most important influences on what students learn, according to national studies.
Three years after the landmark 1983 report, `A Nation at Risk', the Carnegie Task Force on Teaching as a Profession issued a seminal report entitled `A Nation Prepared: Teachers for the 21st Century'.
Its leading recommendation called for the establishment of a National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Founded in 1987, the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards is an independent, nonprofit and nonpartisan organization whose mission is to establish high and rigorous standards for what accomplished teachers should know and be able to do.
Over 9,500 teachers from all 50 States and the District of Columbia have completed advanced certification by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, which certification is the most rigorous assessment process that a teacher can go through and the highest professional credential in the field of teaching.
And more than 12,000 teachers have applied for National Board Certification in the 2000-2001 school year.
Teacher salaries have remained stagnant over the past decade, according to a new study by the National Education Association, and \2/3\ of the States do not meet the national average of $40,582 for teacher salaries.
The full fee for National Board Certification is $2,300.
Thirty-nine States and 181 local school districts have enacted financial incentives for teachers seeking National Board Certification, including fee support to candidates and salary increases for teachers who achieve National Board Certification.
Recent data from the Accomplished Teaching Validation Study have demonstrated that teachers who are certified by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards significantly outperform their peers who are not National Board Certified on 11 of 13 key measures of teaching expertise.
If we are to improve student achievement and success in school, the United States must encourage and support the training and development of our Nation's teachers, who are the single, most important in-school influence on student learning.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to provide a Federal subsidy and support to certain elementary school and secondary school teachers who pursue advanced certification provided by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Board.--The term `Board' means the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Eligible teacher.--The term `eligible teacher' means an individual who is a prekindergarten or early childhood educator, or a kindergarten through grade 12 classroom teacher, instructor, counselor, or principal in an elementary school or secondary school on a full-time basis.
Program Authorization.-- ``(1) Program authorized.--From sums appropriated pursuant to the authority of subsection (g) for any fiscal year, the Secretary, in accordance with this section, shall provide financial assistance to the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, in order to pay the Federal share of the costs of the authorized activities described in subsection (f).
Authorized Activities.-- ``(1) In general.--Federal funds received under this section may be used only for the following activities: ``(A) To help States and local school districts provide fee support to teachers seeking National Board Certification.
For outreach and educational activities directly related to teachers' awareness and pursuit of National Board Certification.
Priorities.--The Board shall give priority to providing outreach and educational activities under paragraph (1)(B) among the following: ``(A) School districts in which there are a significant number of low-performing schools.
School districts with low teacher participation rates in the National Board Certification process.
School districts serving special populations, including-- ``(i) limited English proficient children; ``(ii) gifted and talented children; ``(iii) children with disabilities; and ``(iv) economically and educationally disadvantaged children.
Authorization of Appropriations; Allocation.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $6,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
Allocation.--Of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall make available-- ``(A) 85 percent of such amounts to carry out subsection (f)(1)(A); and ``(B) 15 percent of such amounts to carry out subsection (f)(1)(B).''.
TITLE II--TAX INCENTIVES FOR TEACHER CERTIFICATIONS SEC.
EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN AMOUNTS RECEIVED BY CERTIFIED TEACHERS.
In General.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by redesignating section 139 as section 140 and inserting after section 138 the following new section: ``SEC.
CERTAIN AMOUNTS RECEIVED BY CERTIFIED TEACHERS.
In General.--In the case of an eligible teacher, gross income shall not include the value of any eligible financial benefit received during the taxable year.
Eligible Teacher.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `eligible teacher' means an individual who is a pre-kindergarten or early childhood educator, or a kindergarten through grade 12 classroom teacher, instructor, counselor, aide, or principal in an elementary or secondary school on a full-time basis for an academic year ending during a taxable year.
Elementary and secondary schools.--The terms `elementary school' and `secondary school' have the respective meanings given such terms by section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Eligible Financial Benefit.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible financial benefit' means any financial benefit, including incentive payment, received solely by reason of the successful completion by the eligible teacher of the requirements for advanced certification provided by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Such completion shall be verified in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulation.
Amounts Must Be Reasonable.--Amounts excluded under subsection (a) shall include only amounts which are reasonable.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 3401(a)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``117 or 132'' and inserting ``117, 132, or 139''.
The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 139 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Certain amounts received by certified teachers.
Cross references to other Acts.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
PERCENT FLOOR ON MISCELLANEOUS ITEMIZED DEDUCTIONS NOT TO APPLY TO QUALIFIED ADVANCED CERTIFICATION EXPENSES OF ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS.
In General.--Section 67(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining miscellaneous itemized deductions) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) any deduction allowable for the qualified advanced certification expenses paid or incurred by an eligible teacher (as defined in section 139(b)).''.
Definitions.--Section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to 2-percent floor on miscellaneous itemized deductions) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Qualified Advanced Certification Expenses of Eligible Teachers.--For purposes of subsection (b)(13), the term `qualified advanced certification expenses' means expenses-- ``(1) for fees, supplies, equipment, transportation, and lodging required to secure the advanced certification provided by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, and ``(2) with respect to which a deduction is allowable under section 162 (determined without regard to this section).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.