This Act may be cited as the ``Alaska Power Administration Sale Authorization Act''.
SALE OF SNETTISHAM AND EKLUTNA HYDROELECTRIC PROJECTS.
The Secretary of Energy may sell the Snettisham Hydroelectric Project (referred to in this Act as ``Snettisham'') to the State of Alaska Power Authority (now known as Alaska Industrial Development and Export Authority, and referred to in this Act as the ``Authority''), or its successor, in accordance with the February 10, 1989, Snettisham Purchase Agreement between the Alaska Power Administration of the Department of Energy and the Authority.
The Secretary of Energy may sell the Eklutna Hydroelectric Project (referred to in this Act as ``Eklutna'') to the Municipality of Anchorage doing business as Municipal Light and Power, the Chugach Electric Association, Inc., and the Matanuska Electric Association, Inc. (referred to in this Act as ``Eklutna Purchasers''), in accordance with the August 2, 1989, Eklutna Purchase Agreement between the Department of Energy and the Eklutna Purchasers.
The heads of other affected Federal departments and agencies, including the Secretary of the Interior, shall assist the Secretary of Energy in implementing the sales authorized by this section.
The Secretary of Energy shall deposit sale proceeds in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of miscellaneous receipts.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to prepare or acquire Eklutna and Snettisham assets for sale and conveyance.
Such preparation shall provide sufficient title to ensure the beneficial use, enjoyment, and occupancy to the purchasers assets to be sold.
The sales authorized in this section shall occur not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of legislation defining ``first use'' of Snettisham for purposes of section 147(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, to be considered to occur pursuant to acquisition of the property by or behalf of the State of Alaska.
(1) After the sales authorized by section 2 occur, Eklutna and Snettisham, including future modifications, shall continue to be exempt from the requirements of the Federal Power Act (15 United States Code 79a et sequentes) including its requirements with respect to applications, permits, licenses, and fees, unless a future modification of Eklutna or Snettisham affects Federal lands not used for the two projects when this Act takes effect.
The exemptions in paragraph (1) are subject to the Memorandum of Agreement entered into between the State of Alaska, the Eklutna Purchasers, the Authority, and Federal fish and wildlife agencies regarding the protection, mitigation of, damages to, and enhancement of fish and wildlife, dated August 7, 1991, remaining in full force and effect.
Nothing in this Act or Federal Power Act preempts the State of Alaska from carrying out the responsibilities and authorities of the Memorandum of Agreement.
(1) The United States District Court for the District of Alaska has jurisdiction to review decisions made under the Memorandum of Agreement and enforce the provisions of the Memorandum of Agreement, including the remedy of specific performance.
An action seeking review of a Fish and Wildlife Program of the Governor of Alaska under the Memorandum of Agreement or challenging actions of any of the parties to the Memorandum of Agreement prior to the adoption of the program shall be brought not later than 90 days after the date on which the program is adopted by the Governor of Alaska, or be barred.
An action seeking review of implementation of the program shall be brought not later than 90 days after the challenged act implementing the program, or be barred.
With respect to Eklutna lands described in Exhibit A of the Eklutna Purchase Agreement: (1) The Secretary of the Interior shall issue rights-of-way to the Alaska Power Administration for subsequent reassignment to the Eklutna Purchasers-- (A) at no cost to Eklutna Purchasers; (B) to remain effective for a period equal to the life of Eklutna as extended by improvements, repairs, renewals, or replacements; and (C) sufficient for operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of, and access to, Eklutna facilities located on military lands and lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management, including land selected by the State of Alaska.
If the Eklutna Purchasers subsequently sell or transfer Eklutna to private ownership, the Bureau of Land Management may assess reasonable and customary fees for continued use of the rights-of-way on lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management and military lands in accordance with current law.
Fee title to lands at Anchorage Substation shall be transferred to Eklutna Purchasers at no additional cost if the Secretary of the Interior determines that pending claims to and selection of those lands are invalid or relinquished.
With respect only to approximately 853 acres of Eklutna lands identified in paragraph 1. a, b, and c. of Exhibit A of the Eklutna Purchase Agreement, the State of Alaska may select and the Secretary of the Interior shall convey to the State improved lands under the selection entitlements in section 6(a) of the Act of July 7, 1958 (Public Law 85-508; 79 United States Statutes at Large 339) and the North Anchorage Land Agreement of January 31, 1983.
The conveyance is subject to the rights-of-way provided to the Eklutna Purchasers under paragraph (1).
With respect to the approximately 2,671 acres of Snettisham lands identified in paragraphs 1. a. and b. of Exhibit A of the Snettisham Purchase Agreement, the State of Alaska may select and the Secretary of the Interior shall convey to the State improved lands under the selection entitlement in section 6(a) of the Act of July 7, 1958.
Not later than 1 year after both of the sales authorized in section 2 have occurred, as measured by the transaction dates stipulated in the Purchase Agreements and by section 2(f), the Secretary of Energy shall-- (1) complete the business of, and close out, the Alaska Power Administration; (2) prepare and submit to Congress a report documenting the sales; and (3) return unused balances of funds appropriated for the Alaska Power Administration to the Treasury of the United States.
The Act of July 31, 1950 (64 United States Statutes at Large 382) is repealed effective on the date, as determined by the Secretary of Energy, when all Eklutna assets have been conveyed to the Eklutna Purchasers.
Section 204 of the Flood Control Act of 1962 (Public Law 87- 874; 76 United States Statutes at Large 1193) is repealed effective on the date, as determined by the Secretary of Energy, when all Snettisham assets have been conveyed to the Authority.
As of the later of the two dates determined in subsections (f) and (g), section 302(a) of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42 United States Code 7152(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking out subparagraph (C); and (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (D), (E), and (F) as subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E) respectively; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out ``the Bonneville Power Administration, and the Alaska Power Administration'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``and the Bonneville Power Administration''.
The Act of August 9, 1955 (69 United States Statutes at Large 618), concerning water resources investigations in Alaska, is repealed.
The sales of Eklutna and Snettisham under this Act are not considered a disposal of Federal surplus property under the following provisions of law: (1) Section 203 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 484).
Section 13 of the Surplus Property Act of 1944 (50 United States Code App.