SIGNING AND MASTERY BONUSES FOR TEACHERS IN MATH AND SCIENCE.
Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6601 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part E as part G; (2) by redesignating sections 2401 and 2402 as sections 2601 and 2602, respectively; and (3) by inserting after part D the following new part: ``PART E--SIGNING AND MASTERY BONUSES FOR TEACHERS IN MATH AND SCIENCE ``SEC.
SIGNING BONUSES FOR TEACHERS IN MATH AND SCIENCE.
Grants to State Educational Agencies.-- ``(1) Authority to award grants.--The Secretary shall award grants to State educational agencies to enable the agencies to assist local educational agencies to provide signing bonuses to middle or secondary school math or science teachers who agree to teach in a school in a high-need area during the 4-school year period that begins on the date on which the teacher is hired.
Criteria.--In order to receive a grant under this section, a State educational agency shall submit to the Secretary, for the Secretary's approval, a list of criteria for awarding the signing bonuses described in paragraph (1).
Such criteria shall require that-- ``(A) an individual receiving such a signing bonus have obtained licensing or certification to teach other than temporary or emergency licensing or certification; and ``(B) an individual receiving such a bonus-- ``(i) have an academic major or minor in the academic subject in which the individual intends to teach; or ``(ii) a work-related concentration in the academic subject in which the individual intends to teach.
Peer review board.--In order to receive a grant under this section, a State educational agency shall establish a peer review board to review criteria for providing signing bonuses under the grant.
Application.--In order to receive a grant under this section, a State educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Grants to Local Educational Agencies.-- ``(1) Authority to award grants.--A State educational agency that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use the funds made available through the grant to award grants to local educational agencies to provide the bonuses described in subsection (a).
Use of Funds.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under paragraph (1) shall use the funds made available through the grant to provide, during the 4-school year period described in subsection (a)(1), a signing bonus in the amount of $5,000 for each such year, for the hiring of a middle or secondary school math or science teacher who is eligible for an award based on the criteria in subsection (a)(2).
Application.--In order to receive a grant under this subsection, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the State educational agency at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the State educational agency may require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Definition of `High-Need Area'.--In this section, the term `high-need area' means an area, as determined by the local educational agency, in which-- ``(1) not less than 30 percent of the children served by the local educational agency are children eligible to be counted under section 1124(c)(2); and ``(2) the middle and secondary schools-- ``(A) have a higher percentage of uncertified or unlicensed math and science teachers than the corresponding percentage for the State; or ``(B) have a higher percentage of math and science teachers not trained in math and science than the corresponding percentage for the State.
MASTERY BONUSES FOR TEACHERS IN MATH AND SCIENCE.
Grants to State Educational Agencies.-- ``(1) Authority to award grants.--The Secretary shall award grants to State educational agencies to enable the agencies to assist local educational agencies to provide mastery bonuses to supplement the salaries of middle or secondary school math or science teachers who pass an advanced competency exam in math and science that is approved by the National Academy of Sciences and agree to teach during the 5-school year period that begins during or after the date on which the State educational agency determines that the teacher has passed the advanced competency exam.
Criteria.--In order to receive a grant under this section, a State educational agency shall submit to the Secretary, for the Secretary's approval, a list of criteria for awarding the mastery bonuses described in paragraph (1).
Such criteria shall require that-- ``(A) an individual receiving such a bonus have obtained licensing or certification to teach other than temporary or emergency licensing or certification; and ``(B) an individual receiving such a bonus have an academic or work-related concentration in the academic subject in which the individual intends to teach.
Peer review board.--In order to receive a grant under this section, a State educational agency shall establish a peer review board to review criteria for providing mastery bonuses under the grant.
Application.--In order to receive a grant under this section, a State educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Grants to Local Educational Agencies.-- ``(1) Authority to award grants.--A State educational agency that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use the funds made available through the grant to award grants to local educational agencies to provide the mastery bonuses described in subsection (a).
Use of funds.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under paragraph (1) shall use the funds made available through the grant to provide-- ``(A) a middle or secondary school math or science teacher who passes an advanced competency exam and teaches during the 5-school year period described in subsection (a)(1) with an additional $4,000 each such year; and ``(B) a middle or secondary school math or science teacher who passes an advanced competency exam and agrees to teach in a high-need area (as defined in section 2401(d) during the 5-school year period described in subsection (a)(1) with an additional $5,000 each such year.
Application.--In order to receive a grant under this subsection, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the State educational agency at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the State educational agency may require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.
MENTOR TEACHER PROGRAMS FOR MATH AND SCIENCE TEACHERS.
Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6601 et sequentes), as amended in section 1, is further amended by inserting after part E the following: ``PART F--MENTOR TEACHER PROGRAM ``SEC.
``The purposes of this part are to give local educational agencies the resources to establish mentor teacher programs to enable experienced teachers to train, support, and mentor novice teachers.
``In this part: ``(1) Board certified.--The term `board certified' means successful completion of all requirements to be certified by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards in the academic subject in which a teacher is teaching.
Mentor teacher.--The term `mentor teacher' means a teacher who-- ``(A) is fully certified or licensed; ``(B) has demonstrated mastery of pedagogical and subject matter skills (such as by becoming board certified); and ``(C) has provided evidence of superior teaching abilities and interpersonal relationship characteristics.
Novice teacher.--The term `novice teacher' means a teacher who-- ``(A) has been teaching not more than 3 years at a public elementary school or secondary school; and ``(B) is a math or science teacher.
Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible local educational agencies to develop and implement mentor teacher programs as described in subsection (e).
Duration.--The Secretary shall award grants under this subsection for periods of not more than 5 years.
Eligible Local Educational Agencies.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a) for a fiscal year, a local educational agency shall-- ``(1) be a local educational agency that has received a grant under section 2401 (relating to signing bonuses) for the fiscal year; and ``(2) agree to use the funds made available through the grant to develop and implement the mentor teacher programs in schools served by teachers who have received signing bonuses under section 2401 for the fiscal year.
Geographic Distribution.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall award the grants so that the grants are distributed among the local educational agencies with higher percentages of novice teachers, or lower percentages of certified or licensed teachers, than the corresponding percentages for the States in which the agencies are located.
Amount.--The amount of each grant shall be determined based on-- ``(1) the total amount appropriated for a fiscal year under section 2508 and made available to carry out this part; and ``(2) the extent of the concentration of novice teachers in the school district involved.
Authorized Activities.-- ``(1) Allocation by activity.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under subsection (a) for a mentor teacher program shall use-- ``(A) not less than 75 percent of the funds made available through the grant to pay for the Federal share of the cost of obtaining the services of the mentor teachers; and ``(B) not more than 25 percent of the funds to pay for other costs related to the development and implementation of the mentor teacher program.
Training.--The mentor teacher program shall provide training to novice teachers on effective teaching techniques (including techniques relating to class discipline and curriculum development) through observation, instruction, coaching, and mentoring by mentor teachers.
Federal share.-- ``(A) In general.--The Federal share of the cost described in paragraph (1)(A) is 75 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost may be provided from State sources in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, and services.
Supplement, Not Supplant.--Funds appropriated pursuant to the authority of this part shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, and local public funds expended to provide services for eligible individuals.
``A local educational agency desiring a grant under section 2503 shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
In General.--Grant payments shall be made under this part on an annual basis.
Administrative Costs.--Each local educational agency that receives a grant under section 2503 shall use not more than 2 percent of the amount awarded under the grant for administrative costs.
Denial of Grant.--If the Secretary determines that a local educational agency has failed to make substantial progress in attaining such performance objectives and goals as the Secretary may require the agency to establish, such an agency shall not be eligible for a grant payment under this part in the next succeeding year.
``The Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives a report of program activities funded under this part.
``The Secretary may not award a grant to a local educational agency under section 2503 unless the local educational agency agrees that, with respect to costs to be incurred by the agency in carrying out activities for which the grant was awarded, the agency shall provide (directly or through donations from public or private entities) in non- Federal contributions an amount equal to 25 percent of the amount of the grant awarded to the agency.
``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.