This Act may be cited as the ``Apollo Exploration Award Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) On July 20, 1969, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. ``Buzz'' Aldrin Jr., became the first humans to set foot on another celestial body, during the Apollo 11 mission, accompanied in lunar orbit by Michael Collins.
Between 1969 and 1972, ten other Americans courageously completed the first human exploration of the lunar surface, accompanied by five command module pilots: (A) Apollo 12--Charles J.
``Pete'' Conrad Jr., Alan L. Bean, and Richard Federal Reporter Gordon Jr. (B) Apollo 14--Alan B. Shepard Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa.
Apollo 15--David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden.
Apollo 16--John W. Young, Charles M. Duke Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II.
Apollo 17--Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Harrison H. Schmitt.
In April 1970, James A. Lovell Jr., John L. Swigert Jr., and Fred W. Haise Jr., valiantly made a safe return from the Moon on the Apollo 13 mission, after their command module was disabled by an explosion.
The enormous successes of the Apollo lunar landing missions were only possible due to the pioneering work of the previous Apollo missions, which performed critical testing of the spacecraft and methods, and conducted the first human travel to the Moon: (A) Apollo 7--Walter M. Schirra Jr., Donn Federal Reporter Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham.
Apollo 8--Frank Borman, James A. Lovell Jr., and William A. Anders.
Apollo 9--James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart.
Apollo 10--Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan.
In January 1967, astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee lost their lives in a tragic fire in the command module while testing the spacecraft which would have carried them on the first manned Apollo mission.
Since the time of the Apollo program, the program's astronauts have promoted space exploration and human endeavor by sharing their experiences with the American people and the world, stimulating the imagination and the belief that any goal can be achieved.
Sadly, astronauts John L. Swigert Jr., Donn Federal Reporter Eisele, Ronald E. Evans, James B. Irwin, Stuart A. Roosa, Alan B. Shepard Jr., and Charles J.
``Pete'' Conrad Jr., have died since completing their missions.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that the American people should provide a fitting and tangible tribute to each of the astronauts of the Apollo program, to recognize and commemorate their bravery, substantial scientific and technical accomplishments, and unique contributions to American and world history.
In General.--The Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Administrator'') shall design and present an appropriate award, to be named the ``Apollo Exploration Award'', commemorating the accomplishments of the astronauts who flew in the Apollo program.
Design.--The Administrator shall ensure that the Apollo Exploration Award shall have the following characteristics: (1) A lunar rock sample shall be the central feature of the award.
The design of the award shall permit free access to and removal of the lunar sample by the award recipient.
Presentation.--The Administrator shall present one award created under this Act to each of the following Apollo astronauts, or if such person is deceased, to his closest living family member or heir (as determined by the Administrator): (1) Buzz Aldrin (formerly known as Edwin E. Aldrin Jr.) of Apollo 11.
William A. Anders of Apollo 8.
Neil A. Armstrong of Apollo 11.
Alan L. Bean of Apollo 12.
Frank Borman of Apollo 8.
Eugene A. Cernan of Apollo 10 and Apollo 17.
Roger B. Chafee of Apollo 1.
Michael Collins of Apollo 11.
``Pete'' Conrad Jr. of Apollo 12.
R. Walter Cunningham of Apollo 7.
Charles M. Duke Jr. of Apollo 16.
Donn Federal Reporter Eisele of Apollo 7.
Ronald E. Evans of Apollo 17.
Richard Federal Reporter Gordon Jr. of Apollo 12.
Virgil I. Grissom of Apollo 1.
Fred W. Haise Jr. of Apollo 13.
James B. Irwin of Apollo 15.
James A. Lovell Jr. of Apollo 8 and Apollo 13.
Thomas K. Mattingly II of Apollo 16.
James A. McDivitt of Apollo 9.
Edgar D. Mitchell of Apollo 14.
Stuart A. Roosa of Apollo 14.
Walter M. Schirra Jr. of Apollo 7.
Harrison H. Schmitt of Apollo 17.
Russell L. Schweickart of Apollo 9.
David R. Scott of Apollo 9 and Apollo 15.
Alan B. Shepard Jr. of Apollo 14.
Thomas P. Stafford of Apollo 10.
John L. Swigert Jr. of Apollo 13.
Edward H. White of Apollo 1.
Alfred M. Worden of Apollo 15.
John W. Young of Apollo 10 and Apollo 16.
No person may use an award presented under this Act for monetary gain or profit.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, ownership interest in an award presented under this Act may not be-- (1) sold, traded, bartered, or exchanged for anything of value; or (2) otherwise transferred, other than to a family member of the original recipient of the award or by inheritance.
Exception for Public Display.--The prohibition in subsection (a) does not apply to a transfer to a museum or nonprofit organization for the purpose of public display.
Reversion.--Ownership of an award presented under this Act reverts to the Administrator if-- (1) no person inherits the award after the death of its owner; or (2) the award is not being displayed publicly under subsection (b).
RECALL OF LUNAR MATERIAL.
In General.--The Administrator may recall a lunar sample contained in an award presented under this Act if the Administrator determines that the particular lunar sample is required for scientific purposes.
Prompt Return.--The Administrator shall promptly return a lunar sample recalled under subsection (a) to its owner when such sample is no longer required for scientific purposes.
Replacement.--The Administrator may replace a lunar sample recalled under subsection (a) with a substantially equivalent lunar sample if the Administrator determines that such recalled lunar sample will not be promptly returned in its entirety and without substantial degradation.
Passed the House of Representatives September 26, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.