SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR PURCHASE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE BY FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYER.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
PURCHASE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE BY FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYER.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a first-time homebuyer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter an amount equal to 10 percent of the purchase price of the first principal residence purchased by the taxpayer during the eligibility period.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, such credit shall be allowed for the taxable year in which such residence is purchased.
Limitation.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) to the taxpayer shall not exceed $2,500.
First-Time Homebuyer.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `first-time homebuyer' means any individual unless such individual or such individual's spouse had a present ownership interest in any principal residence at any time during the 3-year period ending on the date of the purchase of the residence referred to in subsection (a).
Unmarried joint owners.--An individual shall not be treated as a first-time homebuyer with respect to any residence unless all the individuals purchasing such residence with such individual are first-time homebuyers.
Allocation of limits.--All individuals purchasing a residence shall be treated as 1 individual for purposes of determining the maximum credit under subsection (a), and such maximum credit shall be allocated among such individuals under regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Certain individuals ineligible.--The term `first-time homebuyer' shall not include any individual if, on the date of the purchase of the residence, the period of time specified in section 1034(a) is suspended under subsection (a)(6), (h), or (k) of section 1034 with respect to such individual.
Special rule for certain contracts of deed.--In the case of an individual described in section 143(i)(1)(C) for any year, an ownership interest shall not include a contract of deed described in such section.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Eligibility period.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligibility period' means the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this section.
Binding contracts.--A residence shall be treated as purchased during the eligibility period if-- ``(i) during the eligibility period, the purchaser enters into a binding contract to purchase the residence, and ``(ii) the purchaser purchases and occupies the residence on or before the date 3 months after the last day of the eligibility period.
For purposes of clause (i), a contract shall not fail to be treated as binding merely because it is contingent on financing or on the condition of the residence.
Purchase.--The term `purchase' means any acquisition of property, but only if-- ``(A) the property is not acquired from a person whose relationship to the person acquiring it would result in the disallowance of losses under section 267 or 707(b), and ``(B) the basis of the property in the hands of the person acquiring it is not determined-- ``(i) in whole or in part by reference to the adjusted basis of such property in the hands of the person from whom acquired, or ``(ii) under section 1014(a) (relating to property acquired from a decedent).
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 1034.
Purchase price.--The term `purchase price' means the adjusted basis of the residence on the date of its acquisition.
Carryover of Unused Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--If-- ``(A) the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds ``(B) the limitation imposed by section 26(a) reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under sections 21 and 22, such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and shall be allowable under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
5-year limit on carryforward.--No amount may be carried under paragraph (1) to any taxable year after the 5th taxable year after the taxable year in which the residence is purchased.
Recapture of Credit for Certain Dispositions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), if the taxpayer disposes of property with respect to the purchase of which a credit was allowed under subsection (a) and such disposition occurs at any time within 36 months after the date the taxpayer acquired the property as his principal residence, then the tax imposed under this chapter for the taxable year in which the disposition occurs is increased by an amount equal to the amount allowed as a credit for the purchase of such property.
Acquisition of new residence.--If, in connection with a disposition described in paragraph (1) and within the applicable period prescribed in section 1034, the taxpayer purchases a new principal residence, then paragraph (1) shall not apply and the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which the new principal residence is purchased is increased to the extent the amount of the credit that could be claimed under this section on the purchase of the new residence (were such residence the first residence purchased during the eligibility period) is less than the amount of credit claimed by the taxpayer under this section.
Death of owner; casualty loss; involuntary conversion; etc.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to-- ``(A) a disposition of a residence made on account of the death of any individual having a legal or equitable interest therein occurring during the 36- month period referred to in paragraph (1), ``(B) a disposition of the old residence if it is substantially or completely destroyed by a casualty described in section 165(c)(3) or compulsorily or involuntarily converted (within the meaning of section 1033(a)), or ``(C) a disposition pursuant to a settlement in a divorce or legal separation proceeding where the residence is sold or the other spouse retains the residence as a principal residence.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
Purchase of principal residence by first-time homebuyer.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.