This Act may be cited as the ``Iran Freedom and Democracy Support Act''.
The Government of Iran is currently seeking to develop nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction and has an active and successful ballistic missile program.
Recent revelations have shown that Iran is further along than previously believed in enriching uranium and developing nuclear weapons, and may only be months away from developing the capability to manufacture nuclear weapons.
There is currently not a democratic government in Iran.
Iran is an ideological dictatorship presided over by an unelected ``Supreme Leader'' with limitless veto power, an unelected Expediency Council, a Council of Guardians capable of eviscerating any reforms, and a President elected only after the Council disqualified 234 other candidates for being too liberal, reformist, or secular.
The April 2003 Department of State report on terrorism indicates that Iran remained the most active state sponsor of terrorism in 2002.
That report also states that Iran continues to provide funding, safehaven, training, and weapons to known terrorist groups, notably Hizballah, HAMAS, the Palestine Islamic Jihad, and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
Human rights have failed to improve in Iran under the pseudo-reformers.
Torture, executions after unfair trials, and censorship of all media remain rampant throughout the country.
Stoning and beheading are used as methods of punishment.
While the Government of Iran remains overtly hostile to the United States, the people of Iran have demonstrated that they wish for improved relations with the United States.
The people of Iran have demonstrated their desire for a democratically-elected, more secular government, committed to protecting the human rights of all of its citizens.
The people of Iran have also demonstrated their desire to see such changes come about through an internationally-monitored referendum.
It is the policy of the United States to-- (1) support transparent, full democracy in Iran; (2) support an internationally-monitored referendum in Iran by which the Iranian people can peacefully change the system of government in Iran; (3) support the aspirations of the Iranian people to live in freedom; and (4) help the Iranian people achieve a free press and build an open, democratic, and free society.
In General.--The Broadcasting Board of Governors shall-- (1) require the head of Radio Farda to develop programming for Radio Farda, after consulting with-- (A) Iranian-Americans and other Iranian exiles who-- (i) support a referendum described in section 3(2); and (ii) oppose the current Government of Iran; and (B) the Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI) at the Department of State and the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs (ECA) at the Department of State; and (2) ensure that a significant percentage of the programming on Radio Farda is devoted to discussing democratic change in Iran including an internationally-monitored democratic referendum in Iran as described in section 3(2).
Translations of Written and Video Materials for the Iranian People.-- (1) Requirement.--The MEPI and ECA shall provide grants to appropriate entities to create and maintain websites, translate and distribute books, videos, documents, and other materials on democracy, rule of law free market economics, and related topics.
Consultation.--The MEPI and ECA shall consult with nongovernmental entities and with Iranian-American opposition groups that support the holding of an internationally-monitored referendum in Iran as described in section 3(2) to select materials to be translated into Persian.
Iran Democracy Support Initiative.-- (1) Authority.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the MEPI and ECA are authorized to award grants to an eligible entity for the purpose of funding programs and activities to promote a democratic referendum in Iran.
Eligible entity.--The following persons are eligible for grants under paragraph (1): (A) A person who provides radio or television broadcasting into Iran that includes programming intended to promote an internationally-monitored democratic referendum in Iran.
A person who is working to promote the holding of an internationally-monitored referendum in Iran, as described in section 3(2).
Authorization of Appropriations.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not less than 5 percent of the funds appropriated to the International Broadcasting Operations account for fiscal year 2004 shall be made available to carry out the provisions of this Act.
IMMEDIATELY ENDING THE UNITED STATES IMPORTATION OF IRANIAN GOODS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law and except as provided in section 6, no textile or food article that is produced, grown, or manufactured in Iran shall enter or be imported into the United States.
CONDITIONS FOR THE RESUMPTION OF UNITED STATES IMPORTATION OF IRANIAN GOODS.
The President may waive the prohibition on the importation of Iranian goods to the United States beginning on or after the date on which the President transmits to Congress a certification stating that-- (1) Iran has shown substantial progress in respecting generally recognized human rights standards including due process under law; (2) Iran has ceased its support for international terrorism; and (3) Iran has terminated its program to develop nuclear weapons.
TRANSFER OF FUNDS TO USAID.
Transfer.--If, beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, an international financial institution to which the United States is a member provides a loan, guarantee, grant, or other form of assistance to Iran, then, notwithstanding any other provision of law, an amount equal to the amount of such assistance may, from amounts available for United States contributions to the international financial institution involved, be made available to the United States Agency for International Development for programs to promote child survival and to combat HIV/AIDS.
Rule of Construction.--For purposes of subsection (a), the various international financial institutions of the World Bank Group shall be considered to comprise a single international financial institution.
Termination.--The authority of this section shall terminate on the date on which the President transmits to Congress a certification under section 6.
REPORTS ON AL QAEDA PRESENCE IN IRAN.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and not later than 1 year thereafter, the President shall transmit to Congress report on the presence of elements of the al Qaeda terrorist organization on the territory of Iran and the posture of the Government of Iran toward these elements.