This Act may be cited as the ``Ferry Transportation Enhancement Act''.
AUTHORIZATION OF FUNDING FOR CONSTRUCTION OF FERRY BOATS AND FERRY TERMINAL FACILITIES.
Funding.--Section 1064(c) of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (23 United States Code 129 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Funding.-- ``(1) In general.--There shall be available, out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account), to the Secretary for obligation at the discretion of the Secretary $150,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009.
Sums made available to carry out this section shall remain available until expended.
Allocation of funds.--The Secretary shall give priority in the allocation of funds under this section to those ferry systems, and public entities responsible for developing facilities for ferries, that carry the greatest number of passengers and vehicles, carry the greatest number of passengers in passenger-only service, or provide critical access to areas that are not well-served by other modes of surface transportation.''.
ELIGIBILITY OF FERRY MAINTENANCE FACILITIES FOR FEDERAL FUNDING.
Maintenance Facilities.--Section 129(c) of title 23, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting ``and maintenance'' after ``terminal''; and (2) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``and maintenance'' after ``terminal'' each place it appears.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 1064 of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (23 United States Code 129 note) is amended by inserting ``and maintenance'' after ``terminal'' each place it appears.
ELIGIBILITY OF FERRIES FOR CLEAN FUELS PROGRAM.
Section 5308 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(3) (i) and (iii) and subsection (e), by inserting ``or ferries'' after ``buses'' each place it appears; (2) in subsection (c) and (e), by inserting ``or ferry'' after ``bus'' each place it appears; (3) in the heading for subsection (e)(2), by inserting ``or ferries'' after ``buses''; and (4) in the heading for subsection (e)(3), by inserting ``or ferry'' after ``bus''.
FERRY JOINT PROGRAM OFFICE.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Transportation shall establish a Ferry Joint Program Office (in this section, referred to as the ``Office'') to coordinate Federal programs affecting ferry boat and ferry facility construction, maintenance, and operations and to promote ferry service as a component of the Nation's transportation system.
The Ferry Joint Program Office shall coordinate ferry and ferry-related programs within the Department of Transportation (including the Federal Highway Administration, the Federal Transit Administration, the Maritime Administration, and the Bureau of Transportation Statistics) and with the Department of Homeland Security and other Federal and State agencies, as appropriate.
Functions.--The functions of the Office shall include-- (1) ensuring resource accountability; (2) coordinating policy relating to ferry transportation among the various agencies of the Department of Transportation and other departments of the United States Government; (3) providing strategic leadership for ferry research, development, testing, and deployment; and (4) promoting ferry transportation as a means to reduce social, economic, and environmental costs associated with traffic congestion.
NATIONAL FERRY DATA BASE.
In General.--The Secretary of Transportation shall maintain a national ferry database, which shall contain current information regarding ferry systems, routes, vessels, passengers and vehicles carried, funding sources, and such other information as the Secretary deems useful.
The Secretary shall utilize the study generated as a result of section 1207(c) of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, and make modifications to that study, as appropriate.
Updated Database.--The Secretary shall produce the first updated version of the national ferry database within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act and every 2 years thereafter.
Public Accessibility.--The Secretary shall ensure that the national ferry database is easily accessible to the public.
NATIONAL FERRY TRANSPORTATION INSTITUTE.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Transportation shall make grants to an institution of higher education, within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, to establish a National Ferry Transportation Institute (in this section, referred to as the ``Institute'').
Administration.--The Secretary shall develop and administer the Institute in cooperation with the Department of Transportation, State transportation departments, public ferry transportation authorities, private ferry operators, ferry boat builders, ferry employees, and other institutions of higher education and research institutes.
Functions.--The Institute shall-- (1) conduct research and recommend development activities on methods of improving ferry transportation programs in the United States, including methods of reducing wake and providing alternative propulsion; (2) develop and conduct training programs for ferry system employees, United States Government employees, and other individuals, as appropriate, on recent developments, techniques, and procedures pertaining to the construction and operation of ferries; (3) encourage and assist collaborative efforts by public and private entities to preserve, improve, and expand the use of ferries as a mode of transportation; and (4) preserve, utilize, and display historical information about the use of ferries in the United States and in foreign countries.
Location.--In selecting the location for the Institute, the Secretary shall consider-- (1) the importance of public and private ferries to the region's transportation system, including both regional travel and long-range travel and service to isolated communities; (2) the historical importance of ferry transportation to the region; (3) the history and diversity of the region's maritime community, including ferry construction and repair and other shipbuilding activities; (4) the anticipated growth of ferry service and ferry boat building in the region; (5) the availability of public-private collaboration in the region; and (6) the presence of nationally recognized research universities in the region.
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009, to carry out activities under this section by the Institute.
The Secretary may authorize the acceptance and expenditure of funding provided to the Institute by public and private entities.
Report.--The Secretary shall report to Congress not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, on the activities of the Institute and the progress in carrying out this section.