This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Interest Checking Act of 2001''.
INTEREST-BEARING TRANSACTION ACCOUNTS AUTHORIZED FOR ALL BUSINESSES.
Section 2 of Public Law 93-100 (12 United States Code 1832) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following: ``(b) Business Account Transactions Authorized.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any depository institution may permit the owner of any deposit or account that is a deposit or account on which interest or dividends are paid and is not a deposit or account described in subsection (a)(2), to make not more than 24 transfers per month (or such greater number as the Board may determine, by rule or order), for any purpose, to another account of the owner in the same institution.
Status as transaction account.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent an account offered pursuant to this subsection from being considered a transaction account (as defined in section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act) for purposes of that Act.''.
PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON RESERVES AT FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS.
In General.--Section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12) Earnings on reserves.-- ``(A) In general.--Balances maintained at a Federal reserve bank by or on behalf of a depository institution may receive earnings to be paid by the Federal reserve bank not less frequently than once in each calendar quarter, at a rate or rates not to exceed the general level of short-term interest rates.
Regulations relating to payments and distribution.--The Board may prescribe regulations concerning-- ``(i) the payment of earnings in accordance with this paragraph; ``(ii) the distribution of such earnings to the depository institutions which maintain balances at such banks, or on behalf of which such balances are maintained; and ``(iii) the responsibilities of depository institutions, Federal home loan banks, and the National Credit Union Administration Central Liquidity Facility with respect to the crediting and distribution of earnings attributable to balances maintained, in accordance with subsection (c)(1)(B), in a Federal reserve bank by any such entity on behalf of depository institutions.''.
Authorization for Pass Through Reserves for Member Banks.-- Section 19(c)(1)(B) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(c)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``which is not a member bank''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--Section 19 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(4) (12 United States Code 461(b)(4)), by striking subparagraph (C) and redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and (2) in subsection (c)(1)(A) (12 United States Code 461(c)(1)(A)), by striking ``subsection (b)(4)(C)'' and inserting ``subsection (b)''.
INCREASED FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FLEXIBILITY IN SETTING RESERVE REQUIREMENTS.
Section 19(b)(2) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``the ratio of 3 per centum'' and inserting ``a ratio not greater than 3 percent (and which may be zero)''; and (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``and not less than 8 per centum,'' and inserting ``(and which may be zero),''.
TRANSFER OF FEDERAL RESERVE SURPLUSES.
In General.--Section 7(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 290) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Additional transfers to cover interest payments for fiscal years 2001 through 2005.-- ``(A) In general.--In addition to the amounts required to be transferred from the surplus funds of the Federal reserve banks pursuant to paragraph (1), the Federal reserve banks shall transfer from such surplus funds to the Board for transfer to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury, such sums as are necessary to equal the net cost of section 19(b)(12), as estimated by the Office of Management and Budget, in each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Allocation by federal reserve board.--Of the total amount required to be paid by the Federal reserve banks under subparagraph (A) for fiscal years 2002 through 2006, the Board shall determine the amount that each such bank shall pay in any such fiscal year.
Replenishment of surplus fund prohibited.-- During fiscal years 2002 through 2006, no Federal reserve bank may replenish the surplus fund of that bank by the amount of any transfer by that bank under subparagraph (A).''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--Section 7(a) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 289(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Payment to treasury.--During fiscal years 2002 through 2006, any amount in the surplus fund of any Federal reserve bank in excess of the amount equal to 3 percent of the paid-in capital and surplus of the member banks of such bank shall be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury.