DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE-DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS JOINT EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Establishment of Joint Committee.--(1) Chapter 3 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Department of Veterans Affairs-Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee ``(a) Joint Executive Committee.--(1) There is established an interagency committee to be known as the Department of Veterans Affairs-Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Committee').
The Committee is composed of-- ``(A) the Deputy Secretary of Veterans Affairs and such other officers and employees of the Department of Veterans Affairs as the Secretary of Veterans Affairs may designate; and ``(B) the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and such other officers and employees of the Department of Defense as the Secretary of Defense may designate.
Administrative Matters.--(1) The Deputy Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Under Secretary of Defense shall determine the size and structure of the Committee, as well as the administrative and procedural guidelines for the operation of the Committee.
The two Departments shall supply appropriate staff and resources to provide administrative support and services.
Support for such purposes shall be provided at a level sufficient for the efficient operation of the Committee, including a subordinate Health Executive Committee, a subordinate Benefits Executive Committee, and such other committees or working groups as considered necessary by the Deputy Secretary and Under Secretary.
Recommendations.--(1) The Committee shall recommend to the Secretaries strategic direction for the joint coordination and sharing efforts between and within the two Departments under section 8111 of this title and shall oversee implementation of those efforts.
The Committee shall submit to the two Secretaries and to Congress an annual report containing such recommendations as the Committee considers appropriate.
Functions.--In order to enable the Committee to make recommendations in its annual report under subsection (c)(2), the Committee shall do the following: ``(1) Review existing policies, procedures, and practices relating to the coordination and sharing of resources between the two Departments.
Identify changes in policies, procedures, and practices that, in the judgment of the Committee, would promote mutually beneficial coordination, use, or exchange of use of services and resources of the two Departments, with the goal of improving the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the delivery of benefits and services to veterans, service members, military retirees and their families through an enhanced Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense partnership.
Identify and assess further opportunities for the coordination and collaboration between the Departments that, in the judgment of the Committee, would not adversely affect the range of services, the quality of care, or the established priorities for benefits provided by either Department.
Review the plans of both Departments for the acquisition of additional resources, especially new facilities and major equipment and technology, in order to assess the potential effect of such plans on further opportunities for the coordination and sharing of resources.
Review the implementation of activities designed to promote the coordination and sharing of resources between the Departments.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``320.
Department of Veterans Affairs-Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Subsection (c) of section 8111 of such title is repealed.
Such section is further amended-- (A) in subsection (b)(2), by striking ``subsection (c)'' and inserting ``section 320 of this title''; (B) in subsection (d)(1), by striking ``Committee established in subsection (c)'' and inserting ``Department of Veterans Affairs-Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee''; (C) in subsection (e)(1), by striking ``Committee under subsection (c)(2)'' and inserting ``Department of Veterans Affairs-Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee with respect to health care resources''; and (D) in subsection (f)(2), by striking subparagraphs (B) and (C) and inserting the following: ``(B) The assessment of further opportunities identified by the Department of Veterans Affairs-Department of Defense Joint Executive Committee under subsection (d)(3) of section 320 of this title for the sharing of health-care resources between the two Departments.
Any recommendation made by that committee under subsection (c)(2) of that section during that fiscal year.''.
Technical Amendments.--Subsection (f) of such section is further amended by inserting ``(Public Law 107-314)'' in paragraphs (3), (4)(A), (4)(B), and (5) after ``for Fiscal Year 2003''.
Effective Date.--(1) If this Act is enacted before October 1, 2003-- (A) section 320 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect on October 1, 2003; and (B) the amendments made by subsections (b) and (c) shall take effect on October 1, 2003, immediately after the amendment made by section 721(a)(1) of the Bob Stump National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2003 (Public Law 107-314; 116 2589).
If this Act is enacted on or after October 1, 2003, the amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives May 21, 2003.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.