This Act may be cited as the ``Combined Sewer Overflow Control and Partnership Act of 1998''.
Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1342) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(q) Combined Sewer Overflows.-- ``(1) Requirement for permits, orders, and decrees.--Each permit, order, or decree issued pursuant to this Act for a discharge from a combined storm and sanitary sewer shall conform to the Combined Sewer Overflow Control Policy signed by the Administrator on April 11, 1994.
Term of permit, order, or decree.-- ``(A) Authority to issue.--Notwithstanding any schedule for compliance authorized by section 301(b), or any permit limitation authorized by subsection (b)(1)(B) of this section, the Administrator or the State (in the case of a State with a program approved under subsection (b)) may issue or execute a permit, order, or decree consistent with this section for a discharge from a combined storm and sanitary sewer.
Schedule for compliance.-- ``(i) In general.--A permit, order, or decree issued pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall include a schedule for compliance, within a period of not to exceed 15 years, with a long-term control plan under the Control Policy referred to in paragraph (1).
Exception.--Notwithstanding clause (i), a compliance schedule of longer than 15 years may be granted if the owner or operator demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator or the State, as appropriate, reasonable further progress towards compliance with a long-term plan under the Control Policy and if the Administrator or the State, as appropriate, determines-- ``(I) that compliance within 15 years is not within the economic capability of the owner or operator; or ``(II) that a longer period is otherwise appropriate.
Savings clause.--Any administrative or judicial decree or order issued before the date of enactment of this subsection establishing any deadline, schedule, or timetable for the construction of treatment works for control of any discharge from a municipal combined sewer system may, at the request of the municipal owner or operator, be modified to extend any such deadline, schedule, or timetable to conform with the requirements of paragraph (2).
Water quality standards-designated use review.--No permit, order, or decree issued pursuant to this Act shall require compliance with water quality based requirements contained in a long-term control plan under the Control Policy referred to in paragraph (1) unless the Administrator or the State, as appropriate, has completed the water quality standards-designated use review process called for in the Control Policy, including the adoption of any refinements needed to reflect the site-specific wet weather impacts of combined sewer overflows and to ensure that the long-term control plan provides for cost-effective compliance with water quality standards.
Consideration shall be given to conducting these reviews on a watershed basis where appropriate.
Nothing in this subsection may be construed to affect either the authority to conduct or scheduling of water quality standard reviews required under section 303(c).
Grants.-- ``(A) In general.--The Administrator may make grants to any municipality or municipal entity for planning, design, and construction of facilities to intercept, transport, control, or treat combined storm and sanitary sewer flows.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of activities carried out using amounts from a grant made under subparagraph (A) shall be at least 55 percent of the cost.
The non-Federal share of the cost may include, in any amount, public and private funds and in-kind services.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this paragraph $500,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $750,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2001.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
Reports.--On or before January 1, 2001, and once every 2 years thereafter, the Administrator shall transmit to Congress a report containing recommended funding levels for the 2 fiscal years following the date of the report for activities relating to combined storm and sanitary sewer flows described in subparagraph (A).