This Act may be cited as the ``Supporting Success for High Need Students Act of 2003''.
HIGH COST FUND FOR LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
Part B of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1411 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
HIGH COST FUND FOR LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Average per-pupil expenditure.--The term `average per-pupil expenditure' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
High need child.--The term `high need child' means a child with a disability for whom a free appropriate public education in a fiscal year costs more than 4 times the average per-pupil expenditure for such fiscal year.
Authorization of Grant Program and Allotment.-- ``(1) Reservation.--From funds appropriated under subsection (h), the Secretary shall reserve-- ``(A) not more than 1 percent to assist the outlying areas in providing a free appropriate public education to children with disabilities in such areas for whom a free appropriate public education costs more than 4 times the national average per-pupil expenditure or 4 times the average per-pupil expenditure in the outlying area; and ``(B) 1.226 percent to assist the Secretary of the Interior in providing a free appropriate public education to children with disabilities on reservations who are enrolled in schools for Indian children operated or funded by the Secretary of the Interior for whom a free appropriate public education costs more than 4 times the national average per-pupil expenditure or 4 times the average per-pupil expenditure in such schools.
Grant Program.--From funds appropriated under subsection (h), and not reserved under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall award grants to State educational agencies, from allotments under paragraph (3), to enable the State educational agencies to establish high cost funds, as described in subsection (c), from which local educational agencies shall receive disbursements to pay a percentage of the costs of providing a free appropriate public education to high need children and other high costs, as described in subsection (c)(3), associated with educating children with disabilities.
Allotment.--From funds appropriated under subsection (h) for a fiscal year, and not reserved under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall allot to each State an amount that bears the same ratio to such funds as the amount the State received under section 611 for the fiscal year bears to the total amount received by all States under that section for the fiscal year.
High Cost Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant under subsection (b) shall-- ``(A) use the grant funds to establish a high cost fund; and ``(B) make disbursements from the high cost fund to local educational agencies in accordance with this subsection.
Required disbursements from the fund.-- ``(A) In general.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant under subsection (b) shall make disbursements from the fund established under paragraph (1) to local educational agencies to pay the percentage described in subparagraph (C) of the costs of providing a free appropriate public education to high need children.
Application.-- ``(i) In general.--A local educational agency that desires a disbursement under this paragraph shall submit an application to the State educational agency at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the State educational agency may require.
Contents.--An application submitted pursuant to clause (i) shall contain the following: ``(I) A figure that reflects the costs of providing a free appropriate public education to each high need child served by the local educational agency in a fiscal year for whom such agency desires a disbursement under this section.
The IEP for each high need child served by the local educational agency for whom such agency desires a disbursement under this section.
Assurances that grant funds provided under this section shall not be used to pay costs that otherwise would be reimbursable as medical assistance for a child with a disability under the State medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
Disbursements.-- ``(i) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (D), a State educational agency shall make a disbursement to a local educational agency that submits an application under subparagraph (B) in an amount that is equal to 75 percent of the costs that are in excess of 4 times the average per-pupil expenditure in either the Nation or the State where the child resides (calculated from whichever average per-pupil expenditure is lower) associated with educating each high need child served by such local educational agency in a fiscal year for whom such agency desires a disbursement.
Appropriate costs.--The costs associated with educating a high need child under clause (i) are only those costs associated with providing special education and related services to such child that are identified in such child's appropriately developed IEP.
Disallowance of certain payments.--A State educational agency may disallow payment of certain costs included in the figure submitted by a local educational agency under subparagraph (B)(ii)(I) if such costs are determined by the State educational agency to be inappropriate or unnecessary excess costs associated with providing a free appropriate public education to a high need child.
Legal fees.--The costs associated with providing a free appropriate public education to a high need child shall not include legal fees, court costs, or other costs associated with a cause of action brought on behalf of such child to ensure a free appropriate public education for such child.
Permissible disbursements from remaining funds.--A State educational agency may make disbursements to local educational agencies from any funds that are remaining in the high cost fund after making the required disbursements under paragraph (2) for a fiscal year for the following purposes: ``(A) To pay the costs associated with serving children with disabilities who moved into the areas served by such local educational agencies after commencement of the school year to assist the local educational agencies in providing a free appropriate public education for such children in such year.
To compensate local educational agencies that expend over a threshold amount determined by the State educational agency on costs associated with providing a free appropriate public education to all children with disabilities served by such agencies.
Limitation on administrative costs.--A State educational agency may use not more than 2 percent of the funds received under this section for the administrative costs of carrying out such agency's responsibilities under this section.
Assurance of a Free Appropriate Public Education.--Nothing in this section shall be construed-- ``(1) to limit or condition the right of a child with a disability who is assisted under this part to receive a free appropriate public education pursuant to section 612(a)(1) in a least restrictive environment pursuant to section 612(a)(5); and ``(2) to authorize a State educational agency or local educational agency to indicate a limit on what is expected to be spent on the education of a child with a disability.
Evaluation and Report.--The Secretary shall-- ``(1) evaluate the effectiveness of the high cost funds established pursuant to this section; and ``(2) submit a report to the appropriate committees of Congress on such evaluation.
Supplement, Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, and local funds available for providing a free appropriate public education for children with disabilities.
Medicaid Services Not Affected.--Grant funds provided under this section shall not be used to pay costs that otherwise would be reimbursable as medical assistance for a child with a disability under the State medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $750,000,000 for fiscal year 2004 and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal year.