CONVEYANCE OF CERTAIN LIGHTHOUSES LOCATED IN MAINE.
Authority To Convey.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (3) and (4), the Secretary of Transportation may convey, without consideration, to the Island Institute, Rockland, Maine (in this section referred to as the ``Institute''), all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to any of the facilities and real property and improvements described in paragraph (2).
Covered facilities.--Paragraph (1) applies to lighthouses, together with any real property and other improvements associated therewith, located in the State of Maine as follows: (A) Whitehead Island Light.
Deer Island Thorofare (Mark Island) Light.
Rockland Harbor Breakwater Light.
Great Duck Island Light.
Isle au Haut Light.
Doubling Point Front Range Light.
Doubling Point Rear Range Light.
Spring Point Ledge Light.
Ram Island Light (Boothbay).
West Quoddy Head Light.
Ram Island Ledge Light.
Mount Desert Rock Light.
Limitation on conveyance.--The Secretary shall retain all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to any historical artifact, including any lens or lantern, that is associated with the lighthouses conveyed under this subsection, whether located at the lighthouse or elsewhere.
The Secretary shall identify any equipment, system, or object covered by this paragraph.
Deadline for conveyance.--The conveyances authorized by this subsection shall take place, if at all, not later than 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Additional conveyances to united states fish and wildlife service.--The Secretary may transfer, in accordance with the terms and conditions of subsection (b), the following lighthouses, together with any real property and improvements associated therewith, directly to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service: (A) Two Bush Island Light.
Conditions of Conveyance.--The conveyance of a lighthouse, and any real property and improvements associated therewith, under subsection (a) shall be subject to the following conditions: (1) That the lighthouse and any such property and improvements be used for educational, historic, recreational, cultural, and wildlife conservation programs for the general public and for such other uses as the Secretary determines to be not inconsistent or incompatible with such uses.
That the lighthouse and any such property and improvements be maintained at no cost to the United States in a manner that ensures the use of the lighthouse by the Coast Guard as an aid to navigation.
That the use of the lighthouse and any such property and improvements by the Coast Guard as an aid to navigation not be interfered with, except with the written permission of the Secretary.
That the lighthouse and any such property and improvements be maintained in a manner consistent with the provisions of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes).
That public access to the lighthouse and any such property and improvements be ensured.
Reservations.--In the conveyance of a lighthouse under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall reserve to the United States the following: (1) The right to enter the lighthouse, and any real property and improvements conveyed therewith, at any time, without notice, for purposes of maintaining any aid to navigation at the lighthouse, including any light, antennae, sound signal, and associated equipment located at the lighthouse, and any electronic navigation equipment or system located at the lighthouse.
The right to enter the lighthouse and any such property and improvements at any time, without notice, for purposes of relocating, replacing, or improving any such aid to navigation, or to carry out any other activity necessary in aid of navigation.
An easement of ingress and egress onto the real property conveyed for the purposes referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2).
An easement over such portion of such property as the Secretary considers appropriate in order to ensure the visibility of the lighthouse for navigation purposes.
The right to obtain and remove any historical artifact, including any lens or lantern that the Secretary has identified pursuant to paragraph (3) of subsection (a).
Maintenance of Aids to Navigation.--The Secretary may not impose upon the Institute, or upon any entity to which the Institute conveys a lighthouse under subsection (g), an obligation to maintain any aid to navigation at a lighthouse conveyed under subsection (a)(1).
Reversionary Interest.--All right, title, and interest in and to a lighthouse and any real property and improvements associated therewith that is conveyed to the Institute under subsection (a)(1) shall revert to the United States and the United States shall have the right of immediate entry thereon if-- (1) the Secretary determines at any time that the lighthouse, and any property and improvements associated therewith, is not being utilized or maintained in accordance with subsection (b); or (2) the Secretary determines that-- (A) the Institute is unable to identify an entity eligible for the conveyance of the lighthouse under subsection (g) within the 3-year period beginning on the date of the conveyance of the lighthouse to the Institute under subsection (a)(1); or (B) in the event that the Institute identifies an entity eligible for the conveyance within that period-- (i) the entity is unable or unwilling to accept the conveyance and the Institute is unable to identify another entity eligible for the conveyance within that period; or (ii) the committee established under subsection (g)(3)(A) disapproves of the entity identified by the Institute and the Institute is unable to identify another entity eligible for the conveyance within that period.
Inspection.--The State Historic Preservation Officer of the State of Maine may inspect any lighthouse, and any real property and improvements associated therewith, that is conveyed under this section at any time, without notice, for purposes of ensuring that the lighthouse is being maintained in the manner required under subsections (b)(4) and (b)(5).
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the Institute, and any subsequent conveyee of the Institute under subsection (g), shall cooperate with the official referred to in the preceding sentence in the inspections of that official under this subsection.
Subsequent Conveyance.-- (1) Requirement.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Institute shall convey, without consideration, all right, title, and interest of the Institute in and to the lighthouses conveyed to the Institute under subsection (a)(1), together with any real property and improvements associated therewith, to one or more entities identified under paragraph (2) and approved by the committee established under paragraph (3) in accordance with the provisions of such paragraph (3).
Exception.--The Institute, with the concurrence of the committee and in accordance with the terms and conditions of subsection (b), may retain right, title, and interest in and to the following lighthouses conveyed to the Institute: (i) Whitehead Island Light.
Deer Island Thorofare (Mark Island) Light.
Identification of eligible entities.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the Institute shall identify entities eligible for the conveyance of a lighthouse under this subsection.
Such entities shall include any department or agency of the Federal Government, any department or agency of the Government of the State of Maine, any local government in that State, or any nonprofit corporation, educational agency, or community development organization that-- (i) is financially able to maintain the lighthouse (and any real property and improvements conveyed therewith) in accordance with the conditions set forth in subsection (b); (ii) agrees to permit the inspections referred to in subsection (f); and (iii) agrees to comply with the conditions set forth in subsection (b) and to have such conditions recorded with the deed of title to the lighthouse and any real property and improvements that may be conveyed therewith.
Order of priority.--In identifying entities eligible for the conveyance of a lighthouse under this paragraph, the Institute shall give priority to entities in the following order, which are also the exclusive entities eligible for the conveyance of a lighthouse under this section: (i) Agencies of the Federal Government.
Entities of the Government of the State of Maine.
Entities of local governments in the State of Maine.
Nonprofit corporations, educational agencies, and community development organizations.
Selection of conveyees among eligible entities.-- (A) Committee.-- (i) In general.--There is hereby established a committee to be known as the Maine Lighthouse Selection Committee (in this paragraph referred to as the ``Committee'').
Membership.--The Committee shall consist of five members appointed by the Secretary as follows: (I) One member, who shall serve as the Chairman of the Committee, shall be appointed from among individuals recommended by the Governor of the State of Maine.
One member shall be the State Historic Preservation Officer of the State of Maine, with the consent of that official, or a designee of that official.
One member shall be appointed from among individuals recommended by State and local organizations in the State of Maine that are concerned with lighthouse preservation or maritime heritage matters.
One member shall be appointed from among individuals recommended by officials of local governments of the municipalities in which the lighthouses referred to in subsection (a) are located.
One member shall be appointed from among individuals recommended by the Secretary of the Interior.
Appointment deadline.--The Secretary shall appoint the members of the Committee not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Membership term.-- (I) Members of the Committee shall serve for such terms not longer than 3 years as the Secretary shall provide.
The Secretary may stagger the terms of initial members of the Committee in order to ensure continuous activity by the Committee.
Any member of the Committee may serve after the expiration of the term of the member until a successor to the member is appointed.
A vacancy in the Committee shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Voting.--The Committee shall act by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Committee.
Responsibilities.-- (i) In general.--The Committee shall-- (I) review the entities identified by the Institute under paragraph (2) as entities eligible for the conveyance of a lighthouse; and (II) approve one such entity, or disapprove all such entities, as entities to which the Institute may make the conveyance of the lighthouse under this subsection.
Approval.--If the Committee approves an entity for the conveyance of a lighthouse, the Committee shall notify the Institute of such approval.
Disapproval.--If the Committee disapproves of the entities, the Committee shall notify the Institute and, subject to subsection (e)(2)(B), the Institute shall identify other entities eligible for the conveyance of the lighthouse under paragraph (2).
The Committee shall review and approve or disapprove of entities identified pursuant to the preceding sentence in accordance with this subparagraph.
Exemption from faca.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Committee, however, all meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public and preceded by appropriate public notice.
Termination.--The Committee shall terminate 8 years from the date of the enactment of this Act.
Conveyance.--Upon notification under paragraph (3)(B)(ii) of the approval of an entity for the conveyance of a lighthouse under this subsection, the Institute shall, with the consent of the entity, convey the lighthouse to the entity.
Responsibilities of conveyees.--Each entity to which the Institute conveys a lighthouse under this subsection, or any successor or assign of such entity in perpetuity, shall-- (A) use and maintain the lighthouse in accordance with subsection (b) and have such terms and conditions recorded with the deed of title to the lighthouse and any real property conveyed therewith; and (B) permit the inspections referred to in subsection (f).
Description of Property.--The exact acreage and legal description of any lighthouse, and any real property and improvements associated therewith, conveyed under subsection (a) shall be determined by the Secretary.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for the next 7 years, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the conveyance of lighthouses under this section.
The report shall include a description of the implementation of the provisions of this section, and the requirements arising under such provisions, in-- (1) providing for the use and maintenance of the lighthouses conveyed under this section in accordance with subsection (b); (2) providing for public access to such lighthouses; and (3) achieving the conveyance of lighthouses to appropriate entities under subsection (g).
Additional Terms and Conditions.--The Secretary may require any additional terms and conditions in connection with a conveyance under subsection (a) that the Secretary considers appropriate in order to protect the interests of the United States.