This Act may be cited as the ``San Gabriel Basin Water Quality Initiative''.
SAN GABRIEL BASIN RESTORATION.
San Gabriel Basin Restoration.-- (1) Establishment of fund.--There shall be established within the Treasury of the United States an interest bearing account to be known as the San Gabriel Basin Restoration Fund (in this section referred to as the ``Restoration Fund'').
Administration of fund.--The Restoration Fund shall be administered by the Secretary of the Army, acting through the Chief of Engineers (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'').
The Secretary shall administer the Fund in cooperation with the San Gabriel Basin Water Quality Authority, or its successor agency.
Purposes of fund.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the amounts in the Restoration Fund, including interest accrued, shall be utilized by the Secretary-- (i) to design and construct water quality projects to be administered by the San Gabriel Basin Water Quality Authority and the Central Basin Water Quality Project to be administered by the Central Basin Municipal Water District; and (ii) to operate and maintain any project constructed under this section for such period as the Secretary determines, but not to exceed 10 years, following the initial date of operation of the project.
Cost-sharing limitation.--The Secretary may not obligate any funds appropriated to the Restoration Fund in a fiscal year until the Secretary has deposited in the Fund an amount provided by non-Federal interests sufficient to ensure that at least 35 percent of any funds obligated by the Secretary are from funds provided to the Secretary by the non-Federal interests.
The San Gabriel Basin Water Quality Authority shall be responsible for providing the non-Federal amount required by the preceding sentence.
The State of California, local government agencies, and private entities may provide all or any portion of such amount.
Compliance With Applicable Law.--In carrying out the activities described in this section, the Secretary shall comply with any applicable Federal and State laws.
Relationship to Other Activities.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect other Federal or State authorities that are being used or may be used to facilitate the cleanup and protection of the San Gabriel and Central groundwater basins.
In carrying out the activities described in this section, the Secretary shall integrate such activities with ongoing Federal and State projects and activities.
None of the funds made available for such activities pursuant to this section shall be counted against any Federal authorization ceiling established for any previously authorized Federal projects or activities.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Restoration Fund established under subsection (a) $85,000,000.
Such funds shall remain available until expended.
Set-aside.--Of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1), no more than $10,000,000 shall be available to carry out the Central Basin Water Quality Project.
In General.--The Secretary, in cooperation with Federal, State, and local government agencies, is authorized to participate in studies and other investigative activities and in the planning and design of projects determined by the Secretary to offer a long-term solution to the problem of groundwater contamination caused by perchlorates.
Investigations and Projects.-- (1) Bosque and leon rivers.--The Secretary, in coordination with other Federal agencies and the Brazos River Authority, shall participate under subsection (a) in investigations and projects in the Bosque and Leon River watersheds in Texas to assess the impact of the perchlorate associated with the former Naval ``Weapons Industrial Reserve Plant'' at McGregor, Texas.
Caddo lake.--The Secretary, in coordination with other Federal agencies and the Northeast Texas Municipal Water District, shall participate under subsection (a) in investigations and projects relating to perchlorate contamination in Caddo Lake, Texas.
Eastern santa clara basin.--The Secretary, in coordination with other Federal, State, and local government agencies, shall participate under subsection (a) in investigations and projects related to sites that are sources of perchlorates and that are located in the city of Santa Clarita, California.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying out the activities authorized in this section, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $25,000,000, of which not to exceed $8,000,000 shall be available to carry out subsection (b)(1), not to exceed $3,000,000 shall be available to carry out subsection (b)(2), and not to exceed $7,000,000 shall be available to carry out subsection (b)(3).
Passed the House of Representatives March 28, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.