This Act may be cited as the ``Spring Mountains National Recreation Area Act''.
As used in this Act: (1) National forest lands.--The term ``National Forest lands'' means lands included in the National Forest System (as defined in section 11(a) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1609(a))).
Recreation area.--The term ``Recreation Area'' means the Spring Mountains National Recreation Area established by section 4.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) preserve scenic, scientific, historic, cultural, natural, wilderness, watershed, riparian, wildlife, threatened and endangered species, and other values contributing to public enjoyment and biological diversity in the Spring Mountains of Nevada; (2) ensure appropriate conservation and management of natural recreation resources in the Spring Mountains; and (3) provide for the development of public recreation opportunities in the Spring Mountains for the enjoyment of present and future generations.
ESTABLISHMENT OF RECREATION AREA.
In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, there is established the Spring Mountains National Recreation Area in Nevada.
Boundaries and Map.--The Recreation Area shall consist of approximately 316,000 acres of federally owned lands and waters in the Toiyabe National Forest, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Spring Mountain National Recreation Area--Proposed'', numbered NV-CH, and dated August 2, 1992.
Map Filing.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map of the Recreation Area with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives.
Public Inspection.--The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Chief of the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture.
Discrepancies.--In the case of any discrepancy between the acreage referred to in subsection (b) and the map described in subsection (b), the map described in subsection (b) shall control with respect to any question concerning the boundaries of the Recreation Area.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service, shall manage the Recreation Area in accordance with the laws applicable to the National Forest System and this Act to provide for-- (1) the conservation of scenic, scientific, historic, cultural, and other values contributing to public enjoyment; (2) the conservation of fish and wildlife populations and habitat, including the use of prescribed fire to improve or maintain habitat; (3) the protection of watersheds and the maintenance of free flowing streams and the quality of ground and surface waters in accordance with applicable Federal and State law; (4) public outdoor recreation benefits, including hunting, fishing, trapping, hiking, horseback riding, backpacking, rock climbing, camping, and nature study; (5) wilderness areas as designated by Congress pursuant to the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes); and (6) the management, utilization, and disposal of natural resources in a manner compatible with the purposes for which the Recreation Area is established.
Hunting, Trapping, and Fishing.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary shall permit hunting, trapping, fishing, and habitat management within the Recreation Area in accordance with the laws of the United States and the State of Nevada.
Exceptions.--The Secretary, after consultation with the Nevada Department of Wildlife, may designate zones where and periods when hunting, trapping, or fishing shall not be permitted for reasons of public safety, administration, or public use and enjoyment.
Grazing.--The Secretary may permit the grazing of livestock within the Recreation Area pursuant to Federal law and subject to such reasonable regulations, policies, and practices as the Secretary considers necessary.
Preventive Measures.--Nothing in this Act shall preclude such reasonable measures as the Secretary considers necessary to protect the land and resources in the Recreation Area from fire or insect or disease infestation.
In General.-- (1) Procedures.-- (A) Development of plan.--Not later than 3 full fiscal years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a general management plan for the Recreation Area as an amendment to the Toiyabe National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan.
Scope.-- (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), the amendment described in subparagraph (A) shall reflect the establishment of the Recreation Area and be consistent with this Act.
Effect on toiyabe plan.--Nothing in this Act shall require the Secretary to revise the Toiyabe National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1604).
Availability to public.--The general management plan for the Recreation Area shall be available to the public in a document separate from the rest of the Toiyabe National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan.
Contents.--The management plan described in paragraph (1) shall be developed with full public participation and shall include-- (A) implementation plans for a continuing program of interpretation and public education about the resources and values of the Recreation Area; (B) proposals for public facilities to be developed, expanded, or improved for the Recreation Area, including one or more visitor centers to accommodate both local and out-of-State visitors; (C) plans for the management of natural and cultural resources in the Recreation Area, with emphasis on the preservation and long-term scientific use of archaeological resources, with priority in development given to the enforcement of the Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979 (16 United States Code 470aa et sequentes) and the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes) within the Recreation Area; (D) wildlife and fish resource management plans for the Recreation Area prepared in consultation with appropriate departments of the State of Nevada and using other available studies of the Recreation Area; (E) recreation management plans for the Recreation Area prepared in consultation with appropriate departments of the State of Nevada; (F) wild horse and burro herd management plans for the Recreation Area prepared in consultation with appropriate departments and commissions of the State of Nevada; and (G) an inventory of all lands within the Recreation Area not presently managed as National Forest lands that will permit the Secretary to evaluate possible future acquisitions.
Consultation.--The plans for the management of natural and cultural resources described in paragraph (2)(C) shall be prepared in consultation with-- (A) the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation established by title II of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470i et sequentes); and (B) the Nevada State Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Division of Historic Preservation and Archaeology.
Wilderness Study Areas.-- (1) Recommendations.--The general management plan for the Recreation Area shall include the recommendations of the Bureau of Land Management as to the suitability for preservation as wilderness pursuant to the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et seq.)
of the 89,270 acres identified as the Mt.
Stirling, La Madre Mountains, and Pine Creek Wilderness Study Areas on the Bureau of Land Management Wilderness Status Map, dated March 1990.
Management.--Pending submission of a recommendation and until otherwise directed by Act of Congress, the Secretary, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service, shall manage the lands and waters within the wilderness study areas referred to in paragraph (1) so as to maintain their potential for inclusion within the National Wilderness Preservation System.
In General.--The Secretary may acquire by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, exchange, bequest, or otherwise such lands, or lesser interests in lands (including mineral interests, water rights, and scenic easements) as the Secretary determines are necessary to carry out this Act.
Exchanges Out of Federal Ownership.--Federally owned lands, waters, or interests in lands or waters located within the Recreation Area may not be exchanged except in connection with an exchange for lands, waters, or interests in lands or waters owned by the State of Nevada or a political subdivision of the State.
Incorporation of Acquired Lands.--Any lands, waters, or interests in lands or waters located within the Recreation Area that are acquired by the United States or are administratively transferred to the Secretary after the date of enactment of this Act shall be incorporated into the Recreation Area and managed in accordance with this Act and the laws applicable to the National Forest System.
Land and Water Conservation Fund.-- (1) Boundaries.--For the purpose of section 7 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-9), when new boundaries are established for a unit of the National Forest System pursuant to subsection (c), the new boundaries shall be treated as if they were the boundaries of the National Forest as of January 1, 1965.
Availability of funds.--Money appropriated from the Land and Water Conservation Fund shall be available for the acquisition of lands, waters, and interests in lands and waters in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
In General.--Subject to valid existing rights and except for the lands described in subsection (b), all Federal lands within the Recreation Area and all lands, waters, and interests in lands and waters within the Recreation Area that are acquired by the United States after the date of enactment of this Act are withdrawn from-- (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and (3) operation under the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws.
Exception.--The lands referred to in subsection (a) have the following legal description: S\1/2\ Sec.
23, W\1/2\E\1/2\ and W\1/2\ Sec.
33, and W\1/2\ Sec.
34, T 23 S, R 58 E, Mt.
The Secretary shall coordinate the management of the Recreation Area with the management of all proximate lands in a manner that best meets the present and future needs of the people of the United States.
In order to encourage unified and cost-effective management and interpretation of natural and cultural resources in southern Nevada, the Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with other Federal, State, and local agencies, and with nonprofit entities, that provide for the management and interpretation of natural and cultural resources in southern Nevada.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.