This Act may be cited as the ``Smoke-Free Environment Act of 1993''.
The Public Health Service Act is amended by adding the following new title at the end thereof: ``TITLE XXVII--SMOKE-FREE ENVIRONMENTS ``SEC.
Policy Required.--In order to protect children and adults from cancer, respiratory disease, heart disease, and other adverse health effects from breathing environmental tobacco smoke, the responsible entity for each public facility shall adopt and implement at such facility a smoke-free environment policy which meets the requirements of subsection (b).
Elements of Policy.--Each smoke-free environment policy for a public facility shall-- ``(1) prohibit the smoking of cigarettes, cigars, and pipes, and any other combustion of tobacco, within the facility and on facility property within the immediate vicinity of the entrance to the facility; and ``(2) post a clear and prominent notice of the smoking prohibition in appropriate and visible locations at the public facility.
The policy may provide an exception to the prohibition specified in paragraph (1) for one or more specially designated smoking areas within a public facility if such area or areas meet the requirements of subsection (c).
Specially Designated Smoking Areas.--A specially designated smoking area meets the requirements of this subsection if: ``(1) The area is ventilated in accordance with specifications promulgated by the Administrator that insure that air from the area is directly exhausted to the outside and does not recirculate or drift to other areas within the public facility.
Nonsmoking individuals do not have to enter the area for any purpose.
In General.--An action may be brought to enforce the requirements of this title by any aggrieved person, any State or local government agency, or the Administrator.
Venue.--Any action to enforce this title may be brought in any United States district court for the district in which the defendant resides or is doing business to enjoin any violation of this title or to impose a civil penalty for any such violation in the amount of not more than $5,000 per day of violation.
The district courts shall have jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in controversy or the citizenship of the parties, to enforce this title and to impose civil penalties under this title.
Notice.--An aggrieved person shall give any alleged violator notice of at least 60 days prior to commencing an action under this section.
No action may be commenced by an aggrieved person under this section if such alleged violator complies with the requirements of this title within such 60-day period and thereafter.
Costs.--The court, in issuing any final order in any action brought pursuant to this section, may award costs of litigation (including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to any prevailing plaintiff, whenever the court determines such award is appropriate.
Penalties.--The court in any action under this section to apply civil penalties shall have discretion to order that such civil penalties be used for projects which further the policies of this title.
The court shall obtain the view of the Administrator in exercising such discretion and selecting any such projects.
``Nothing in this title shall preempt or otherwise affect any other Federal, State or local law which provides protection from health hazards from environmental tobacco smoke.
``The Administrator is authorized to promulgate such regulations as the Administrator deems necessary to carry out this title.
``The requirements of this title shall take effect on the date one year after the date of the enactment of the Smoke-Free Environment Act of 1993.
``As used in this title-- ``(1) the term `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; ``(2) the term `public facility' means any building regularly entered by 10 or more individuals at least one day per week, including any such building owned by or leased to a Federal, State, or local government entity.
Such term shall not include any building or portion thereof regularly used for residential purposes; and ``(3) the term `responsible entity' means, with respect to any public facility, the owner of such facility, except that in the case of any such facility or portion thereof which is leased, such term means the lessee.