This Act may be cited as the ``Workforce Fairness and Tax Relief Act of 2003''.
AGREEMENTS WITH STATES HAVING QUALIFIED WORKER TRAINING PROGRAMS.
In General.--Any State, the State unemployment compensation law of which is approved by the Secretary of Labor (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') under section 3304 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, which desires to do so, may enter into and participate in an agreement with the Secretary under this Act, if such State law contains (as of the date such agreement is entered into) a requirement that special unemployment assistance be payable to individuals participating in a qualified worker training program, as described in subsection (b).
Any State which is a party to an agreement under this Act may, upon providing 30 days' written notice to the Secretary, terminate such agreement.
Qualified Worker Training Program.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``qualified worker training program'' means a program-- (1) under which individuals who meet the requirements described in paragraph (3) are eligible to receive special unemployment assistance while participating in the program; (2) under which the assistance described in paragraph (1) is payable in the same amount, at the same interval, on the same terms, and subject to the same conditions, as regular compensation under the State law, except that-- (A) State requirements relating to availability for work, active search for work, and refusal to accept work are not applicable to such individuals; (B) assistance shall not be payable after the end of the 12-month period following the last day of the individual's benefit year; and (C) such individuals are considered to be unemployed for the purposes of Federal and State laws applicable to unemployment compensation, as long as such individuals meet the requirements applicable under this subsection; (3) under which individuals may receive the assistance described in paragraph (1) if such individuals-- (A)(i)(I) have exhausted all rights to regular compensation under the State law; (II) have exhausted all rights to extended compensation, or are not entitled thereto, because of the ending of their eligibility for extended compensation, in such State; (ii) have no rights to compensation (including both regular compensation and extended compensation) with respect to a week under such law or any other State unemployment compensation law or to compensation under any other Federal law; (iii) are not receiving compensation with respect to such week under the unemployment compensation law of Canada or any other foreign country; (B)(i) were terminated as a result of any permanent closure of a plant or facility; or (ii) are identified pursuant to a State worker profiling system as individuals who-- (I) are long-term unemployed and have limited opportunities for employment or reemployment in the same or a similar occupation in the area in which they reside; (II) are otherwise unlikely to return to their previous industry or occupation; or (III) satisfy such other criteria as may be established in or under the agreement for purposes of this subclause; and (C) are actively participating in training activities approved by the State agency preparing them for suitable reemployment; and (4) which meets such other requirements as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
PAYMENTS TO STATES HAVING AGREEMENTS.
In General.--There shall be paid to each State which has entered into an agreement under this Act an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the covered costs of the qualified worker training program of such State.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Applicable percentage.--The term ``applicable percentage'', with respect to a State which has entered into an agreement under this Act, means-- (A) during each of the first 3 calendar years beginning on the date on which such agreement is entered into, 100 percent; and (B) during each calendar year thereafter, 50 percent.
Covered costs.--The term ``covered costs'', with respect to a qualified worker training program, means-- (A) the amount of special unemployment assistance (as described in section 3(b)(1)) paid under such program; and (B) such amount as the Secretary determines to be necessary for the proper and efficient administration of such program.
Method of Payment.--Sums payable to any State by reason of such State's having an agreement under this Act shall be payable, either in advance or by way of reimbursement (as determined by the Secretary), in such amounts as the Secretary estimates the State will be entitled to receive under this Act for each calendar month, reduced or increased, as the case may be, by any amount by which the Secretary finds that the Secretary's estimates for any prior calendar month were greater or less than the amounts which should have been paid to the State.
Such estimates may be made on the basis of such statistical, sampling, or other method as may be agreed upon by the Secretary and the State agency of the State involved.
In General.--Payments to States under section 3 shall be made in accordance with this section.
Certifications.--The Secretary shall from time to time certify to the Secretary of the Treasury for payment to each State the sums payable to such State under this Act.
The Secretary of the Treasury, prior to audit or settlement by the General Accounting Office, shall make payments to the State in accordance with such certification, by transfers from general funds in the Treasury to-- (1) the account of such State in the Unemployment Trust Fund, to the extent that such payment is allocable to costs described in section 3(b)(2)(A); and (2) such fund or other repository as may be agreed upon by the Secretary and the State agency of the State involved, to the extent that such payment is allocable to costs described in section 3(b)(2)(B).
For purposes of this Act, the terms ``State'', ``State law'', ``State agency'', ``regular compensation'', ``extended compensation'', ``benefit year'', and ``week'' shall have the respective meanings assigned to them under section 205 of the Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970.
REPORTS BY THE SECRETARY OF LABOR.
The Secretary shall prepare and transmit to the Congress on an annual basis a written report on the operation of this Act, including-- (1) an assessment of this Act's effectiveness within those States having an agreement in effect under this Act during the period covered by the report; (2) the name of any State whose request to enter into an agreement under this Act was disapproved during the period covered by the report, including the reasons for each such decision; and (3) such other information as the Secretary considers appropriate.
REPEAL OF TAX ON UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION.
In General.--Section 85 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is hereby repealed.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (p) of section 3402 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (2) and by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).
Section 6050B of such Code (relating to returns relating to unemployment compensation) is hereby repealed.
The table of sections for part II of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 85.
The table of sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 6050B.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts received after December 31, 2002.