This Act may be cited as the ``1995 Special Olympics World Games Commemorative Coin Act''.
One Dollar Silver Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 800,000 $1 coins, which shall weigh 26.73 grams, have a diameter of 1.500 inches, and shall contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of the coins issued under this Act shall be emblematic of the 1995 Special Olympics World Games.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1995'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5132(a)(1) of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
The design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the 1995 Special Olympics World Games Organizing Committee, Inc. and the Commission of Fine Arts.
As required by section 5135 of title 31, United States Code, the design shall also be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
ISSUANCE OF THE COINS.
Quality of Coins.--The coins authorized under this Act may be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Not more than 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Issuance.--The coins authorized under this Act shall be available for issue not later than January 15, 1995.
Sunset Provision.--No coins shall be minted under this Act after December 31, 1995.
SALE OF THE COINS.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins, and the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins authorized under this Act prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharge Required.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
No provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Nothing in this section shall relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
The total surcharges collected by the Secretary from the sale of the coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the 1995 Special Olympics World Games Organizing Committee, Inc.
Such amounts shall be used to-- (1) provide a world class sporting event for athletes with mental retardation; (2) demonstrate to a global audience the extraordinary talents, dedication, and courage of persons with mental retardation; and (3) underwrite the cost of staging and promoting the 1995 Special Olympics World Games.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the 1995 Special Olympics World Games Organizing Committee, Inc. as may be related to the expenditure of amounts paid under section 8.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take all actions necessary to ensure that the issuance of the coins authorized by this Act shall result in no net cost to the United States Government.
Adequate Security for Payment Required.--No coin shall be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment therefore; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.