Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Pay Compression Relief Act of 2004''.
References.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 5, United States Code.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO BASIC PAY.
Administrative Law Judges.--Section 5372(b)(1)(C) is amended by striking ``may not exceed the rate for level IV'' and inserting ``may not exceed the rate for level III''.
Contract Appeals Board Members.--Section 5372a is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: ``(b)(1) Rates of basic pay under this section-- ``(A) shall consist of-- ``(i) the rate for the chairman of an appeals board; ``(ii) the rate for the vice chairman of an appeals board; and ``(iii) the rate for all other contract appeals board members; ``(B) shall be initially adjusted by the Office of Personnel Management and thereafter adjusted under paragraph (2); and ``(C) shall not be greater than the rate of basic pay for level III of the Executive Schedule nor less than 94 percent of the rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
Subject to paragraph (1)(C), effective at the beginning of the first applicable pay period commencing on or after the first day of the month in which an adjustment takes effect under section 5303 in the rates of basic pay under the General Schedule, each rate of basic pay for contract appeals board members shall be adjusted by an amount determined by the President to be appropriate.
''; and (2) by adding after subsection (c) the following: ``(d) The Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations necessary to administer this section.''.
Certain Senior-Level Positions.--Section 5376(b)(1)(B) is amended by striking ``level IV'' and inserting ``level III''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO LOCALITY-BASED COMPARABILITY PAYMENTS.
Modified Maximums.--Paragraph (2) of section 5304(g), as amended by section 1125(a)(1)(A) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-136; 117 United States Statutes at Large 1638), is amended to read as follows: ``(2) The applicable maximum under this subsection shall be-- ``(A) level II of the Executive Schedule for positions under subparagraphs (A)-(D) of subsection (h)(1); and ``(B) level III of the Executive Schedule for any positions under subsection (h)(1)(E) which the President may determine.''.
Administrative Appeals Judges.--Section 5304(h)(1), as amended by section 1125(a)(1)(B) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-136; 117 United States Statutes at Large 1638), is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following: ``(D) a position to which section 5372b applies (relating to administrative appeals judges); and''.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Section 5304(h)(2)(B), as amended by section 1125(a)(1)(C) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-136; 117 United States Statutes at Large 1638), is amended-- (1) in clause (i)-- (A) by striking ``(A) through (C)'' and inserting ``(A) through (D)''; and (B) by striking ``(vii)'' and inserting ``(vi)''; and (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``(1)(D)'' and inserting ``(1)(E)''.
In General.--The amendments made by this Act shall-- (1) for purposes of computing any rate of compensation for service performed in any pay period beginning before the date specified under subsection (b), be treated as if they had never been enacted; and (2) for purposes of computing any rate of compensation for service performed in any pay period beginning on or after the date specified under subsection (b), take effect as if included in the enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-136; 117 United States Statutes at Large 1392).
Date Specified.--The date specified under this subsection shall be the earlier of-- (1) the first day of the first pay period beginning at least 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act; or (2) such other date (not earlier than the date of the enactment of this Act) as the Office of Personnel Management may determine.
In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Office of Personnel Management shall submit to the Committee on Government Reform of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate a written report containing the following: (1) A list of all Executive Schedule positions, and the rate of basic pay in effect for and the total number of individuals occupying each such position.
A comparison of the rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, administrative appeals judges, and contract appeals board members (before and after taking comparability pay into account) with-- (A) the rates of basic pay for Executive Schedule positions; and (B) the rates of basic pay for United States magistrate judges, United States bankruptcy judges, judges of a United States district court, and judges of a United States court of appeals, respectively.
A determination of whether rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, administrative appeals judges, and contract appeals board members are incongruous with the rates of basic pay for the positions referred to in paragraphs (2)(A) and (2)(B), respectively.
A recommendation on the extent to which the rates of basic pay for Executive Schedule positions should be adjusted (if at all), based on any determination under paragraph (3).
Any other information or recommendation which the Office of Personnel Management considers pertinent to the issue of appropriate rates of basic pay for Executive Schedule positions.
Data and Methodology.--The report of the Office of Personnel Management under this section shall include a statement identifying the data and methodology used in preparing such report.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``Executive Schedule positions'' means positions under the Executive Schedule under subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, and all other positions in the executive branch the annual rates of basic pay for which are individually fixed, or expressly authorized to be fixed, by statute, at the rate provided for a level of the Executive Schedule or at a rate determined by reference to a level of the Executive Schedule, but does not include administrative law judges, contract appeals board members, or administrative appeals judges; (2) the terms ``administrative law judge'', ``contract appeals board member'', and ``administrative appeals judge'' have the meanings given them by sections 5372, 5372a, and 5372b of title 5, United States Code, respectively; and (3) the term ``comparability pay'' means comparability pay under section 5304 of title 5, United States Code, or similar provision of law.
Amend the title so as to read: ``A bill to adjust the rates of pay payable to administrative law judges, and for other purposes.