This Act may be cited as the ``Bond Price Competition Improvement Act of 1999''.
EXTENSION OF TRANSACTION REPORTING TO DEBT SECURITIES.
Amendment.--Subsection (d) of section 11A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78k-1(d)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Minimum Requirements for Transaction Information on Debt Securities.-- ``(1) Action Required.--The Commission shall adopt such rules and take such other actions under this section as may be necessary or appropriate, having due regard for the public interest, the protection of investors, and the maintenance of fair and orderly markets to assure the prompt, accurate, reliable, and fair collection, processing, distribution, and publication of transaction information, including last sale data, with respect to covered debt securities so that such information is available to all exchange members, brokers, dealers, securities information processors, and all other persons.
In determining the rules or other actions to take under this subsection, the Commission shall take into consideration, among other factors, private sector systems for the collection and distribution of transaction information on corporate debt securities.
Effect on other authority.--Nothing in this subsection limits or otherwise alters the Commission's authority under the other provisions of this section or any other provision of this title.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection: ``(A) Covered debt securities.--The term `covered debt securities' means bonds, debentures, or other debt instruments of an issuer, other than-- ``(i) exempted securities; and ``(ii) securities that the Commission determines by rule to except from the requirements of this subsection.
Transaction information.--The term `transaction information' means information concerning such price, volume, and yield information associated with a transaction involving the purchase or sale of a covered debt security as may be prescribed by the Commission by rule for purposes of this subsection.
Factors in definitional rules.--In prescribing rules pursuant to this paragraph, the Commission shall take into consideration the extent to which a security is actively traded, market liquidity, competition, the protection of investors and the public interest, and other relevant factors.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 11A(a)(3)(A) of such Act is amended by striking ``(which shall be in addition to the National Market Advisory Board established pursuant to subsection (d) of this section)''.
Deadline for Action.--The Securities and Exchange Commission shall take action to implement the requirements of section 11A(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78k-1(d)), as amended by subsection (a) of this section, within 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
EXCHANGE LISTING OF DEBT SECURITIES.
Section 12(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78l(a)) is amended by striking the period at the end thereof and inserting the following: ``, except that a registration is not required to be effective for trading on an exchange of a class of debt securities of an issuer that has another class of securities for which a registration is effective for such exchange.
Such a class of debt securities shall, for purposes of any provision of this title or the rules or regulations thereunder, be treated as a class of securities registered under this section upon approval of the listing of such class of debt securities by the exchange.''.
Section 3(a)(12)(B) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78c(a)(12)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A)(i) of this paragraph, securities, other than equity securities, that are described in subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (42) of this subsection shall not be deemed to be exempted securities for purposes of section 11A of this title.''.
Studies Required.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a study of measures needed in the public interest and for the protection of investors to improve the prompt, accurate, reliable, and fair collection, processing, distribution, and publication of information concerning transactions-- (1) in debt securities as to which transaction information is collected but not disseminated pursuant to section 11A(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended by this Act (15 United States Code 78k-1(d)); and (2) in municipal securities (as such term is defined in section 3(a)(29) of such Act (15 United States Code 78c(a)(29)).
Commission and MSRB Participation.--The Comptroller General shall conduct the study required by subsection (a)(1) in consultation with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the study required by subsection (a)(2) in consultation with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board.
Submission of Reports.--The Comptroller General shall submit to the Congress a report on the studies required by subsection (a) within one year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Such reports shall include an identification of the measures needed to improve the prompt, accurate, reliable, and fair collection, processing, distribution, and publication of information concerning transactions in the debt securities and municipal securities described in such subsection, including measures requiring legislative or regulatory action.
Passed the House of Representatives June 14, 1999.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.