This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness in Textile Trade Act of 2000''.
EQUALIZATION OF TRADE IN TEXTILE AND APPAREL GOODS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND WTO MEMBER COUNTRIES.
Statement of Policy.--It shall be the policy of the United States to negotiate, within the WTO, reciprocal market access in trade in textile and apparel goods with no concessions in addition to those in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, unless and until the United States has negotiated substantially similar market access with each WTO member country.
Presidential Determinations on WTO Members.--Not later than December 31 of each year, with respect to each WTO member country-- (1) the President shall determine whether that country allows access in its markets to textile and apparel goods that are products of the United States that is substantially similar to the access provided in United States markets to textile and apparel goods that are products of that country; (2) if the determination under paragraph (1) is that the access to a country's markets for textile and apparel goods that are products of the United States is less favorable than that provided by the United States to textile and apparel goods that are products of that country, the President shall impose quotas, tariffs, or other measures on the textile and apparel products of that country in order to make access in the markets of both countries substantially similar; (3) the President shall seek to negotiate agreements with any country described in paragraph (2) to remove the tariff and nontariff barriers to trade in textile and apparel goods that were the basis of the President's determination under paragraph (1); and (4) if agreements under paragraph (3) are reached, the President shall adjust the measures imposed under paragraph (2) so that the access in the markets of the country concerned to textile and apparel goods that are products of the United States and the access in United States markets to textile and apparel goods that are products of that country are substantially similar.
Report to Congress.--Not later than June 30 of each year, the President shall transmit to the Congress a report on actions taken under subsection (a), including-- (1) each determination made under subsection (a)(1); (2) measures implemented under subsection (a)(2); (3) negotiations undertaken and agreements reached under subsection (a)(3); and (4) measures adjusted under subsection (a)(4).
The President shall include the rationale for each action addressed in the report.
Definitions.--As used in this section, the terms ``WTO'' and ``WTO member country'' have the meanings given those terms in section 2 of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (19 United States Code 3501).
CIVIL ACTIONS FOR DAMAGES ARISING FROM FRAUDULENT ACTS OF IMPORTERS.
Right of Action.--Any producer, distributor, or retailer of textile or apparel goods who is injured by any violation of the customs laws set forth in section 592A(a)(2) of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1592a(a)(2) may bring a civil action in the appropriate Federal court against the person or persons committing the violation for damages incurred as a result of that violation.
Burden of Proof.--In any action brought under subsection (a), the violation of the customs laws concerned is established if the plaintiff proves the violation by a preponderance of the evidence.
Exclusivity of Remedy.--The remedy provided by this section is not available to a person to the extent that person has recovered damages under any other provision of law that were incurred as a result of a violation of law referred to in subsection (a).
EXTENSION OF BENEFIT PERIOD FOR TRADE READJUSTMENT ALLOWANCES FOR ADVERSELY AFFECTED WORKERS ENROLLED IN TRAINING PROGRAMS.
Extension of Benefit Period.--Section 233(a)(3) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2293(a)(3)) is amended by striking ``26'' each place it appears and inserting ``52''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) apply to any worker covered by a certification of eligibility issued under subchapter A or D of chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974-- (1) if the certification is issued on or after the date of the enactment of this Act; or (2) if the certification is issued before such date of enactment and the trade readjustment allowances payable with respect to the period covered by the certification to that worker have not exceeded the maximum allowable under section 233 of the Trade Act of 1974 on the day before such date of enactment.
CREDIT FOR HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS PAID BY INDIVIDUALS RECEIVING TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25A the following new section: ``SEC.
HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF INDIVIDUALS RECEIVING TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount paid during the taxable year for coverage for the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse and dependents under qualified health insurance during a period that the taxpayer or spouse is receiving trade adjustment assistance.
Qualified Health Insurance.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified health insurance' means insurance which constitutes medical care, as defined in section 213(d) without regard to-- ``(A) paragraph (1)(C) thereof, and ``(B) so much of paragraph (1)(D) thereof as relates to qualified long-term care insurance contracts.
Exclusion of coverage provided under group health plans, etc.--Such term shall not include insurance provided through any group health plan of an employer or any other entity.
Trade Adjustment Assistance.--For purposes of this section, the term `trade adjustment assistance' means assistance provided under subchapter A or D of chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Coordination with other deductions.--No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any amount taken into account in determining the credit under this section.
Denial of credit to dependents.--No credit shall be allowed under this section to any individual with respect to whom a deduction under section 151 is allowable to another taxpayer for a taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year begins.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Health insurance costs of individuals receiving trade adjustment assistance.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.
TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR TEXTILE AND APPAREL WORKERS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, workers in any firm producing textile or apparel goods whose employment is terminated, or threatened with termination, as a result of either-- (1) a decrease in the firm's sales or production, or (2) a firm's plant or facility closure or relocation, shall be certified by the Secretary of Labor as eligible to receive adjustment assistance under chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 at the same level of benefits as workers certified under subchapter D of chapter 2 of such title.
The Secretary of Labor shall make such certification not later than 30 days after the date a petition for certification of eligibility for such assistance is filed under such title II.