This Act may be cited as the ``Safety and Fuel Economy (SAFE) Act''.
The Congress finds and declares the following: (1) Automobile fuel economy standards have played an important role in mitigating the increased consumption of gasoline and have resulted in lower fuel costs to consumers.
Such standards and the successful response of automobile manufacturers to those standards have been very effective in increasing automobile fuel efficiency, resulting in a near doubling of the passenger automobile fleet fuel economy between 1975 and the present.
In recent years, the average automobile fuel economy of the fleets of many automobile manufacturers has actually declined, while the size and horsepower of the fleets have increased.
Overall, automobile and light truck average fuel economy in 2000 was at its lowest in 20 years.
Several Government studies agree that increased fuel efficiency is possible utilizing currently available technology and without significant changes in the size, mix, or performance of the fleet of automobiles.
In addition, the safety of the current fleet of automobiles can be maintained and potentially improved through improved safety features.
With appropriate lead time, and by utilizing technology currently in production, passenger automobile average fuel economy of between 38 and 45 miles per gallon has been estimated by various experts to be feasible without significant changes in automobile size or performance.
When technology currently in development becomes available, even higher levels of average fuel economy are possible.
Improved automobile average fuel economy standards can reduce carbon dioxide emissions, improve air quality, and potentially mitigate against global warming.
IMPROVING CRASH SAFETY OF AUTOMOBILES AND LIGHT TRUCKS IN COLLISIONS.
In General.--Subchapter II of chapter 301 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Crash safety of automobiles and light trucks in collisions ``(a) Motor Vehicle Safety Standard.-- ``(1) Notice of proposed rulemaking.--Not later than June 1, 2002, the Secretary of Transportation shall issue a notice of proposed rulemaking to prescribe a new Federal motor vehicle safety standard to improve the crash safety of automobiles and light trucks in collisions.
CRAGG index.--The new standard prescribed under this subsection shall include a Crash Aggressivity index (in this section referred to as a `CRAGG index') that-- ``(A) measures the aggressivity of a motor vehicle; ``(B) takes into account the stiffness, structure height, and mass of a vehicle; and ``(C) substantially improves the present crash safety of automobiles and light trucks by reducing the aggressivity of such vehicles.
Final rule.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall complete a rulemaking to prescribe such a standard by issuing, not later than June 1, 2003, a final rule with any provision the Secretary considers appropriate, consistent with this subsection and the requirements of section 30111 of title 49, United States Code.
Effective date.--The Secretary shall specify in the final rule issued under this subsection that the rule-- ``(A) shall become effective in phases as rapidly as practicable, beginning September 1, 2005; and ``(B) shall be fully effective for all vehicles identified in section 30127(b) of title 49, United States Code, that are manufactured on and after September 1, 2009.
Disclosure of CRAGG Index Ratings to Purchasers.-- ``(1) Disclosure by manufacturers.--The Secretary of Transportation shall issue regulations that require that motor vehicle manufacturers-- ``(A) report CRAGG index ratings for each model year after model year 2005; ``(B) submit the first such report by no later than August 1, 2005, and submit such reports by August 1 of each year thereafter; and ``(C) conspicuously post on each new motor vehicle at the point of sale the CRAGG index rating for the vehicle, beginning September 1, 2005.
Disclosure by secretary.--The Secretary shall also post on the Department of Transportation's Internet website, beginning September 1, 2005-- ``(A) comparative CRAGG index ratings, by make and model; and ``(B) an identification of the 10 motor vehicles with the greatest aggressivity, by CRAGG index rating, each year.
Annual Report.--The Secretary of Transportation shall annually report to the Congress on January 1 of each year beginning in 2004 on the progress made in improving the crash safety of automobiles and light trucks in collisions.
Such report shall address the comparative improvement in the aggressivity of new vehicles as measured by the CRAGG index and the number of fatalities caused by the aggressivity of light trucks and sport utility vehicles in collisions with other vehicles.
Revision of Standard.--On September 1, 2007, the Secretary of Transportation shall issue an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking to determine if substantial improvement has been made in the crash safety of automobiles and light trucks that are subject to the Federal motor vehicle safety standard prescribed under subsection (a).
If substantial improvement has not been made, the Secretary shall issue a notice of proposed rulemaking by March 1, 2008, to revise such standard to further increase crash comparability.
If initiated, the Secretary shall complete the rulemaking required by this subsection by issuing a new final rule not later than March 1, 2009.
The Secretary shall specify in the rule that the rule shall become effective in phases as rapidly as practicable, beginning September 1, 2010.
The rule shall become fully effective for all vehicles identified in section 30127(b), title 49, United States Code, that are manufactured on and after September 1, 2012.
Phased-In Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--If the Secretary of Transportation fails to meet any of the deadlines in subsections (a) through (d) of this section with respect to any motor vehicle, motor vehicles with respect to which such deadline applied having a gross vehicle weight rating less than 10,000 pounds that are manufactured by each manufacturer must satisfy the requirements described in paragraph (2) in accordance with the following phase-in schedule: ``(A) 20 percent of such vehicles manufactured by a manufacturer in the first year after the date the deadline is not met must satisfy such requirements.
40 percent of such vehicles manufactured by a manufacturer in the second year after the date the deadline is not met must satisfy such requirements.
60 percent of such vehicles manufactured by a manufacturer in the third year after the date the deadline is not met must satisfy such requirements.
80 percent of such vehicles manufactured by a manufacturer in the fourth year after deadline is not met must satisfy such requirements.
All such vehicles manufactured by a manufacturer after the fourth year after the date the deadline is not met must satisfy such requirements.
Requirements.--The requirements referred to in paragraph (1) are the following, in the frontal barrier crash test defined in section 571.208 S5.1 of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, conducted with a load cell barrier: ``(A) The height of the center of force as determined by a 30 mile per hour crash into a load cell barrier shall not be greater than 22 inches (55 centimeters).
For any vehicle with a curb weight greater than 3,500 pounds, the dynamic stiffness shall not be greater than the number determined by multiplying-- ``(i) 50,000 pounds; by ``(ii) the number determined by dividing-- ``(I) 33,000; by ``(II) the number determined by subtracting the weight of the vehicle (in pounds) from 20,000.
Advisory Committees.--The Secretary of Transportation shall ensure that-- ``(1) any Federal advisory committee, task force, or other entity concerned with vehicle compatibility includes a balance of representatives from consumer and safety organizations, insurers, manufacturers, and suppliers; and ``(2) such consumer and safety organization representatives are selected from among organizations that do not receive any significant funding from motor vehicle manufacturers and their affiliates.
Definitions.-- ``(1) Automobile; light truck.--Each of the terms `automobile' and `light truck' has the meaning set forth in section 32901 of this title.
Aggressivity.--The term `aggressivity' means the degree to which the front of a motor vehicle, in a collision with another motor vehicle-- ``(A) inflicts damage to the other motor vehicle; and ``(B) causes injury to the occupants of the other motor vehicle.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 301 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 30127 the following: ``30128.
Crash safety of automobiles and light trucks in collisions.''.
INCREASED AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS FOR PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES AND LIGHT TRUCKS.
Increased Standards.--Section 32902 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by striking ``Non-Passenger Automobiles.--'' and inserting ``Prescription of Standards by Regulation.--''; and (B) by striking ``(except passenger automobiles)'' and inserting ``(except passenger automobiles and light trucks)''; and (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows: ``(b) Standards for Passenger Automobiles and Light Trucks.-- ``(1) Passenger automobiles, generally.--The average fuel economy standard for passenger automobiles manufactured by a manufacturer-- ``(A) after model year 2003 shall be 30.0 miles per gallon; and ``(B) after model year 2005 shall be 32.5 miles per gallon.
Light trucks.--The average fuel economy standard for light trucks manufactured by a manufacturer-- ``(A) after model year 2003 shall be 23.0 miles per gallon; and ``(B) after model year 2005 shall be 25.5 miles per gallon.
Combined standard.--The average fuel economy standard for the combination of passenger automobiles and light trucks manufactured by a manufacturer-- ``(A) after model year 2007 shall be 32.0 miles per gallon; ``(B) after model year 2009 shall be 36.0 miles per gallon; and ``(C) after model year 2011 shall be 40.0 miles per gallon.''.
Definition of Light Truck.-- (1) In general.--Section 32901(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(17) `light truck' means an automobile that the Secretary decides by regulation-- ``(A) is manufactured primarily for transporting not more than 10 individuals; ``(B) is rated at not more than 8,500 pounds gross vehicle weight; and ``(C) is not a passenger automobile.''.
Deadline for regulations.--The Secretary of Transportation-- (A) shall issue proposed regulations implementing the amendment made by this subsection by not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) shall issue final regulations implementing such amendment by not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 32902(c) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``the standard'' and inserting ``a standard''; and (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``increases the standard above 27.5 miles per gallon, or decreases the standard below 26.0 miles per gallon,'' and inserting ``increases the standard above the standard that would otherwise apply under subsection (b), or decreases the standard by more than 1.5 miles per gallon below the standard that would otherwise apply under subsection (b),''.
Application.--The amendments made by this section shall apply beginning on January 1, 2006.
Applicability of Existing Standards.--This section does not affect the application of section 32902 of title 49, United States Code, to passenger automobiles and light trucks manufactured before model year 2007.
FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS FOR AUTOMOBILES UP TO 10,000 POUNDS GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
Vehicles Defined as Automobiles.--Section 32901(a)(3) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``6,000'' each place it appears and inserting ``8,500''.
Application Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply beginning on January 1, 2006.
IMPROVEMENT OF CALCULATION OF AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY.
In General.--Section 32904(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' before the first sentence; (2) in paragraph (1) (as so designated), in the second sentence by inserting ``and subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection,'' after ``of this title,''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Calculations and testing procedures prescribed by the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall ensure that average fuel economy calculated under this subsection-- ``(A) reflects, and is determined under conditions that include, actual driving conditions; and ``(B) is not an optimized number that results solely from tests performed under laboratory conditions.''.
Application.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to automobiles manufactured after model year 2005.
Regulations.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall issue regulations that implement the amendments made by subsection (a) by not later than December 31, 2002.