Congress finds as follows: (1) Since 1935, the United States has owned a parcel of land in Riverside, California, consisting of approximately 9.5 acres, more specifically described in section 2(a) (in this section referred to as the ``property'').
The property is administered by the Department of Agriculture and has been variously used for research and plant materials purposes.
Since 1998, the property has been administered by the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
Since 2002, the property has been co-managed under a cooperative agreement between the Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Riverside Corona Resource Conservation District, which is a legal subdivision of the State of California under section 9003 of the California Public Resources Code.
The Conservation District wishes to acquire the property and use it for conservation, environmental, and related educational purposes.
As provided in this Act, the conveyance of the property to the Conservation District would promote the Conservation District's conservation education and related purposes and result in savings to the Federal Government.
LAND CONVEYANCE, NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE PROPERTY, RIVERSIDE COUNTY, CALIFORNIA.
Conveyance Authorized.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall convey and quitclaim to the Riverside Corona Resource Conservation District (in this section referred to as the ``Conservation District'') all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to a parcel of real property, including improvements thereon, that is located at 4500 Glenwood Drive in Riverside, California, consists of approximately 9.5 acres, and is administered by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture.
As necessary or desirable for the conveyance under this subsection, the Secretary or the Conservation District may survey all or portions of the property to be conveyed.
Consideration.-- (1) Value in use.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Conservation District shall pay to the Secretary an amount equal to the value in use of the property to be conveyed under subsection (a) as consideration for the conveyance of the property.
Required reductions.--The amount otherwise determined under paragraph (1) shall be reduced by-- (A) the value of the improvements on the property provided for by non-Federal sources; and (B) the amount of any rental rate abatements negotiated and agreed to by the Secretary for the continued use of the property by the Department during the 10-year period beginning upon the conveyance of the property.
Deposit and Use of Consideration.--The amounts received as consideration under subsection (b) shall be credited to the applicable appropriation of the Natural Resources Conservation Service for conservation operations in California and shall remain available, without further appropriation, until expended as the Secretary may direct.
Prohibition on Reservation of Interest.--The Secretary shall not reserve any future interest in the property to be conveyed under subsection (a), except that which may be acceptable to the Conservation District.
Hazardous Substances.--Notwithstanding section 120(h) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9620(h)) or the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes), in the conveyance of the property under subsection (a), the Secretary shall be only required to meet the disclosure requirements for hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants, but shall otherwise not be required to remediate or abate any such releases of hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants, including petroleum and petroleum derivatives.
Cooperative Authority.-- (1) Leases, contracts, and cooperative agreements authorized.--In conjunction with, or in addition to, the conveyance under subsection (a), the Secretary may enter into leases, contracts and cooperative agreements with the Conservation District.
Sole source.--Notwithstanding sections 3105, 3301, and 3303 to 3305 of title 41, United States Code, or any other provision of law, the Secretary may lease real property from the Conservation District on a noncompetitive basis.
Non-exclusive authority.--The authority provided by this subsection is in addition to any other authority of the Secretary.
Additional Terms and Conditions.--The Secretary may require such reasonable terms and conditions in connection with the conveyance under subsection (a) as the Secretary considers appropriate to protect the interests of the United States, except that the conveyance does not require further administrative or environmental analyses or examination.