short title Section 1.
This Act may be referred to as the ``Federal Oil and Gas Lease Management Improvement Act of 1998''.
findings and purposes Sec.
Congress finds that-- (1) State governments have a long and successful history of regulation of operations to explore for and produce oil and gas.
The special role of the States was recognized by Congress in 1935 through its ratification under the Constitution of the Interstate Compact to Conserve Oil and Gas.
Under the guidance of the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission, States have established effective regulation of the oil and natural gas industry and subject their programs to periodic peer review through the Commission.
It is significantly less expensive for State governments than for the Federal Government, through its Bureau of Land Management, to regulate oil and gas lease operations on Federal lands.
Significant cost savings could be achieved, with no reduction in environmental protection or in the conservation of oil and gas resources, by having the Federal Government defer to State regulation of oil and gas lease operations on Federal lands.
State governments carry out regulatory oversight on State, private, and Federal lands.
Oil and gas companies operating on federal lands are burdened with the additional cost and time of duplicative oversight by both State and Federal conservation authorities.
Additional cost savings could be achieved within the private sector by having the Bureau of Land Management defer to State regulation.
The Federal Government is presently cast in dual opposing roles as a mineral owner and regulator.
State regulation of oil and gas operations on Federal lands would eliminate this conflict of interest.
It remains the responsibility of the Secretary of the Interior to carry out the Federal policy set forth in the Mining and Minerals Policy Act of 1970 (30 United States Code Sec.
21a) to foster and encourage private sector enterprise in the development of economically sound and stable domestic mineral industries, and the orderly and economic development of domestic mineral resources and reserves, including oil and gas resources.
Resource management analyses and surveys conducted under the conservation laws of the United States benefit the public at large and are an expense properly borne by the Federal Government.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to transfer from the Bureau of Land Management to each State in which the Federal lands are present authority to regulate oil and gas operations on leased tracts and related operations as fully as if the operations were occurring on privately owned land, (2) to share the costs saved through more efficient State enforcement among State governments and the Federal treasury, (3) to prevent the imposition of unwarranted delays and recoupments of Federal administrative costs on Federal oil and gas lessees, (4) to effect no change in the administration of Indian lands, and (5) to ensure that those funds deducted from the States' net receipt share are directly tied to administrative costs related to oil and gas on Federal lands.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) The term ``Federal lands'' means all lands and interests in lands owned by the United States which are subject to the mineral leasing laws, including mineral resources or mineral estates reserved to the United States in the conveyance of a surface or nonmineral estate.
The term excludes ``Indian lands'' as that term is defined in 30 United States Code Sec.
1702(3) and submerged lands on the ``Outer Continental Shelf'' as that term is defined in the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, 43 United States Code Sec.
1331 et sequentes, other than submerged lands subject to section 8(g) of that Act, 43 United States Code Sec.
The term ``oil and gas conservation authority'' means the agency or agencies in each State responsible for regulating for conservation purposes operations to explore for and produce oil and natural gas.
application of act Sec.
For the purposes of this Act, Federal lands subject to section 8(g) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act are deemed to be within the state with which revenues from those lands are shared.
However, nothing in this Act shall be construed to give a State a property right or interest in any Federal lease or land.
TITLE I--DEFERRAL TO STATE REGULATION OF OIL AND GAS LEASE OPERATIONS ON FEDERAL LANDS Sec.
No sooner than 6 months from the date of enactment of this Act, a State may notify the Secretary of the Interior of its intent to accept authority for regulation of operations, as described in paragraphs (1) through (11) of this subsection, under oil and gas leases on Federal lands within the State.
Effective 6 months after the Secretary receives the state's notice, the authority is transferred from the Bureau of Land Management to the State.
This authority includes-- (1) processing and approving Applications for Permits to Drill, subject to surface use agreements and other terms and conditions determined by the Secretary; (2) production operations; (3) well testing; (4) well completion; (5) well spacing; (6) communization; (7) conversion of a producing well to a water well; (8) well abandonment procedures; (9) inspections; (10) enforcement activities; and (11) site security.
Effective on the date of transfer, the Bureau of Land Management shall no longer include the charges associated with performing those authorities transferred in subsection (a) in costs charged against the State under section 35(b) of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code Sec.
The Bureau of Land Management and the Forest Service shall retain authority over the issuance of leases and the approval of surface use plans, and shall spend appropriated funds to assure that the agency is making timely decisions respecting oil and gas leasing, taking into consideration multiple uses of Federal lands, socioeconomic and environmental impacts, and the results of consultations with state and local government officials.
Following the transfer of authority, no Federal agency shall exercise the authority formerly held by the Bureau of Land Management as to oil and gas lease operations and related operations on Federal lands.
Following the transfer of authority, each State shall enforce its own laws, regulations, and requirements pertaining to oil and gas lease operations and related operations with due regard to the national interest in the expedited, environmentally sound development of oil and gas resources in a manner consistent with oil and gas conservation principles.
The Bureau of Land Management may continue to enforce any pending actions respecting acts committed prior to the date authority is transferred to a State under section 101(a) until those proceedings are concluded.
All applications respecting oil and gas lease operations and related operations on federal lands pending before the Bureau of Land Management on the date authority is transferred shall be immediately transferred to the oil and gas conservation authority of the State in which the given lease is located.
The oil and gas conservation authority shall act on the application in accordance with its own laws, regulations, and requirements.
TITLE II--USE OF COST SAVINGS FROM STATE REGULATION Sec.
Subject to available appropriations, the Secretary of the Interior shall compensate any State for those costs incurred to carry out the authorities transferred under section 101(a).
Payment shall be made not less than every quarter during the fiscal year.
Each State seeking compensation shall report to the Secretary a cost breakdown for the authorities transferred.
Compensation to a State may not exceed 50 percent of the Bureau of Land Management's allocated cost, under section 35(b) of the Mineral Leasing Act, for that State for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1997.
The Secretary will adjust the maximum level of cost compensation at least once every two years to reflect any increases in the Consumer Price Index (all items, United States city average) as prepared by the Department of Labor, using 1997 as the baseline year.
Section 35 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 United States Code Sec.
191) is amended by adding at the end of subsection (b) the following: ``(6) The Secretary shall not include, for the purpose of calculating the deduction under paragraph (1), costs of preparing resource management planning documents and analyses for areas in which oil and gas leasing is excluded or areas in which the primary activity under review is not oil and gas leasing and development.''.
TITLE III--STREAMLINING AND COST REDUCTION Sec.
Notwithstanding sections 304 and 504 of Public Law 94-579 (43 United States Code Sec.
1734 and 1764) and section 9701 of title 31, United States Code, the Department of the Interior may not recover its costs with respect to applications and other documents relating to oil and gas leases.
The Bureau of Land Management and the Forest Service shall complete any resource management planning documents and analyses within 90 days of the agency's receipt of any offer, application, or request for which planning document or analysis must be prepared.
If the agency is unable to complete the document or analysis within that time, it shall notify the applicant or lessee of the opportunity to prepare the required document or analysis for the agency's review and use in decision making.
The agency for which the document or analysis is prepared shall reimburse the applicant or lessee for costs directly associated with the preparation of the document or analysis.
The Bureau of Land Management and the Forest Service shall assure the timely issuance of Federal agency decisions respecting oil and gas leasing and operations on federal lands.
The Bureau of Land Management shall accept or reject an offer to lease within 90 days of the filing of the offer.
If an offer is not acted upon within that time, the offer is deemed accepted.
The Bureau of Land Management and a State that has accepted transfer under section 101(a) shall approve or disapprove an Application for Permit to Drill within 30 days of receipt of a complete application.
If the application is not acted upon within that time, the application is deemed approved.
The Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service, as the case may be, shall approve or disapprove a surface use plan within 30 days of receipt of a complete plan.
From the time that a Federal oil and gas lessee or operator files a notice of administrative appeal of a decision or order of an officer or employee of the Department of the Interior or the Forest Service respecting a Federal oil and gas Federal lease, the Department or Service shall have two years to issue a final decision in that appeal.
If no final decision has been issued within that time, the appeal is deemed granted.
The Bureau of Land Management and the Forest Service shall assure that unwarranted denials and stays of lease issuance and unwarranted restrictions on lease operations are eliminated from the administration of oil and as leasing on Federal lands.
Lands designated as available for multiple use under Bureau of Land Management resource management plans and Forest Service leasing analyses shall be available for oil and gas leasing without lease stipulations more stringent than restrictions on surface use and operations imposed under the laws and regulations of the relevant State oil and gas conservation authority unless the Bureau or Service includes in its decision approving the management plan or leasing analysis a written explanation of why more stringent stipulations are warranted.
Any decision to require a more stringent stipulation shall be administratively appealable and, following a final agency decision, judicially reviewable under the Administrative Procedure Act.
If the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service rejects an offer to lease on the ground that the land is unavailable for leasing, the respective agency shall provide a written, detailed explanation of the reasons the land is unavailable for leasing.
Where the determination of unavailability is based on a previous resource management decision, the explanation shall include a careful assessment of whether the reasons underlying the previous decision are still persuasive.
The agency may not reject an offer to lease lands available for leasing on the ground that the offer includes lands unavailable for leasing, and it must segregate lands available from those unavailable, upon the offeror's request following notice by the agency, before acting on the offer to lease.
The Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service shall provide a written, detailed explanation of the reasons for disapproving or requiring modifications of any surface use plan or Application for Permit to Drill.
A decision of the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service respecting an oil and gas lease shall be effective pending administrative appeal to the appropriate office within the Department of the Interior or the Department of Agriculture unless that office grants a stay in response to a petition satisfying the criteria for a stay established by 43 CFR Sec.
By March 31, 1999, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture will jointly submit a report to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives explaining the most efficient means of eliminating overlapping jurisdiction, duplication of effort, and inconsistent policymaking and policy implementation as between the Bureau of Land Management and the Forest Service.
The report will include recommendations on changes in statute needed to implement the report's conclusions.
By March 31, 1999, the Secretary of the Interior will publish, through notice in the Federal Register, a national inventory of the oil and gas reserves and potential resources underlying Federal lands (other than lands governed by section 8(g) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act).
The inventory will indicate what percentage of those reserves and resources is currently available for leasing and development.
The inventory will further detail what percentage of the reserves and resources are on-- (1) lands now open for leasing but which have never been leased; (2) lands open for leasing or development subject to no surface occupancy stipulations; and (3) lands open for leasing or development subject to other lease stipulations which have significantly impeded or prevented, or are likely to significantly impede or prevent, development.
By September 30, 1999, public comments on the inventory will be filed.
The Secretary of the Interior shall specifically invite comments on the effect of Bureau of Land Management resource management decisions on past and future oil and gas development.
By March 31, 2000, the Secretary of the Interior will file a report with the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives to be comprised of his revised inventory and other responses to the public comments.
The report will specifically indicate what steps the Bureau of Land Management will take to increase the percentage of lands open for development of oil and gas resources.