NATIONAL COMMISSION ON NUCLEAR SECURITY.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission on Nuclear Security'' (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Organizational Matters.--(1)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the Commission shall be composed of 14 members appointed from among individuals in the public and private sectors who have recognized experience in matters related to nuclear weapons and materials, safeguards and security, counterintelligence, and organizational management, as follows: (i) Three shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
Two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Three shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
One shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
One shall be appointed by the ranking member of the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
One shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives.
One shall be appointed by the ranking member of the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives.
The members of the Commission may not include a sitting Member of Congress or any officer of the United States who serves at the discretion of the President.
Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Any vacancies in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, and shall not affect the powers of the Commission.
(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the chairman of the Commission shall be designated by the Majority Leader of the Senate, in consultation with the Speaker of the House of Representatives, from among the members of the Commission appointed under paragraph (1)(A).
The chairman of the Commission may not be designated under subparagraph (A) until seven members of the Commission have been appointed under paragraph (1).
The Commission may commence its activities under this section upon the designation of the chairman of the Commission under paragraph (3).
The members of the Commission shall establish procedures for the activities of the Commission, including procedures for calling meetings, requirements for quorums, and the manner of taking votes.
Duties.--The Commission shall review the efficacy of the organization of the National Nuclear Security Administration, and the appropriate organization and management of the nuclear weapons programs of the United States, under the current Presidential Administration and under the Presidential Administration commencing in 2001, including-- (1) whether the requirements and objectives of the National Nuclear Security Administration Act are being fully implemented by the Secretary of Energy and Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration; (2) the feasibility and advisability of various means of improving the security and counterintelligence posture of the programs of the National Nuclear Security Administration; (3) the feasibility and advisability of various modifications of existing management and operating contracts for the laboratories under the jurisdiction of the National Nuclear Security Administration; and (4) whether the national security functions of the Department of Energy, including the National Nuclear Security Administration, should-- (A) be transferred to the Department of Defense; (B) be established as a semiautonomous agency within the Department of Defense; (C) be established as an independent agency; or (D) remain as a semiautonomous agency within the Department of Energy (as provided for under the provisions of the National Nuclear Security Administration Act (title XXXII of Public Law 106-65)).
Report.--(1) Not later than May 1, 2001, the Commission shall submit to Congress and to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Energy a report containing the findings and recommendations of the Commission as a result of the review under subsection (c).
The report shall include any comments pertinent to the review by an individual serving as the Secretary of Defense, and an individual serving as the Secretary of Energy, during the duration of the review that any such individual considers appropriate for the report.
The report may include recommendations for legislation and administrative action.
Personnel Matters.--(1)(A) Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including traveltime) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Any officer or employee of the United States may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Inapplicability of FACA.--The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the activities of the Commission.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate not later than 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under subsection (d).
Funding.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated by sections 3101 and 3103, not more than $975,000 shall be available for the activities of the Commission under this section.
Amounts available to the Commission under this section shall remain available until expended.