Board of Concession Appeals.-- (1) Establishment.--The President shall establish an independent administrative review board to be known as the Board of Concession Appeals.
The Board shall be similar to, and operate in a similar manner as, the Interior Board of Land Appeals.
Jurisdiction.--The Board shall adjudicate disputes between the Federal Government and concessioners arising under this Act, including (but not limited to) disputes regarding the issuance, revocation, suspension, or termination of a concession authorization, performance and evaluation ratings, sales of concession service agreements, and rate approval.
The expiration of a concession authorization shall not be subject to appeal to the Board.
Administrative Review.--Appeals of decisions may be taken to the Board after one level of review of decisions made within an agency.
Judicial Review.-- (1) In general.--A person may seek judicial review of decisions made by the Board.
Concession service agreements.--Judicial review of decisions rendered by the Board regarding concession service agreements shall be to the United States Court of Federal Claims in accordance with section 1491 of title 28, United States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Tucker Act'').
Concession licenses.--Judicial review of decisions rendered by the Board regarding concession licenses shall be to the appropriate Federal District Court.
Inapplicability of Certain Provisions.--Disputes arising under this Act shall not be subject to the jurisdiction of the General Accounting Office to review bid protests under the Competition in Contracting Act of 1984.
BREACH OF CONTRACT BY THE SECRETARY CONCERNED.
If the Secretary concerned breaches a concession authorization, the Secretary shall pay just compensation to the concessioner.
Maintenance and Access.--Each concessioner shall keep such records as the Secretary concerned may prescribe to enable the Secretary to determine that all terms of the concession authorization have been and are being faithfully performed, and the Secretary and his duly authorized representatives shall, for the purpose of audit and examination, have access to said records and to other books, documents, and papers of the concessioner pertinent to the concession authorization and all the terms and conditions thereof.
Access by Comptroller General.--The Comptroller General of the United States or any of his duly authorized representatives shall, until the expiration of five calendar years after the close of the business year of each concessioner have access to and the right to examine any pertinent books, documents, papers, and records of the concessioner related to the concession authorization involved.
PRIVATIZATION OF FOREST SERVICE AND BLM LANDS SUBJECT TO CONCESSION LEASES.
Authorization To Sell.-- (1) In general.--Not later than the earlier of five years after the date of the enactment of this Act or the expiration of a lease of qualifying concession lands, the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to National Forest System lands and the Secretary of the Interior with respect to Bureau of Land Management lands may sell such lands to the owners of such facilities.
Any such sale shall be at fair market value and, subject to valid existing rights, shall transfer all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the lands.
Qualifying concession lands.--For the purposes of subsection (a), lands are qualifying concession lands if such lands are-- (A) subject to a lease on the date of the enactment of this Act for private concession facilities with a fair market value greater than $2,000,000; and (B) located either adjacent to the boundary of the Federal lands or adjacent to other significant private inholdings.
Appraisal.-- (1) In general.--The appropriate Secretary shall provide for an independent appraisal of the lands and interests therein to be transferred pursuant to subsection (a).
The appraiser shall-- (A) utilize nationally recognized appraisal standards, including to the extent appropriate the uniform appraisal standards for Federal land acquisition; and (B) not include the value of any improvement placed on the lands by the concessioner.
Appraisal report.--The appraiser shall submit a detailed report to the Secretary.
Payments.--The Secretary may accept and use donated funds to pay, in whole or in part, for appraisals under this section.
Use of Proceeds by the Appropriate Secretary.--The appropriate Secretary shall deposit 50 percent of the funds generated through sales under this section to the credit of the appropriate agency in the agencywide account established under section 10(b).
The remaining 50 percent of such amount shall be deposited in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
APPLICATION OF GENERAL GOVERNMENTAL ACQUISITION REQUIREMENTS.
The following laws and regulations shall not apply to concession service agreements and concession licenses under this Act: (1) Title III of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 251-266).
The Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 401 et sequentes).
The Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-355).
The Brooks Automatic Data Processing Act (40 United States Code 759).
Chapters 137 and 141 of title 10, United States Code.
The Federal Acquisition Regulation and any laws not listed in paragraphs (1) through (5) providing authority to promulgate regulations in the Federal Acquisition Regulation.
The Act of June 20, 1936 (20 United States Code 107; commonly referred to as the ``Randolph-Sheppard Act'') and the Service Contract Act of 1965 (41 United States Code 351 et sequentes).
Concession programs of an agency on Federal lands and waters subject to this Act shall be fully consistent with the agency's mission and laws applicable to the agency.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as limiting or restricting any right, title, or interest of the United States in any land or resources.
In General.--Within one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior, Secretary of Agriculture, and Secretary of the Army shall develop a single set of regulations to implement this Act.
Qualifications of Agency Personnel Assigned Concession Management Duties.--The Secretary, by regulation under subsection (a) and taking into account the provisions of this Act, shall specify the minimum qualifications required for agency personnel assigned predominantly to concession management duties.- SEC.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER EXISTING LAWS.
Repeals.-- (1) The Act entitled ``An Act relating to the establishment of concession policies in the areas administered by the National Park Service and for other purposes'' (16 United States Code 20- 20g) is repealed.
The last paragraph under the heading ``forest service'' in the Act of March 4, 1915 (38 United States Statutes at Large 1101), as amended by the Act of July 28, 1956 (chap.
771; 70 United States Statutes at Large 708) (16 United States Code 497), is repealed.
Section 7 of the Act of April 24, 1950 (16 United States Code 580d) is repealed.
Superseded Provisions.--The provisions of this Act shall supersede the provisions of-- (1) the Federal Water Project Recreation Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-12-21); (2) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (Oct. 21, 1976); (3) the Recreation and Public Purposes Act (43 United States Code 869 et sequentes); (4) section 4 of the Act entitled ``An Act authorizing the construction of certain public works on rivers and harbors for flood control, and for other purposes'' (16 United States Code 460d); (5) sections 103 and 926 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (100 United States Statutes at Large 4084 and 4197); (6) Public Law 87-714 (16 United States Code 460k et sequentes; commonly known as the ``Refuge Recreation Act''); and (7) the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd).
Savings.-- (1) In general.--The repeal of any provision, and the superseding of any provision, of an Act referred to in subsection (a) or (b) shall not affect the validity of any authorizations entered into under such Act.
The provisions of this Act shall apply to any such authorizations, except to the extent such provisions are inconsistent with the express terms and conditions of such authorizations.
Right of renewal.--The right of renewal provided for by any concession contract under any such provision shall be preserved for a single renewal of a contract following the enactment of, or concession authorization under, this Act.
Value of possessory interest.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to change the value of existing possessory interest as identified in concession contracts entered into before the enactment of this Act.
ANILCA.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to amend, supersede or otherwise affect any provision of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 United States Code 3101 et sequentes) relating to revenue-producing visitor services.