This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Energy Small Business and Industry Partnership Enhancement Act of 1998''.
Congress finds that-- (1) partnerships between contractor-operated facilities of the Department of Energy and small businesses can enhance growth of competitive small business opportunities; (2) the contractor-operated facilities represent a national resource in science and technology; (3) capacity for innovation in the United States is enhanced when the capabilities of the contractor-operated facilities are engaged with other providers and users of the Nation's science and technology base; (4) contributors to the Nation's science and technology delivery system, Federal agencies, private industry, universities, and the contractor-operated facilities can best perform their missions through partnerships and interactions that leverage the resources of each such entity; (5) interactions of the contractor-operated facilities with industry and universities serve to-- (A) expand the technology base available for missions of the Department of Energy; and (B) instill sound business practices in the contractor-operated facilities to enable cost-effective realization of the Federal missions of the facilities; (6) the contractor-operated facilities benefit from university interactions through access to leading edge research and through recruitment of the talent needed to pursue the missions of the facilities; (7) industry can improve products and processes leading to an enhanced competitive position through simplified access to the science and technology developed by the contractor-operated facilities; and (8) other Federal agencies can advance their own missions by using capabilities developed within the contractor-operated facilities.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to improve the ability of small businesses, Federal agencies, industry, and universities to work with the contractor-operated facilities of the Department of Energy while ensuring full cost recovery of each contractor-operated facility's expenses incurred in such work; (2) to encourage the contractor-operated facilities to expand their partnerships with universities and industries; and (3) to expand interactions of contractor-operated facilities with small businesses so as to-- (A) encourage commercial evaluation and development of the science and technology base of the contractor- operated facilities; and (B) provide technical assistance to small businesses.
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2051(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) areas of technology within the mission of the Department of Energy as authorized by law.''.
Section 33 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2053) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Sec.
Research for Others.--Where'' and inserting the following: ``SEC.
In General.--Where''; and (2) by striking the last sentence and inserting the following: ``(b) Cost Recovery.-- ``(1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary of Energy shall not recover more than the full cost of work incurred at contractor-operated facilities of the Department of Energy.
Administrative costs.--Any costs incurred by the Department of Energy in connection with work performed by contractor-operated facilities of the Department of Energy shall be funded from departmental administration accounts of the Department of Energy.
Charges.--For work performed for a person other than the Department of Energy (including non-Federal entities and Federal agencies other than the Department of Energy) (referred to in this paragraph as an `external customer'), a contractor- operated facility may assess a charge in an amount that does not exceed the sum of-- ``(A) the direct cost to the contractor in performing the work for the external customer; and ``(B) a pro rata share of overhead charges for overhead-funded services directly required for performance of the specific work for external customers as a whole or to a category of external customers that includes the external customer.''.
PARTNERSHIPS WITH UNIVERSITIES AND INDUSTRY.
In General.--Chapter 4 of title I of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2051 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CONTRACTOR-OPERATED FACILITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY.
Metrics.-- ``(1) Definition of metrics.--In this subsection, the term `metrics' means a system of measurements to determine levels of specific areas of performance.
Inclusion in contracts.--Metrics-- ``(A) shall be developed jointly by the Secretary of Energy and each contractor operating a facility of the Department of Energy to ensure that realistic goals are established that are directly supportive of the mission and responsibilities of the contractor-operated facility; ``(B) shall be specified in the contract for operation of the facility; and ``(C) shall be used to evaluate the effectiveness of partnership development by the facility.
Partnerships and Interactions.-- ``(1) Encouragement of partnerships and interactions.--The Secretary of Energy shall encourage partnerships and interactions with universities and private industry at each contractor-operated facility.
Component of performance evaluations.--The development and expansion of partnerships and interactions with universities and private industry shall be a component in evaluating the annual performance of each contractor-operated facility.
Small Business Technology Partnership Program.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Energy shall require that each contractor operating a facility of the Department of Energy create a small business technology partnership program at each contractor-operated facility.
Funding level.--A contractor may spend not more than 0.25 percent of the total operating budget of a contractor- operated facility on the program.
Evaluations.--The Secretary shall annually evaluate the effectiveness of the program with each contractor to ensure that the program is providing opportunities for small businesses to interact with and use the resources of each contractor-operated facility.
Use of funds.--Funds from the program-- ``(A) shall be used to cover a contractor-operated facility's costs of interactions with small businesses; and ``(B) shall not be used for direct monetary grants to small businesses.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code prec.
2011) is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to chapter 4 of title I the following: ``Sec.
Contractor-operated facilities of the Department of Energy.