This Act may be cited as the ``World War I Memorial Act of 2014''.
DESIGNATION OF NATIONAL WORLD WAR I MUSEUM AND MEMORIAL IN KANSAS CITY, MISSOURI.
Designation.--The Liberty Memorial of Kansas City at America's National World War I Museum in Kansas City, Missouri, is hereby designated as the ``National World War I Museum and Memorial''.
Ceremonies.--The World War I Centennial Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'') may plan, develop, and execute ceremonies to recognize the designation of the Liberty Memorial of Kansas City as the National World War I Museum and Memorial.
REDESIGNATION OF PERSHING PARK IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA AS THE NATIONAL WORLD WAR I MEMORIAL AND ENHANCEMENT OF COMMEMORATIVE WORK.
Redesignation.--Pershing Park in the District of Columbia is hereby redesignated as the ``National World War I Memorial''.
Ceremonies.--The Commission may plan, develop, and execute ceremonies for the rededication of Pershing Park, as it approaches its 50th anniversary, as the National World War I Memorial and for the enhancement of the General Pershing Commemorative Work as authorized by subsection (c).
Authority To Enhance Commemorative Work.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may enhance the General Pershing Commemorative Work by constructing on the land designated by subsection (a) as the National World War I Memorial appropriate sculptural and other commemorative elements, including landscaping, to further honor the service of members of the United States Armed Forces in World War I.
General pershing commemorative work defined.--The term ``General Pershing Commemorative Work'' means the memorial to the late John J. Pershing, General of the Armies of the United States, who commanded the American Expeditionary Forces in World War I, and to the officers and men under his command, as authorized by Public Law 89-786 (80 United States Statutes at Large 1377).
Compliance With Standards for Commemorative Works.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), chapter 89 of title 40, United States Code, applies to the enhancement of the General Pershing Commemorative Work under subsection (c).
Waiver of certain requirements.-- (A) Site selection for memorial.--Section 8905 of such title does not apply with respect to the selection of the site for the National World War I Memorial.
Conditions applicable to area i.--Section 8908(b) of such title does not apply to the National World War I Memorial concerning Pershing Park.
No Infringement Upon Existing Memorial.--The National World War I Memorial may not interfere with or encroach on the District of Columbia War Memorial.
Deposit of Excess Funds.-- (1) Use for other world war i commemorative activities.-- If, upon payment of all expenses for the enhancement of the General Pershing Commemorative Work under subsection (c) (including the maintenance and preservation amount required by section 8906(b)(1) of title 40, United States Code), there remains a balance of funds received for such purpose, the Commission may use the amount of the balance for other commemorative activities authorized under the World War I Centennial Commission Act (Public Law 112-272; 126 United States Statutes at Large 2448).
Use for other commemorative works.--If the authority for enhancement of the General Pershing Commemorative Work and the authority of the Commission to plan and conduct commemorative activities under the World War I Centennial Commission Act have expired and there remains a balance of funds received for the enhancement of the General Pershing Commemorative Work, the Commission shall transmit the amount of the balance to a separate account with the National Park Foundation, to be available to the Secretary of the Interior following the process provided in section 8906(b)(4) of title 40, United States Code, for accounts established under section 8906(b)(3) of such title.
Authorization To Complete Construction After Termination of Commission.--Section 8 of the World War I Centennial Commission Act (Public Law 112-272) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``The Centennial Commission'' and inserting ``Except as provided in subsection (c), the Centennial Commission''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Exception for Completion of National World War I Memorial.-- The Centennial Commission may perform such work as is necessary to complete the rededication of the National World War I Memorial and enhancement of the General Pershing Commemorative Work under section 3 of the World War I Memorial Act of 2014, subject to section 8903 of title 40, United States Code.''.
ADDITIONAL AMENDMENTS TO WORLD WAR I CENTENNIAL COMMISSION ACT.
Ex Officio and Other Advisory Members.--Section 4 of the World War I Centennial Commission Act (Public Law 112-272; 126 United States Statutes at Large 2449) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Ex Officio and Other Advisory Members.-- ``(1) Powers.--The individuals listed in paragraphs (2) and (3), or their designated representative, shall serve on the Centennial Commission solely to provide advice and information to the members of the Centennial Commission appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(1), and shall not be considered members for purposes of any other provision of this Act.
Ex officio members.--The following individuals shall serve as ex officio members: ``(A) The Archivist of the United States.
The Librarian of Congress.
The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.
The Secretary of State.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
The Administrator of General Services.
Other advisory members.--The following individuals shall serve as other advisory members: ``(A) Four members appointed by the Secretary of Defense in the following manner: One from the Navy, one from the Marine Corps, one from the Army, and one from the Air Force.
Two members appointed by the Secretary of Homeland Security in the following manner: One from the Coast Guard and one from the United States Secret Service.
Two members appointed by the Secretary of the Interior, including one from the National Parks Service.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in a member position under paragraph (3) shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.''.
Payable Rate of Staff.--Section 7(c)(2) of such Act (Public Law 112-272; 126 United States Statutes at Large 2451) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
''; and (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``level IV'' and inserting ``level II''.
Limitation on Obligation of Federal Funds.-- (1) Limitation.--Section 9 of such Act (Public Law 112-272; 126 United States Statutes at Large 2453) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
LIMITATION ON OBLIGATION OF FEDERAL FUNDS.
``No Federal funds may be obligated or expended for the designation, establishment, or enhancement of a memorial or commemorative work by the World War I Centennial Commission.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 7(f) of such Act (Public Law 112-272; 126 United States Statutes at Large 2452) is repealed.
Clerical amendment.--The item relating to section 9 in the table of contents of such Act (Public Law 112-272; 126 United States Statutes at Large 2448) is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Limitation on obligation of Federal funds.