SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``United States- Russian Federation Nuclear Cooperation Agreement Act of 2008''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
TITLE I--APPROVAL OF UNITED STATES-RUSSIAN FEDERATION AGREEMENT FOR COOPERATION ON PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY Sec.
TITLE II--LIMITATIONS ON NUCLEAR COOPERATION WITH THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION Sec.
Certification of actions by the Russian Federation on nonproliferation matters.
Certification of cooperation by the Russian Federation on Iran sanctions.
Certification of Russian liability protections for United States civil nuclear industries.
TITLE III--AUTHORIZATION OF EXTRAORDINARY PAYMENTS IN CONNECTION WITH THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION Sec.
Authorization of extraordinary payments.
TITLE IV--FUTURE AGREEMENTS FOR COOPERATION ON PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY Sec.
Requirement for congressional approval of agreements for peaceful nuclear cooperation.
Initiatives and negotiations relating to agreements for peaceful nuclear cooperation.
In this Act: (1) Agency or instrumentality of a foreign state.--The term ``agency or instrumentality of a foreign state'' has the meaning given that term in section 1603(b) of title 28, United States Code.
Agreement.--The term ``United States-Russian Federation Agreement for Cooperation on Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy'' or ``Agreement'' means the Agreement Between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Russian Federation for Cooperation in the Field of Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy that was transmitted to the Congress by the President on May 13, 2008.
Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
Extraordinary payments in connection with the international space station.--The term ``extraordinary payments in connection with the International Space Station'' has the meaning given that term in section 7(1) of the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Nonproliferation Act (Public Law 106-178; 50 United States Code 1701 note).
Goods, services, or technology.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term ``goods, services, or technology'' means-- (i) goods, services, or technology listed on-- (I)(aa) the Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines for the Export of Nuclear Material, Equipment and Technology (published by the International Atomic Energy Agency as Information Circular INFCIRC/254/Rev.8/Part 1, and subsequent revisions) and Guidelines for Transfers of Nuclear-Related Dual- Use Equipment, Material, and Related Technology (published by the International Atomic Energy Agency as Information Circular INFCIRC/254/Rev.7/ Part 2, and subsequent revisions); (bb) the Missile Technology Control Regime Equipment and Technology Annex of June 11, 1996, and subsequent revisions; (cc) the lists of items and substances relating to biological and chemical weapons the export of which is controlled by the Australia Group; (dd) the Schedule One or Schedule Two list of toxic chemicals and precursors the export of which is controlled pursuant to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction; or (ee) the Wassenaar Arrangement list of Dual Use Goods and Technologies and Munitions list of July 12, 1996, and subsequent revisions; or (ii) goods, services, or technology not listed on any list identified in clause (i) but which nevertheless would be, if they were United States goods, services, or technology, prohibited for export to Iran because of their potential to make a material contribution to the development of nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons, or of ballistic or cruise missile systems.
Exclusion.--The term ``goods, services, or technology'' does not include goods, services, or technology that are directly related to the operation of the Bushehr nuclear power reactor.
Government of the russian federation.-- (A) In general.--The term ``Government of the Russian Federation'' includes the government of any subdivision of the Russian Federation, and any agency or instrumentality of the Government of the Russian Federation.
Agency or instrumentality.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ``agency or instrumentality of the Government of the Russian Federation'' means an agency or instrumentality of a foreign state as defined in section 1603(b) of title 28, United States Code, with each reference in such section to ``a foreign state'' deemed to be a reference to ``the Russian Federation''.
Government of iran.-- (A) In general.--The term ``Government of Iran'' includes the government of any subdivision of Iran, and any agency or instrumentality of the Government of Iran.
Agency or instrumentality.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ``agency or instrumentality of the Government of Iran'' means an agency or instrumentality of a foreign state as defined in section 1603(b) of title 28, United States Code, with each reference in such section to ``a foreign state'' deemed to be a reference to ``Iran''.
National of iran.--The term ``national of Iran'' means-- (A) any citizen of Iran; or (B) any other legal entity that is organized under the laws of Iran.
National of the russian federation.--The term ``national of the Russian Federation'' means-- (A) any citizen of the Russian Federation; or (B) any other legal entity that is organized under the laws of the Russian Federation.
Person.--The term ``person'' means any person or entity, including any agency or instrumentality of a foreign state.
TITLE I--APPROVAL OF UNITED STATES-RUSSIAN FEDERATION AGREEMENT FOR COOPERATION ON PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY SEC.
In General.--Congress does favor the United States-Russian Federation Agreement for Cooperation on Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, subject to the requirements of subsection (b).
Relationship to Other Provisions of Law.--Notwithstanding section 123 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2153), the Agreement shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of this Act and other applicable provisions of law.
TITLE II--LIMITATIONS ON NUCLEAR COOPERATION WITH THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION SEC.
CERTIFICATION OF ACTIONS BY THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION ON NONPROLIFERATION MATTERS.
Certification.--No license may be issued for the export of nuclear material, equipment, or technology to the Russian Federation pursuant to the Agreement for any fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act unless the President certifies to the appropriate congressional committees for such fiscal year that the requirements of subsection (b) have been met.
Requirements.--The requirements referred to in subsection are the following: (1) The Government of the Russian Federation has taken, and is continuing to take, effective actions to prohibit, terminate, and prevent the transfer of goods, services, or technology as defined in this Act to the Government of Iran.
For the preceding 12-month period-- (A) there has been no cooperation with respect to any activity described in paragraph (1) between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Iran or any national of Iran based on all credible information available to the United States at the time of the certification; and (B)(i) there has been no cooperation with respect to any activity described in paragraph (1) between any national of the Russian Federation and the Government of Iran or any national of Iran based on all credible information available to the United States at the time of the certification; or (ii) the Government of the Russian Federation has-- (I) terminated any significant cooperation between any such Russian national and the Government of Iran or any such Iranian national; (II) instituted effective measures to prevent a reoccurrence of any such cooperation; or (III) prosecuted any such Russian national.
Limitation.--A certification of the conditions described in clause (ii) of subsection (b)(2)(B) may not be used to satisfy the requirements of such subsection for three or more consecutive fiscal years.
Sunset.--The provisions of this section shall be effective for the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
CERTIFICATION OF COOPERATION BY THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION ON IRAN SANCTIONS.
Certification.--No license may be issued for the export of nuclear material, equipment or technology to the Russian Federation pursuant to the Agreement for any fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act unless the President certifies to the appropriate congressional committees for such fiscal year that the requirements of subsection (b) have been met.
Requirements.--The requirements referred to in subsection (a) are that the Government of the Russian Federation is fully and completely supporting United States efforts to achieve effective international and United Nations Security Council sanctions on Iran in response to Iran's nuclear program.
CERTIFICATION OF RUSSIAN LIABILITY PROTECTIONS FOR UNITED STATES CIVIL NUCLEAR INDUSTRIES.
Certification.--No license may be issued for the export of nuclear material, equipment or technology to the Russian Federation pursuant to the Agreement unless the President certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that the requirements of subsection (b) have been met.
Requirements.--The requirements referred to in subsection (a) are that the Government of the Russian Federation has ratified the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage, done at Vienna on September 12, 1997, or has enacted domestic law that provides adequate liability protections for United States firms for civil nuclear commerce with the Russian Federation.
TITLE III--AUTHORIZATION OF EXTRAORDINARY PAYMENTS IN CONNECTION WITH THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION SEC.
AUTHORIZATION OF EXTRAORDINARY PAYMENTS.
Authorization.--Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in section 6 of the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Nonproliferation Act (Public Law 106-178; 50 United States Code 1701 note), the President is authorized to make extraordinary payments in connection with the International Space Station to the Russian Federal Space Agency, or any organization or entity under the jurisdiction or control of the Russian Federal Space Agency, for equipment and services related to transportation to and from, rescue from, and provision, maintenance, and operation of the International Space Station.
Limitations.--The authority under subsection (a)-- (1) shall be limited to payments for services provided before July 1, 2016; and (2) may not be used for the purchase of-- (A) any cargo services provided by a Progress vehicle after December 31, 2011; or (B) any crew transportation or rescue services provided by a Soyuz vehicle after a United States commercial provider of crew transportation and rescue services demonstrates the capability to meet mission requirements of the International Space Station.
TITLE IV--FUTURE AGREEMENTS FOR COOPERATION ON PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY SEC.
REQUIREMENT FOR CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL OF AGREEMENTS FOR PEACEFUL NUCLEAR COOPERATION.
Cooperation With Other Nations.--Section 123 d. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2153 d.) is amended in the first sentence-- (1) by striking ``not'' the first and second place it appears; (2) by inserting ``only'' after ``effective''; and (3) by striking ``Provided further,'' and all that follows through the period at the end.
Subsequent Arrangements.--Section 131 a.
of such Act is amended-- (1) in the second sentence, by striking ``, security'' and all that follows through the period at the end; and (2) by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``Such subsequent arrangement shall not take effect unless the Congress enacts a joint resolution of approval, according to the procedures of sections 123 d. and 130 i. of this Act.
Any such nuclear proliferation assessment statement shall be submitted to the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate no later than the 31st day of continuous session after submission of the subsequent arrangement.''.
INITIATIVES AND NEGOTIATIONS RELATING TO AGREEMENTS FOR PEACEFUL NUCLEAR COOPERATION.
Section 123 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2153) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``e. The President shall keep the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate fully and currently informed of any initiative or negotiations relating to a new or amended agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation pursuant to this section prior to the President's announcement of such initiative or negotiations.
The President shall consult with the appropriate congressional committees concerning such initiative or negotiations beginning not less than 15 calendar days after the initiation of any such negotiations, or the receipt or transmission of a draft agreement, whichever occurs first, and monthly thereafter until such time as the negotiations are concluded.