This Act may be cited as the ``Gifted and Talented Students Education Act of 1998''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Gifted and talented students give evidence of high performance capability in specific academic fields, or in areas such as intellectual, creative, artistic, or leadership capacity, and require services or activities not ordinarily provided by a school in order to fully develop such capabilities.
These children are from all cultural, racial, and ethnic backgrounds, and socioeconomic groups; some have disabilities and for some, English is not their first language.
Many of these students have been historically underrepresented in gifted education programs.
Because gifted and talented students generally are more advanced academically, are able to learn more quickly and study in more depth and complexity than others their age, their special educational needs require opportunities and experiences that are different from those generally available in regular education programs.
There currently is no Federal requirement to identify or serve the Nation's approximately 3,000,000 gifted and talented students.
While some States and school districts allocate resources to educate gifted and talented students, other do not.
Additionally, State laws and State and local funding, identification, and accountability mechanisms vary widely, resulting in a vast disparity of services for this special- needs population.
If the United States is to compete successfully in the global economy, it is important that more students achieve to higher levels, and that highly capable students receive an education that prepares them to perform the most highly innovative and creative work necessary in today's workplace.
The performance of twelfth-grade advanced students in the United States on the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) was among the lowest in the world.
In each of 5 physics content areas and in each of 3 math content areas, the performance of physics and advanced mathematics students in the United States was among the lowest of participating countries.
Typical elementary school students with academic gifts and talents have already mastered 35 to 50 percent of the school year's content in several subject areas before the year begins.
In 1990, fewer than 2 cents out of every $100 spent on elementary and secondary education in the United States was devoted to providing challenging programming for the Nation's gifted and talented students.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide grants to States to support programs, classes, and other services designed to meet the needs of the Nation's gifted and talented students in elementary and secondary schools.
PROGRAM AUTHORIZATION AND ACTIVITIES.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to States for use by public schools to develop or expand gifted and talented education programs through one or more of the following activities: (1) Professional development programs.--States may expend funds to develop and implement programs to address State and local needs for inservice training programs for general educators, specialists in gifted and talented education, administrators, school counselors, or other personnel at the elementary and secondary levels.
Technical assistance.--A State may make materials and services available through State regional education service centers, universities, colleges, or other entities.
Innovative programs and services.--States may support innovative approaches and curricula used by school districts, individual schools, or consortia of schools or school districts.
Emerging technologies.--States may provide funds to provide challenging, high-level course work to individual students or groups of students in schools and school districts that do not have the resources to otherwise provide the courses through new and emerging technologies, including distance learning.
Funds may be used to develop curriculum packages, compensate distance-learning educators, or for other relevant purposes, but may not be used for the purchase or upgrading of technological hardware.
State Infrastructure Costs.--Not more than 10 percent of the total amount received under this Act may be used for State educational agency administrative costs, such as facilitating the coordination of gifted and talented education programs and services, disseminating information and materials to teachers and parents, creating State gifted education advisory boards, and administering funds received under this Act.
In General.--To be eligible to receive a grant award under this Act, a State educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time and in such form and manner as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--The application shall include assurances that-- (1) funds received under this Act shall be used to support gifted and talented students in public schools, including students from all economic, ethnic, and racial backgrounds, students of limited English proficiency, gifted students with disabilities and highly gifted students; (2) not less than 90 percent of the funds received by the State will be distributed to public schools within the State; and (3) funds received under this Act shall be used only to supplement, but not supplant, the amount of State and local funds expended for the specialized education and related services provided for the education of gifted and talented students.
States shall develop and implement program assessment models to evaluate educational effectiveness and ensure program accountability.
Approval.--To the extent funds are made available for this Act, the Secretary shall approve an application of a State educational agency if such application meets the requirements of this section.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), of the total amount made available for this Act, the Secretary shall award to each State an amount that bears the same relation to the total amount as the number of children ages 5 through 18 in the State for the preceding academic year bears to the total number of all such children in all States for such year.
Minimum Award.--If sufficient funds are made available for this Act for each State to receive $1,000,000 in each fiscal year, each State that meets the requirements of this Act shall receive not less than $1,000,000 each fiscal year.
Ratable Reduction.--If the amount made available for this Act is insufficient to allocate the amount specified in subsection (b), the allocation shall be ratably reduced for each State.
The State educational agency shall submit a report to the Secretary beginning one year after the date of the enactment of this Act and each subsequent year that describes the number of students served and the activities supported with funds provided under this Act.
The report shall include a description of the measures taken to comply with the accountability requirements of section 4.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``gifted and talented'' has the meaning such term has under State law or as such term is defined by the State or local educational agency, or in the case of a State that does not have a law that defines the term and the State or local educational agency has not defined the term, the term has the meaning given such term under section 14101(16) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (20 United States Code 8801(16)).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
The term ``State educational agency'' has the same meaning given such term under section 14101(28) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (20 United States Code 8801(28)).
There are authorized to be appropriated $160,000,000 to carry out this Act for each of the fiscal years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003.