This Act may be cited as the ``Children of Female Vietnam Veterans' Benefits Act of 2000''.
BENEFITS FOR THE CHILDREN OF FEMALE VIETNAM VETERANS WHO SUFFER FROM CERTAIN BIRTH DEFECTS.
In General.--Chapter 18 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER II--CHILDREN OF FEMALE VIETNAM VETERANS BORN WITH CERTAIN BIRTH DEFECTS ``Sec.
Definitions ``In this subchapter: ``(1) The term `child', with respect to a female Vietnam veteran, means a natural child of the female Vietnam veteran, regardless of age or marital status, who was conceived after the date on which the female Vietnam veteran first entered the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era (as specified in section 101(29)(A) of this title).
The term `covered birth defect' means each birth defect identified by the Secretary under section 1812 of this title.
The term `female Vietnam veteran' means any female individual who performed active military, naval, or air service in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era (as so specified), without regard to the characterization of the individual's service.
Birth defects covered ``(a) Identification.--Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary shall identify the birth defects of children of female Vietnam veterans that-- ``(1) are associated with the service of female Vietnam veterans in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era (as specified in section 101(29)(A) of this title); and ``(2) result in the permanent physical or mental disability of such children.
Limitations.--(1) The birth defects identified under subsection (a) may not include birth defects resulting from the following: ``(A) A familial disorder.
A fetal or neonatal infirmity with well-established causes.
The birth defects identified under subsection (a) may not include spina bifida.
List.--The Secretary shall prescribe in regulations a list of the birth defects identified under subsection (a).
Benefits and assistance ``(a) Health Care.--(1) The Secretary shall provide a child of a female Vietnam veteran who was born with a covered birth defect such health care as the Secretary determines is needed by the child for such birth defect or any disability that is associated with such birth defect.
The Secretary may provide health care under this subsection directly or by contract or other arrangement with a health care provider.
For purposes of this subsection, the definitions in section 1803(c) of this title shall apply with respect to the provision of health care under this subsection, except that for such purposes-- ``(A) the reference to `specialized spina bifida clinic' in paragraph (2) of such section 1803(c) shall be treated as a reference to a specialized clinic treating the birth defect concerned under this subsection; and ``(B) the reference to `vocational training under section 1804 of this title' in paragraph (8) of such section 1803(c) shall be treated as a reference to vocational training under subsection (b).
Vocational Training.--(1) The Secretary may provide a program of vocational training to a child of a female Vietnam veteran who was born with a covered birth defect if the Secretary determines that the achievement of a vocational goal by the child is reasonably feasible.
Subsections (b) through (e) of section 1804 of this title shall apply with respect to any program of vocational training provided under paragraph (1).
Monetary Allowance.--(1) The Secretary shall pay a monthly allowance to any child of a female Vietnam veteran who was born with a covered birth defect for any disability resulting from such birth defect.
The amount of the monthly allowance paid under this subsection shall be based on the degree of disability suffered by the child concerned, as determined in accordance with a schedule for rating disabilities resulting from covered birth defects that is prescribed by the Secretary.
In prescribing a schedule for rating disabilities under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall establish four levels of disability upon which the amount of the monthly allowance under this subsection shall be based.
The amount of the monthly allowance paid under this subsection shall be as follows: ``(A) In the case of a child suffering from the lowest level of disability prescribed in the schedule for rating disabilities under this subsection, $100.
In the case of a child suffering from the lower intermediate level of disability prescribed in the schedule for rating disabilities under this subsection, the greater of-- ``(i) $214; or ``(ii) the monthly amount payable under section 1805(b)(3) of this title for the lowest level of disability prescribed for purposes of that section.
In the case of a child suffering from the higher intermediate level of disability prescribed in the schedule for rating disabilities under this subsection, the greater of-- ``(i) $743; or ``(ii) the monthly amount payable under section 1805(b)(3) of this title for the intermediate level of disability prescribed for purposes of that section.
In the case of a child suffering from the highest level of disability prescribed in the schedule for rating disabilities under this subsection, the greater of-- ``(i) $1,272; or ``(ii) the monthly amount payable under section 1805(b)(3) of this title for the highest level of disability prescribed for purposes of that section.
Amounts under subparagraphs (A), (B)(i), (C)(i), and (D)(i) of paragraph (4) shall be subject to adjustment from time to time under section 5312 of this title.
Subsections (c) and (d) of section 1805 of this title shall apply with respect to any monthly allowance paid under this subsection.
General Limitations on Availability of Benefits and Assistance.--(1) No individual receiving benefits or assistance under this section may receive any benefits or assistance under subchapter I of this chapter.
In any case where affirmative evidence establishes that the covered birth defect of a child results from a cause other than the active military, naval, or air service in the Republic of Vietnam of the female Vietnam veteran who is the mother of the child, no benefits or assistance may be provided the child under this section.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations for purposes of the administration of the provisions of this section.''.
Administrative Provisions.--That chapter is further amended by inserting after subchapter II, as added by subsection (a) of this section, the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER III--ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS ``Sec.
Applicability of certain administrative provisions ``The provisions of sections 5101(c), 5110(a), (b)(2), (g), and (i), 5111, and 5112(a), (b)(1), (b)(6), (b)(9), and (b)(10) of this title shall apply with respect to benefits and assistance under this chapter in the same manner as such provisions apply to veterans' disability compensation.
Treatment of receipt of monetary allowance on other benefits ``(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, receipt by an individual of a monetary allowance under this chapter shall not impair, infringe, or otherwise affect the right of the individual to receive any other benefit to which the individual is otherwise entitled under any law administered by the Secretary.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, receipt by an individual of a monetary allowance under this chapter shall not impair, infringe, or otherwise affect the right of any other individual to receive any benefit to which such other individual is entitled under any law administered by the Secretary based on the relationship of such other individual to the individual who receives such monetary allowance.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a monetary allowance paid an individual under this chapter shall not be considered as income or resources in determining eligibility for or the amount of benefits under any Federal or Federally-assisted program.''.
Repeal of Superseded Matter.--Section 1806 of title 38, United States Code, is repealed.
Redesignation of Existing Matter.--Chapter 18 of that title is further amended by inserting before section 1801 the following: ``SUBCHAPTER I--CHILDREN OF VIETNAM VETERANS BORN WITH SPINA BIFIDA''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Sections 1801 and 1802 of that title are each amended by striking ``this chapter'' and inserting ``this subchapter''.
Section 1805(a) of such title is amended by striking ``this chapter'' and inserting ``this section''.
Clerical Amendments.--(1)(A) The chapter heading of chapter 18 of that title is amended to read as follows: ``CHAPTER 18--BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN OF VIETNAM VETERANS''.
The tables of chapters at beginning of that title, and at the beginning of part II of that title, are each amended by striking the item relating to chapter 18 and inserting the following new item: ``18.
Benefits for Children of Vietnam Veterans............. 1801''.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 18 of that title is amended-- (A) by inserting after the chapter heading the following: ``SUBCHAPTER I--CHILDREN OF VIETNAM VETERANS BORN WITH SPINA BIFIDA''; (B) by striking the item relating to section 1806; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER II--CHILDREN OF FEMALE VIETNAM VETERANS BORN WITH CERTAIN BIRTH DEFECTS ``1811.
``SUBCHAPTER III--ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS ``1821.
Applicability of certain administrative provisions.
Treatment of receipt of monetary allowance on other benefits.''.
Applicability.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall take effect on the first day of the first month beginning more than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall identify birth defects under section 1822 of title 38, United States Code (as added by subsection (a) of this section), and shall prescribe the regulations required by subchapter II of that title (as so added), not later than the effective date specified in paragraph (1).
No benefit or assistance may be provided under subchapter II of chapter 18 of title 38, United States Code (as so added), for any period before the effective date specified in paragraph (1) by reason of the amendments made by this section.