The Congress finds the following: (1) According to the United Nations, economic and social factors contribute to the spread of HIV/AIDS, which now infects an average of 16,000 people every day.
Due to the debt crisis in the majority of impoverished countries, substantially more money is spent on debt repayment each year than on HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment programs.
Structural adjustment programs in the developing world, in an attempt to enable the impoverished nations to repay their debt, have required governments to impose failed and often harmful policies including charging user fees for the use of medical clinics.
These user fees can create an obstacle to effective prevention and treatment programs.
In Kenya, when user fees were imposed at Nairobi's Sexually Transmitted Disease clinics, attendance decreased 35- 60 percent.
User fees have also been shown to decrease the use of health clinics in Mozambique, the Congo, Ghana, and Zimbabwe.
Cuts in health clinic budgets, required by structural adjustment programs, may also contribute to the spread of HIV/ AIDS.
Structural adjustment programs have also contributed to internal and international labor migration.
Labor migration is associated with increase in HIV transmission rates in Senegal, Ghana, Benin, Nigeria, and Kenya.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic will result in tens of millions of orphaned children worldwide, creating an unprecedented strain on the world's economic resources and relief efforts.
Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, stated in 1999 that ``the impact of AIDS is no less destructive than that of warfare itself, and by some measures, far worse''.
Many of the same nations in Sub-Saharan Africa which are crushed beneath the weight of foreign debt are experiencing catastrophic loss of life and negative economic growth due largely to the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
The decision of the G-8 countries at the Cologne Summit in 1999 to reduce by $100,000,000,000 the debt of the countries listed by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPCs) (which combined owe approximately $220,000,000,000 in debt) is a measure for which only 22 have qualified.
These countries have seen their annual debt service reduced by an average of 26 percent, a level of reduction which is neither allowing these countries a sustainable exit from debt, nor freeing up substantial resources to combat poverty and the AIDS pandemic.
Per capita government expenditure on health care in most African countries is below $10, and the per capita share of debt service to foreign creditors is up to 5 times as high as public health expenditure.
The Congress enacted section 596 of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2001.
This demonstrated the political commitment to eliminate user fees for primary health care and education.
A large-scale program of multilateral and bilateral debt cancellation explicitly linked to HIV/AIDS control would have minimal impact on creditor country taxpayers and budgets.
The active participation of all stakeholders in the epidemic, in the process of negotiating debt cancellation for HIV/AIDS prevention and care, is a precondition for the implementation of effective programs.
The United States has shown good faith by providing $435,000,000 in fiscal year 2001 for bilateral debt cancellation and multilateral debt reduction.
This action should encourage international financial institutions to match the debt cancellation efforts of the G-8 countries to ensure burden sharing.
MULTILATERAL DEBT CANCELLATION EFFORTS FOR COUNTRIES ELIGIBLE TO BE CONSIDERED FOR ASSISTANCE UNDER THE HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES (HIPC) INITIATIVE OR HEAVILY AFFECTED BY HIV/AIDS.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors at the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States to call for a vote in their respective institutions on (and call for the publication of the outcome of any such vote)-- (1) negotiating a strategy for cancelling the debts owed to the institution by any country that is eligible to be considered for assistance under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative or is heavily affected by HIV/AIDS, which should ensure that the savings from debt cancellation are used for poverty reduction in a process that is fair and transparent, and that includes the participation of national governments, including parliamentary bodies, nongovernmental organizations, and civil society; (2) in the interim, accepting an immediate moratorium on debt service payments and accrual of interest on such debt owed by any such country; (3) encouraging each such country and civil society stakeholders to ensure that-- (A) the national HIV/AIDS strategic plan is fully funded, and that a significant proportion of the savings from debt cancellation is used for the HIV/AIDS response and other health priorities, as determined locally; and (B) HIV/AIDS and infectious disease control strategies are based upon best practices, including prevention, care, treatment, orphan response, and accessibility to affordable drugs and social and health infrastructure; and (4) using the reserve accounts or net income of the institution to offset the costs of any such debt cancellation.
OPPOSITION TO USER FEES FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION OR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors at at the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund to oppose and vote against any program of these institutions that would include user fees or service charges for primary education or primary health care, including prevention and treatment efforts for HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and infant, child, and maternal well-being.
The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with appropriate governmental agencies, nongovernmental organizations, and civil society, shall develop strategies to counter corruption in the countries described in section 2.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the Committees on Financial Services and on International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and on Foreign Relations of the Senate a written report on all progress in debt cancellation efforts undertaken pursuant to this Act and on the effects of the debt cancellation provided pursuant to this Act on funding for HIV/AIDS programs, projects, activities (including any vaccination approaches, health care delivery system infrastructure development, HIV prevention education), and the effectiveness of such programs, projects, and activities in reducing the worldwide spread of HIV/AIDS.
The report should include recommendations for measures to ensure accountability in the use of the savings from such debt cancellation.
In this Act: (1) G-8 countries.--The term ``G-8 countries'' means the group consisting of France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Italy, and Russia established to facilitate economic cooperation among the 8 major economic powers.
Heavily affected by hiv/aids.--The term ``heavily affected by HIV/AIDS'' means, with respect to a country, that the country has an HIV/AIDS incidence of at least 3 percent or the country has declared a national health emergency related to HIV/AIDS.
Heavily indebted poor countries (hipc) initiative.--The term ``Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative'' means countries that are eligible for consideration for highly concessional assistance from the International Development Association, and from the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility of the International Monetary Fund.
HIV/AIDS.--The term ``HIV/AIDS'' means infection with the human immunodeficiency virus.
Such term includes the acquired immune deficiency syndrome.