This Act may be cited as the ``Diverse Teachers Recruitment Act of 2010''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Department of Education statistics reveal a lack of diversity among public schoolteachers.
During the school year of 2007 through 2008, an estimated 83.1 percent of public schoolteachers were Caucasian, while 7.1 percent were Latino, 7 percent were African-American, and 1.2 percent were Asian.
Of all public schoolteachers, 24.1 percent were male and 75.9 percent were female.
Some experts believe the lack of diversity can leave students in underrepresented groups without role models to whom they can relate, which may lead to poorer performance in the classroom.
Statistics show that students in some underrepresented groups have lower standardized test scores and lower graduation rates.
Teacher demographics should better reflect those of the population as a whole, ensuring that students have role models from diverse backgrounds and racial and ethnic groups and of different genders.
RECRUITMENT, TRAINING, AND RETENTION OF TEACHERS FROM UNDERREPRESENTED GROUPS.
In General.--Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6601 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART E--RECRUITMENT, TRAINING, AND RETENTION OF TEACHERS FROM UNDERREPRESENTED GROUPS ``SEC.
Authorization.--From amounts appropriated under section 2505, the Secretary shall make grants on a competitive basis to eligible entities for recruiting, training, and retaining individuals from underrepresented groups as teachers at public elementary schools and secondary schools.
Eligibility.--The Secretary may only make a grant under subsection (a) to an eligible entity that-- ``(1) serves schools that have difficulty recruiting, training, and retaining individuals from underrepresented groups as teachers; and ``(2) submits an application at such time, in such form, and containing such information and assurances as the Secretary may require, including-- ``(A) a description of how the activities the eligible entity carries out with grant funds will ensure the recruitment, training, and retention of a significant number of individuals from underrepresented groups; and ``(B) a description of the difficulty recruiting, training, and retaining individuals from underrepresented groups experienced by the schools served by the eligible entity.
Priority.--In making grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to-- ``(1) local educational agencies (or consortia of local educational agencies) that serve the most high-need schools; and ``(2) local educational agencies (or consortia of local educational agencies) that serve schools with the highest percentages of minority individuals in their student populations.
Matching Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may not make a grant to an eligible entity under subsection (a) unless the eligible entity agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the eligible entity in carrying out the activities for which the grant is awarded, the eligible entity will make available non- Federal contributions in an amount equal to not less than 10 percent of the Federal funds provided under the grant.
Satisfying matching requirement.--The non-Federal contributions required under paragraph (1) may be-- ``(A) in cash or in-kind, including services, fairly evaluated; and ``(B) from-- ``(i) any private source; or ``(ii) a State educational agency or local educational agency.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive or reduce the non- Federal contribution required by paragraph (1) if the eligible entity involved demonstrates that it cannot meet the contribution requirement due to financial hardship.
``An eligible entity receiving a grant under section 2501(a) shall submit to the Secretary not later than 90 days after the end of each school year in which the entity receives grant funds a report that contains-- ``(1) a description of the activities for which the entity used grant funds during such school year; ``(2) data concerning, with respect to the schools served by the entity-- ``(A) the number of individuals from underrepresented groups that began teaching during such school year; ``(B) the retention rate of teachers who are individuals from underrepresented groups; ``(C) in the case of the report covering the last school year in which the entity receives grant funds, indicators of student academic achievement during such school year as compared with previous school years, disaggregated, if possible, by the achievement of-- ``(i) economically disadvantaged students; ``(ii) students from major racial groups; ``(iii) students with disabilities; and ``(iv) students with limited English proficiency; ``(D) student graduation rates for the school year covered by the report as compared with previous school years, if applicable in the case of the schools served by the entity; and ``(E) student attendance rates for the school year covered by the report as compared with previous school years; and ``(3) a description of and data regarding such characteristics of the schools served by the entity, and the students of such schools, as the Secretary considers appropriate, including the number and percentage of students in each of the groups listed in clauses (i) through (iv) of paragraph (2)(C).
BEST PRACTICES INFORMATION CLEARINGHOUSE.
In General.--The Secretary shall evaluate the success of the activities carried out by eligible entities using grant funds received under section 2501(a) and compile a database of best practices for recruiting, training, and retaining individuals from underrepresented groups as public elementary and secondary school teachers.
The Secretary shall make such database available to eligible entities (regardless of whether such entities have received grants under such section) through an Internet Web site.
Funds Available.--Of the amounts appropriated to carry out this part for a fiscal year, the Secretary may use not more than 10 percent to carry out this section during such fiscal year.
``In this part, the following definitions apply: ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means-- ``(A) a local educational agency (or consortium of local educational agencies); or ``(B) an entity that-- ``(i) has entered into a partnership with a local educational agency (or consortium of local educational agencies) in which the local educational agency (or consortium of local educational agencies) is the primary partner; and ``(ii) is a private nonprofit organization, educational service agency, institution of higher education, or State educational agency.
High-need high school.--The term `high-need high school' means a secondary school-- ``(A) in which the entering grade of the school is not lower than grade 9 and that includes grade 12; and ``(B) that has a graduation rate of not more than 65 percent in each of the 2 academic years prior to the submission of the grant application.
High-need middle school.--The term `high-need middle school' means a secondary school-- ``(A) in which the entering grade is not lower than grade 6 and the highest grade is not higher than grade 9; and ``(B) from which not less than 35 percent of the students who complete such school enroll in a high-need high school.
High-need school.--The term `high-need school' means a public school, including a charter school (as such term is defined in section 5210(1))-- ``(A) in which not less than 40 percent of the enrolled students are eligible to receive free or reduced price lunches under section 9(b) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1758(b)); or ``(B) that is a high-need high school or a high- need middle school.
Individual from an underrepresented group.--The term `individual from an underrepresented group' means an individual who is a member of a racial group or gender that has historically been underrepresented among teachers in public primary and secondary schools in the United States.
Minority individual.--The term `minority individual' means an individual who is a member of a racial group that has historically been underrepresented among teachers in public primary and secondary schools in the United States.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part such sums as are necessary for fiscal years 2010 through 2015.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 2 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding after the item related to section 2441 the following: Part E--Recruitment, Training, and Retention of Teachers From Underrepresented Groups Sec.
Best practices information clearinghouse.