MORTGAGE PAYMENT ASSISTANCE TO AVOID FORECLOSURE OF HOME LOANS GUARANTEED UNDER TITLE 38.
In General.--(1) Chapter 37 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 3714 the following new section: ``Sec.
Loans to refinance delinquent indebtedness ``(a)(1) The Secretary may, at the Secretary's option, provide assistance to a veteran under this section for the purpose of avoiding the foreclosure of a housing loan made to that veteran and guaranteed by the Secretary under section 3710 or 3712 of this title (hereinafter in this section referred to as a `primary loan').
Assistance under this section shall be in the form of a loan to the veteran.
Such assistance may be provided only if-- ``(A) the dwelling that secures the primary loan is the current residence of the veteran and is occupied by the veteran as the veteran's home; ``(B) the veteran is at least six months delinquent in payments on that primary loan; ``(C) the veteran has lost employment or has had a substantial reduction in household income (as defined in regulations prescribed by the Secretary) through no fault of the veteran; and ``(D) the Secretary determines that there is a reasonable prospect that the veteran will be able to resume payment on the primary loan within six months after receiving assistance under this section.
For the purposes of this section, the term `veteran' includes the surviving spouse of a veteran if the surviving spouse was a co- obligor of the primary loan.
(1) A loan under this section shall be advanced to the holder of the primary loan.
The amount of the loan under this subsection shall first be applied to the amount delinquent on the loan guaranteed under this chapter including any amount delinquent on taxes, assessments, hazard insurance, and late charges required by the holder to be included in the veteran's monthly payment on the mortgage.
The Secretary may make more than one loan under this section to a veteran.
The total amount of loans under this section to any veteran may not exceed $10,000.
A loan under this section-- ``(1) shall bear no interest until the date on which payments on the primary loan (including amounts for taxes, assessments, hazard insurance, and late charges required by the holder to be included in the veteran's monthly payment on the mortgage) are current; ``(2) shall be secured by a lien on the property securing the primary loan and by such other security as the Secretary may require; and ``(3) shall be subject to such additional terms and conditions as the Secretary may require.
As a condition of receiving a loan under this section the veteran shall execute an agreement, in such form as the Secretary may prescribe, to repay the loan within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Secretary, not to exceed 15 years from the date on which such loan is made.
If the Secretary determines that the veteran has sufficient income or other resources to do so, the Secretary may require the veteran to make partial payments on the primary loan guaranteed under this chapter during the period the holder of that loan is applying the amount of the loan under this section to payments becoming due on the primary loan.
Notwithstanding any other law, the Secretary may employ attorneys to bring suit to collect any amount of a loan under this section on which the veteran to whom the loan is made is in default.
The Secretary's decisions on any question of law or fact regarding assistance under this section, including whether or not to grant such assistance and the terms and conditions under which such assistance is granted or not granted, shall be final and conclusive, and no other official or any court of the United States shall have power or jurisdiction to review any such decision by an action in the nature of mandamus or otherwise.
A loan under this section shall be made from the fund established under section 3724 or 3725 of this title that is available with respect to the primary loan in connection with which the loan is made under this section.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3714 the following new item: ``3715.
Loans to refinance delinquent indebtedness.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a), shall take effect at the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
FINANCING OF DISCOUNT POINTS.
Section 3703(c)(4)(B) of title 38, United States Code, is amended in the second sentence by striking out ``Discount'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Except in the case of a loan for the purpose specified in section 3710(a)(8), 3710(b)(7), or section 3712(a)(1)(F) of this title, discount''.
RATE ADJUSTMENTS FOR ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGES.
Section 3707(b)(2) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``on the anniversary of the date on which the loan was closed''.