This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission to Support Law Enforcement Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) law enforcement officers risk their lives daily to protect citizens, for modest rewards and too little recognition; (2) a significant shift has occurred in the problems that law enforcement officers face without a corresponding change in the support from the Federal Government; (3) law enforcement officers are on the front line in the war against drugs and crime; (4) the rate of violent crime continues to increase along with the increase in drug use; (5) a large percentage of individuals arrested test positive for drug usage; (6) the Presidential Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice of 1965 focused attention on many issues affecting law enforcement, and a review twenty-five years later would help to evaluate current problems, including drug-related crime, violence, racial conflict, and decreased funding; and (7) a comprehensive study of law enforcement issues, including the role of the Federal Government in supporting law enforcement officers, working conditions, and responsibility for crime control would assist in redefining the relationships between the Federal Government, the public, and law enforcement officials.
There is established a national commission to be known as the ``National Commission to Support Law Enforcement'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall study and recommend changes regarding law enforcement agencies and law enforcement issues on the Federal, State, and local levels, including the following: (1) Funding.--The sufficiency of funding, including a review of grant programs at the Federal level.
Employment.--The conditions of law enforcement employment.
Information.--The effectiveness of information-sharing systems, intelligence, infrastructure, and procedures among law enforcement agencies of Federal, State, and local governments.
Research and training.--The status of law enforcement research and education and training.
Equipment and resources.--The adequacy of equipment, physical resources, and human resources.
Cooperation.--The cooperation among Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies.
Responsibility.--The responsibility of governments and law enforcement agencies in solving the crime problem.
Impact.--The impact of the criminal justice system, including court schedules and prison overcrowding, on law enforcement.
Consultation.--The Commission shall conduct surveys and consult with focus groups of law enforcement officers, local officials, and community leaders across the Nation to obtain information and seek advice on important law enforcement issues.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 25 members as follows: (1) Seven individuals from national law enforcement organizations representing law enforcement officers, of whom-- (A) Two shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (B) Two shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; (C) One shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; (D) One shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate; and (E) One shall be appointed by the President.
Seven individuals from national law enforcement organizations representing law enforcement management, of whom-- (A) Two shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (B) Two shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; (C) One shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; (D) One shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate; and (E) One shall be appointed by the President.
Two individuals with academic expertise regarding law enforcement issues, of whom-- (A) One shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate.
One shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate and the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Two Members of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker and the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Two Members of the Senate, appointed by the majority leader and the minority leader of the Senate.
One individual involved in Federal law enforcement from the Department of the Treasury, appointed by the President.
One individual from the Department of Justice, appointed by the President.
One individual representing a State or local governmental entity, such as a Governor, mayor, or State Attorney General, to be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
One individual representing a State or local governmental entity, such as a Governor, mayor, or State Attorney General, to be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One individual representing a State or local governmental entity, such as a governor, mayor, or State attorney general, to be appointed by the President.
Comptroller General.--The Comptroller General shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall oversee the methodology and approach of the Commission's study.
Chairperson.--Upon their appointment the members of the Commission shall select one of their number to act as chairperson.
Compensation.-- (1) In general.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowance, or benefit by reason of service on the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Appointment Dates.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed no later than 90 days after the enactment of this Act.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Administrative Support.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, administrative support services as the Commission may request.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for purposes of this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at the times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence, as the Commission considers appropriate.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the chairperson of the Commission, the head of an agency shall furnish the information to the Commission to the extent permitted by law.
Gifts and Donations.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Not later than the expiration of the eighteen-month period beginning on the date of the appointment of the members of the Commission, a report containing the findings of the Commission and specific proposals for legislation and administrative actions that the Commission has determined to be appropriate shall be submitted to Congress.
The Commission shall cease to exist upon the expiration of the sixty-day period beginning on the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 8.
Title XXXIV of the Crime Control Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-647; 104 United States Statutes at Large 4918) and title II, section 211 B of the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1991 (Public Law 101-515; 104 United States Statutes at Large 2122) are repealed.