This section may be cited as the ``American's Math and Science Excellence Act''.
In this Act: (1) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the National Science Foundation.
Elementary school; secondary school.--The terms ``elementary school'' and ``secondary school'' have the meanings given the terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the same meaning given it in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1201(a)).
Charter school.--The term ``charter school'' has the same meaning given it in section 10310(g) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8060(g)).
Internship.--The term ``internship'' means a program of personal service by an individual, other than an employee, for a specified period of time under which the service is primarily for the educational experience of the individual.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TEACHER TRAINING GRANTS.
Grants Authorized.--The Director, in consultation with the Secretary of Education, is authorized to award grants, on a competitive basis, to support professional development in the use of information technology as it pertains to enhanced student learning for teachers who teach in elementary schools, secondary schools, or charter schools.
Duration.--Grants awarded under this section-- (1) to individuals shall be awarded for a period of not more than 1 year; and (2) to educational institutions shall be awarded for a period of not more than 3 years.
Applications.-- (1) In general.--To receive a grant under this section, an individual, secondary school, or other educational institution shall submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Director may require.
Requirements.--In awarding grants under this section, the Director shall not require applications for the grants to be submitted by computer or Internet-based routes, although such applications may be submitted by such routes.
Uses of funds.--Grant funds awarded under this section may be used for-- (A) substitute teacher pay or teacher salary; (B) fees for attendance at workshops, seminars, conferences, classes, or training sessions; (C) developing a compensation system based on merit that supports teachers who become increasingly expert in subject areas underpinning information technology, and demonstrate high levels of teaching performance, resulting from the use of information technology tools, measured against professional teaching standards; or (D) other reasonable expenses related to professional development in information technology for elementary school, secondary school, or charter school teachers.
Recipients.--Grants under this subsection may be awarded to individual elementary school, secondary school, or charter school teachers, to elementary schools, secondary schools, or charter schools, or to organizations supporting professional development in information technology areas for elementary school, secondary school, or charter school teachers.
Factors.--Among the factors the Director shall consider in awarding grants under this subsection, are the following: (A) Whether the grant will benefit elementary schools, secondary schools, and charter schools that are at or below the 25th percentile for academic performance of schools in the respective State.
Whether matching funds are available for the private sector.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the National Science Foundation to carry out this section $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $35,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and $35,000,000 for fiscal year 2004.
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY WORKFORCE INTERNSHIP GRANTS.
Grants Authorized.--The Director, in consultation with the Secretary of Education, is authorized to award grants to secondary schools and institutions of higher education to establish student information technology internships.
Applications.-- (1) In general.--To receive a grant under this section, an individual, secondary school, or institution of higher education shall submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Director may require.
Form.--In awarding grants under this section, the Director shall not require applications for the grants to be submitted by computer or Internet-based routes, although such applications may be submitted by such routes.
Uses of Funds.--Grants awarded under this section may be used for-- (1) internships designed to strengthen the science, mathematics, and engineering preparation of technicians for the high-performance workforce; and (2) internships to offer students hands-on opportunities in the private sector to apply their education to information technology, manufacturing, or information security.
Duration.--Grants awarded under this section shall be awarded for a period of not more than 3 years.
Other Requirements.--The Director shall ensure that-- (1) any internship assisted by a grant made under this section is conducted at a private sector entity; and (2) matching funds from the private sector are available in an amount equal to the amount of grant funds provided under this subsection.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to the National Science Foundation to be appropriated to carry out this section $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2004.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY STATE SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
In General.--The Director of the National Science Foundation, in consultation with the Secretary of Education, shall make grants to States to provide supplementary scholarships to students for study leading to a graduate degree in science, math, engineering, or a related field.
The scholarships shall be awarded by the State higher education system, the State scholarship commission, or an equivalent State entity.
Eligibility.-- (1) In general.--A scholarship awarded under subsection (a) may be applied to any technology-related degree program offered at an accredited institution of higher learning, including a college, university, community college, or vocational-training institution.
Maximum amount.--A scholarship awarded under subsection (a) may not, when combined with other sources of financial assistance, exceed the cost of tuition and related expenses of the qualified degree program of the recipient.
Matching.--The Director may not make a grant to a State under subsection (a) unless the State provides not less than one-half of the cost of the program for which the grant is provided from State funds.
Distribution.--The Director may not make a grant to a State under subsection (a) unless the State provides assurances that at least two-thirds of the scholarships awarded using grant funds will be awarded to students who are members of families with a family income that is not more than 200 percent of the poverty line.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the National Science Foundation a total of $50,000,000 for grants under this section for fiscal years 2001 through 2004.
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 19A of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278g-2a) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
TEACHER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Director shall establish within the Institute a Twenty-First Century Teacher Enhancement Program.
Purpose and Goals.--The purpose of the program established under this section is to provide for professional development of mathematics and science teachers for elementary, middle, and secondary schools.
The goals of the program are to provide-- ``(1) math and science teaching strategies; ``(2) self-confidence in math and science; and ``(3) the understanding of math and science and their impact on commerce and the economy.
Focus.--In carrying out the program under this section, the Director shall focus on the areas of-- ``(1) scientific measurements; ``(2) tests and standards development; ``(3) industrial competitiveness and quality; ``(4) manufacturing; ``(5) technology transfer; and ``(6) any other area of expertise of the Institute that the Director determines to be appropriate.
Selection Procedures and Criteria.--The Director shall develop and issue procedures and selection criteria for participants in the program.
Each such participant shall be a teacher described in subsection (b).
Summer Program.--The program established under this section shall be conducted on an annual basis during the summer months, during the period of time when a majority of elementary, middle, and secondary schools have not commenced a school year.
Strategies.--The program shall provide for teachers' participation in activities at the Institute laboratory facilities or shall utilize other means of accomplishing the goals of the program, which may include use of the Internet, video conferencing and recording, workshops, and conferences.''.
Availability of Funds.--The following amounts of funds appropriated to the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall be used to carry out the Twenty-First Century Teacher Enhancement Program under section 19A of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act added by subsection (a) of this section: (1) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2001.
$5,500,000 for fiscal year 2002.
$6,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.
$6,500,000 for fiscal year 2004.