This Act may be cited as the ``Public Safety Officers' Defense Act''.
Section 2254 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Crimes Against Public Safety Officer.-- ``(1) Definition of public safety officer.--In this subsection, the term `public safety officer' has the meaning given such term in section 1204 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796b).
In general.--A court, justice, or judge shall not have jurisdiction to consider any claim relating to the judgment or sentence in an application described under paragraph (3), unless the applicant shows that the claim qualifies for consideration on the grounds described in subsection (e)(2).
Any such application that is presented to a court, justice, or judge other than a district court shall be transferred to the appropriate district court for consideration or dismissal in conformity with this subsection, except that a court of appeals panel must authorize any second or successive application in conformity with section 2244 prior to any consideration by the district court.
Application of subsection.--This subsection shall apply to an application for a writ of habeas corpus on behalf of a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of a State court for a crime that involved the killing of a public safety officer while the public safety officer was engaged in the performance of official duties, or on account of the public safety officer's performance of official duties.''.
Section 2254(j) of title 28, United States Code, as added by section 2 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Time limits in district court.--For any application described under paragraph (3), in the district court the following shall apply: ``(A) Any motion by either party for an evidentiary hearing shall be filed and served not later than 90 days after the State files its answer or, if no timely answer is filed, the date on which such answer is due.
Any motion for an evidentiary hearing shall be granted or denied not later than 30 days after the date on which the party opposing such motion files a pleading in opposition to such motion or, if no timely pleading in opposition is filed, the date on which such pleading in opposition is due.
Any evidentiary hearing shall be-- ``(i) convened not less than 60 days after the order granting such hearing; and ``(ii) completed not more than 150 days after the order granting such hearing.
A district court shall enter a final order, granting or denying the application for a writ of habeas corpus, not later than 15 months after the date on which the State files its answer or, if no timely answer is filed, the date on which such answer is due, or not later than 60 days after the case is submitted for decision, whichever is earlier.
If the district court fails to comply with the requirements of this paragraph, the State may petition the court of appeals for a writ of mandamus to enforce the requirements.
The court of appeals shall grant or deny the petition for a writ of mandamus not later than 30 days after such petition is filed with the court.
Time limits in court of appeals.--For any application described under paragraph (3), in the court of appeals the following shall apply: ``(A) A timely filed notice of appeal from an order issuing a writ of habeas corpus shall operate as a stay of that order pending final disposition of the appeal.
The court of appeals shall decide the appeal from an order granting or denying a writ of habeas corpus-- ``(i) not later than 120 days after the date on which the brief of the appellee is filed or, if no timely brief is filed, the date on which such brief is due; or ``(ii) if a cross-appeal is filed, not later than 120 days after the date on which the appellant files a brief in response to the issues presented by the cross-appeal or, if no timely brief is filed, the date on which such brief is due.
(i) Following a decision by a panel of the court of appeals under subparagraph (B), a petition for panel rehearing is not allowed, but rehearing by the court of appeals en banc may be requested.
The court of appeals shall decide whether to grant a petition for rehearing en banc not later than 30 days after the date on which the petition is filed, unless a response is required, in which case the court shall decide whether to grant the petition not later than 30 days after the date on which the response is filed or, if no timely response is filed, the date on which the response is due.
If rehearing en banc is granted, the court of appeals shall make a final determination of the appeal not later than 120 days after the date on which the order granting rehearing en banc is entered.
If the court of appeals fails to comply with the requirements of this paragraph, the State may petition the Supreme Court or a justice thereof for a writ of mandamus to enforce the requirements.
Application of time limits.-- ``(A) In general.--The time limitations under paragraphs (4) and (5) shall apply to an initial application described under paragraph (3), any second or successive application described under paragraph (3), and any redetermination of an application described under paragraph (3) or related appeal following a remand by the court of appeals or the Supreme Court for further proceedings.
Remand in district court.--In proceedings following remand in the district court, time limits running from the time the State files its answer under paragraph (4) shall run from the date the remand is ordered if further briefing is not required in the district court.
If there is further briefing following remand in the district court, such time limits shall run from the date on which a responsive brief is filed or, if no timely responsive brief is filed, the date on which such brief is due.
Remand in court of appeals.--In proceedings following remand in the court of appeals, the time limit specified in paragraph (5)(B) shall run from the date the remand is ordered if further briefing is not required in the court of appeals.
If there is further briefing in the court of appeals, the time limit specified in paragraph (5)(B) shall run from the date on which a responsive brief is filed or, if no timely responsive brief is filed, from the date on which such brief is due.
Failure to comply.--The failure of a court to meet or comply with a time limitation under this subsection shall not be a ground for granting relief from a judgment of conviction or sentence, nor shall the time limitations under this subsection be construed to entitle a capital applicant to a stay of execution, to which the applicant would otherwise not be entitled, for the purpose of litigating any application or appeal.''.
APPLICATION TO PENDING CASES.
In General.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply to cases pending on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Time Limits.--In a case pending on the date of enactment of this Act, if the amendments made by this Act provide that a time limit runs from an event or time that has occurred prior to such date of enactment, the time limit shall run instead from such date of enactment.