This Act may be cited as the ``Riverside School for the Arts Act of 2000''.
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RIVERSIDE SCHOOL FOR THE ARTS.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States is home to the world's largest entertainment technology industry comprising motion picture production, television, multimedia, new media, and information technology sectors; motion picture production alone accounted for $30,500,000,000 in gross domestic product in 1997.
California's entertainment technology industry, centered in Southern California, provides the largest export product in the State.
The Southern California entertainment technology industry alone employs over 500,000 people--more than 70 percent of all entertainment professionals working in the State of California.
The Southern California entertainment technology industry continues to report a shortage of trained personnel to fill production and artistic jobs, and an ever-growing reliance on foreign labor.
National education in the arts, and training of artists and technical professionals in the United States has not kept pace with the demands of the entertainment technology industry.
California projects that more than 260,000 new elementary and secondary school teachers will be needed in the state in the next 10 years, and the University of California and the California State University systems now require successful completion of visual and performing arts coursework as a college entrance requirement.
No existing educational or training institution in California offers this fusion of academic, artistic, and technical preparation that can develop professionals or teachers equipped to meet the demands of the entertainment technology industry and the needs of California's public K-12 systems.
Riverside County, California (population 1,441,237), which is located adjacent to the core of the Southern California entertainment industry, is considered one of the State's fastest growing population/transportation/business corridors and is strategically positioned to be a center for an evolving entertainment support industry.
The Riverside School for the Arts will create a new model for developing and training artists and entertainment professionals, and will educate students from throughout the region, State, and Nation.
In 2000, the legislature of California authorized the designation of the Riverside School for the Arts as a California Center for Excellence and authorized the joint funding and operation of the School under the three public education segments.
The Riverside School for the Arts will serve as a model for intersegmental education that spans the K-12, community college, and university levels.
The Riverside School for the Arts will serve as a model for teacher preparation programs.
The Riverside School for the Arts will serve as a local, regional, and national site for the study of the integration of intensive liberal arts and sciences curriculum, traditional visual and performing arts training, and emerging new media instruction.
The Riverside School for the Arts will provide a unique access point into the entertainment technology industry for under-represented and disadvantaged populations, as well as a retraining entry point for professionals already employed in the industry.
The Riverside School for the Arts, located in the City of Riverside's main urban redevelopment area, will illustrate the concept of how an intersegmental, industry-sensitive educational institution can serve as a catalyst and anchor for the revitalization of downtown areas.
The Riverside School for the Arts will sponsor visual and performing arts programs, including programs related to all entertainment forms--e.g., film, drama, dance, music (traditional, contemporary, and electronic), literary arts, as well as community-oriented productions and events.
Facility development of the Riverside School for the Arts encompasses three distinct programmatic areas of study: the performing arts, the visual arts, and the liberal arts.
The Riverside School for the Arts is planned to include a 400-seat Proscenium Theater, a 200-300 seat Black Box Theater, a 400- seat Dance Studio Theater, a Photography Modeling Center, a Digital Filmmaking and Animation Hall, sound and animation studios, convertible performance and exhibition spaces, a student-operated gift store, a film and video library, a back lot area, administrative and faculty offices, and a residential housing building.
It is appropriate for the Federal Government to share in the costs of planning and program development of the Riverside School for the Arts because Congress recognizes that the Riverside School for the Arts has the potential to be a premier education and training facility for performing arts, new media, and entertainment technology; and serve as a model for education/business partnerships, intersegmental educational planning, teacher preparation and training, and community and economic development.
Definitions.--In this section-- (1) the term ``Partnership'' means Riverside Community College, the University of California at Riverside, and the Riverside County Office of Education; and (2) the term ``School'' means the Riverside School for the Arts.
Construction of the School.--The Secretary of Education will award a grant to the Partnership to pay for the Federal share of the costs of design, construction, furnishing, and equipping the School that will be located at a site to be determined by the Riverside Community College District, within the City of Riverside, California.
Grant Requirements.-- (1) In general.--In order to receive a grant awarded under subsection (c), the Partnership, acting through the President of Riverside Community College-- (A) shall submit to the Secretary of Education, within 45 days of the date of the enactment of this Act, a copy of the Riverside School for the Arts program documents; and (B) shall exercise due diligence to expeditiously execute, in a period not to exceed 90 days, a memorandum of understanding concerning construction timelines and program development phases.
Memorandum of understanding.--The memorandum of understanding described in paragraph (1) shall provide-- (A) the date of completion of the construction of the School; (B) that the Partnership shall award the contract for architectural engineering and design services in accordance with the California Education Code; and (C) that the contract for construction of the School-- (i) shall be awarded pursuant to a competitive bid process; and (ii) shall be awarded not later than 3 months after the solicitation of bids for the construction of the School.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the costs described in subsection (c) shall be 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the costs described in subsection (c) shall be in cash or in kind fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
The non- Federal share of the costs described in subsection (c) shall include $25,000,000 appropriated by the California State legislature for the planning, development, and construction of the School.
Use of Funds for Design, Construction, Furnishing, and Equipment.--The funds received under a grant awarded under subsection (c) shall be used only for the design, construction, inspection, and furnishing of the School.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Partnership to carry out this section a total of $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and succeeding fiscal years.
Funds appropriated pursuant to the authority of the preceding sentence shall remain available until expended.