State Program.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (referred to in this Act as the ``Administrator'') shall provide funds to each State for the purpose of enabling such States to conduct education and outreach activities relating to the health-related effects on children of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke.
Amount.--From amounts made available under subsection (d)(1) for each fiscal year, the Administrator shall provide to a State an amount that bears the same ratio to such available amounts as the population of the State bears to the total population of all States.
Use of funds.--A State shall use amounts received under this subsection to carry out activities consistent with the purpose of paragraph (1).
Minimum amount.--In providing funds to each State under this subsection, the Administrator shall ensure that no State receives less than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the amount available under subsection (e)(1) for a fiscal year for grants under this subsection.
Maximum amount.--In providing funds to each State under this subsection, the Administrator shall ensure that no State receives more than 2\1/2\ percent of the amount available under subsection (e)(1) for a fiscal year for grants under this subsection.
National Education and Outreach Campaign.--The Administrator shall use amounts made available under subsection (d)(2) in each fiscal year to establish a national education and outreach campaign relating to the effect on individuals of exposure to tobacco smoke and ways to minimize such exposure.
In establishing such campaign, the Administrator shall-- (1) focus on children's exposure to environmental tobacco smoke in the home; and (2) coordinate activities with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and other Federal agencies as determined appropriate by the Administrator.
Peer Review.--The Administrator shall use amounts made available under subsection (d)(3) in each fiscal year to carry out research, and provide for peer review studies of research, related to the exposure of individuals to environmental tobacco smoke.
Funding.--The Administrator shall use amounts available for each fiscal year from any Trust Fund established as part of a national settlement on tobacco litigation to carry out this section.
With respect to such amounts for any fiscal year, the Administrator shall utilize-- (1) $185,000,000 for each fiscal year to carry out subsection (a); (2) $10,000,000 for each fiscal year to carry out subsection (b); and (3) $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2008 to carry out subsection (c).
Sunset.--This section shall not apply after the expiration of the 25-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.
The provisions of this Act shall not preempt any provision of State or local law that provides greater restrictions than those required in this Act.
COVERAGE OF FEDERAL BUILDINGS.
In General.--The provisions of Executive Order 13058 (62 FR 43451; August 13, 1997) shall apply to all facilities owned, rented, or leased by the executive, judicial, or legislative branches of the Federal Government (including independent agencies) and in any outdoor areas under executive, judicial or legislative branch control.
Enforcement.--The enforcement of the provisions described in subsection (a) shall be carried out by-- (1) in the case of facilities or areas to which subsection (a) applies that are under executive branch control, the head of the Federal agency involved; (2) in the case of facilities or areas to which subsection (a) applies that are under judicial branch control, the Director of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts; and (3) in the case of facilities or areas to which subsection (a) applies that are under legislative branch control, the Congressional Office of Compliance.
PROHIBITIONS AGAINST SMOKING ON SCHEDULED FLIGHTS.
In General.--Section 41706 of title 49, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Prohibitions against smoking on scheduled flights ``(a) Smoking Prohibition in Intrastate and Interstate Air Transportation.--An individual may not smoke in an aircraft on a scheduled airline flight segment in interstate air transportation or intrastate air transportation.
Smoking Prohibition in Foreign Air Transportation.--The Secretary of Transportation shall require all air carriers and foreign air carriers to prohibit, on and after the 120th day following the date of the enactment of this section, smoking in any aircraft on a scheduled airline flight segment within the United States or between a place in the United States and a place outside the United States.
Limitation on Applicability.--With respect to an aircraft operated by a foreign air carrier, the smoking prohibitions contained in subsections (a) and (b) shall apply only to the passenger cabin and lavatory of the aircraft.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations necessary to carry out this section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the 60th day following the date of the enactment of this Act.