This Act may be cited as the ``Mark O. Hatfield Scholarship and Excellence in Tribal Governance Act of 2008''.
Congress finds that-- (1) Senator Mark O. Hatfield served the United States with distinction and honor; (2) Senator Hatfield has had a lasting impact on the relationship between the United States and Native Americans, restoring to Federal recognition the Grand Ronde, Coquille, Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Indians, Confederated Tribes of the Coos, Lower Umpqua and Siuslaw Indians, and Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians; (3) Senator Hatfield has been a champion of the rights of Native Americans and Alaska Natives and worked in Congress to strengthen tribal self-governance; and (4) it is a fitting tribute to the leadership, courage, and bipartisan spirit that Senator Mark O. Hatfield exemplifies to establish in his name programs to encourage excellence in tribal government.
In this Act: (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Board of Trustees of the Foundation.
Eligible individual.--The term ``eligible individual'' means a citizen or national of the United States or a permanent resident alien of the United States.
Foundation.--The term ``Foundation'' means the Mark O. Hatfield Scholarship and Excellence in Tribal Governance Foundation established by section 4(a).
Institute.--The term ``Institute'' means the Institute for Tribal Government at Portland State University.
Institute policy board.--The term ``Institute Policy Board'' means the Institute Policy Board for the Institute for Tribal Government at Portland State University.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)).
State.--The term ``State'' means-- (A) a State; (B) the District of Columbia; (C) American Samoa; (D) the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands; (E) Guam; (F) the Republic of the Marshall Islands; (G) the Federal States of Micronesia; (H) the Republic of Palau; (I) the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico; and (J) the United States Virgin Islands.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MARK O. HATFIELD SCHOLARSHIP AND EXCELLENCE IN TRIBAL GOVERNANCE FOUNDATION.
Establishment.--There is established as an independent entity in the Executive branch the Mark O. Hatfield Scholarship and Excellence in Tribal Governance Foundation.
Board of Trustees.-- (1) In general.--The Foundation shall be subject to the supervision and direction of a Board of Trustees.
Membership.--The Board shall consist of the Institute Policy Board.
Location of Foundation.--The Foundation shall be located in Portland, Oregon.
Executive Director.-- (1) In general.--There shall be an Executive Director of the Foundation, who shall be appointed by the Board.
Duties.--The Executive Director-- (A) shall be the chief executive officer of the Foundation; and (B) shall carry out the functions of the Foundation, subject to the supervision and direction of the Board, and such other functions consistent with this Act as the Board shall prescribe.
Compensation.--The Executive Director may be compensated at the rate specified for an employee in level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
The purposes of the Foundation shall be-- (1) to develop resources to properly train Native American and Alaska Native tribal council members in self-government and related fields; (2) to foster among people in the United States greater recognition and understanding of the role of tribal self- government in the development of the United States; (3) to identify critical issues facing tribal governments; (4) to establish a program for tribal governance research at the Institute; and (5) to provide educational outreach regarding tribal self- government.
AUTHORITY OF THE FOUNDATION.
In General.--The Foundation, in consultation with the Institute, may identify and conduct such programs, activities, and services as the Foundation considers appropriate to carry out the purposes of the Foundation.
Programs, Activities, and Services.--The Foundation may, in accordance with this section-- (1) award scholarships, fellowships, internships, and grants; and (2) provide grants to the Institute to carry out and manage other programs, activities, and services.
National Competition.--The Foundation may provide, directly or by contract, for the conduct of a national competition for the purpose of selecting recipients of scholarships, fellowships, internships, and grants awarded under this Act.
Award of Scholarships, Fellowships, Internships, and Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Foundation may award scholarships, fellowships, internships, and grants to eligible individuals who meet the minimum criteria established by the Foundation, for study in fields relating to tribal governance.
Mark o. hatfield scholars.--Recipients of scholarships, fellowships, internships, and grants under this Act shall be known as ``Mark O. Hatfield Scholars''.
Scholarships.-- (1) In general.--The Foundation may award scholarships to outstanding-- (A) undergraduate students who intend to pursue careers relating to tribal governance; and (B) Native American and Alaska Native undergraduate students who intend to pursue careers in tribal public policy.
Payments.--An eligible individual awarded a scholarship under this Act may receive payments under this Act only during such periods as the Foundation determines that the eligible individual-- (A) is maintaining satisfactory proficiency and devoting full time to study or research; and (B) is not engaging in gainful employment other than employment approved by the Foundation under regulations of the Board.
Reports.-- (A) In general.--The Foundation may require reports containing such information, in such form, and to be filed at such times as the Foundation determines to be necessary from any eligible individual awarded a scholarship under this Act.
Certificate.--Except as otherwise provided under this subsection, a report under subparagraph (A) shall be accompanied by a certificate from an appropriate official at the institution of higher education, approved by the Foundation, stating that the individual is making satisfactory progress in, and is devoting essentially full time to, study or research.
Fellowships.--The Foundation may award fellowships to-- (1) outstanding graduate students who intend to pursue advanced degrees in fields relating to tribal governance; (2) outstanding Native American and Alaska Native graduate students who intend to pursue advanced degrees in tribal public policy, law, or medicine; and (3) faculty from a variety of disciplines to bring the expertise of the faculty to the Foundation.
Internships.--The Foundation may award internships to deserving and qualified-- (1) individuals, for use in participating in internships in Federal, State, and local agencies or in offices of major tribal governance organizations; and (2) Native American and Alaska Native individuals, for use in participating in internships in Federal, State, and local agencies or in offices of major public health or public policy organizations.
Grants.--The Foundation shall award grants to the Institute-- (1) to provide for an annual panel of experts to discuss contemporary tribal governance issues; (2) to conduct tribal governance policy research; (3) to conduct research on Native American and Alaska Native tribal public policy issues; and (4) to invite visiting policymakers to share practical experiences with the Foundation.
Coordination.--The Foundation shall assist in the development and implementation of a program for tribal governance research to be located at the Institute.
Program Priorities.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Foundation shall determine-- (A) the priority of the programs to be carried out under this Act; and (B) the amount of funds to be allocated for the programs.
Requirements.--Of amounts made available to carry out this section-- (A) not less than 50 percent shall be used for the programs described in subsections (e), (f), and (g); (B) not less than 20 percent shall be made available to the Institute to carry out subsections (h) and (i), on the conditions that-- (i) a 25-percent matching share is provided from other non-Federal sources; and (ii) adequate space at the Institute is made available by the Institute for the Executive Director and other appropriate staff of the Foundation; and (C) not more than 15 percent shall be used for salaries and other administrative purposes.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.