This Act may be cited as the ``Stop Regulating our Small Businesses Act of 1995''.
Moratorium.--Until the end of the moratorium period, a Federal agency may not take any regulatory rulemaking action respecting small business, unless an exception is provided under section 4.
Beginning 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the effectiveness of any regulatory rulemaking action respecting small business taken or made effective during the moratorium period but before the date of the enactment shall be suspended until February 1, 1996, unless an exception is provided under section 4.
Inventory of Rulemakings.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall conduct an inventory and publish in the Federal Register a list of all regulatory rulemaking actions covered by subsection (a) taken or made effective during the moratorium period but before the date of the enactment.
SPECIAL RULE ON STATUTORY, REGULATORY, AND JUDICIAL DEADLINES.
In General.--Any deadline for, relating to, or involving any action dependent upon, any regulatory rulemaking actions respecting small business authorized or required to be taken before the end of the moratorium period is extended until February 1, 1996.
Deadline Defined.--The term ``deadline'' means any date certain for fulfilling any obligation or exercising any authority established by or under any Federal statute or regulation, or by or under any court order implementing any Federal statute or regulation.
Identification of Postponed Deadlines.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall identify and publish in the Federal Register a list of deadlines covered by subsection (a).
Emergency Exception.--Section 2(a) or 3(a), or both, shall not apply to a regulatory rulemaking action if-- (1) the head of a Federal agency otherwise authorized to take the action submits a written request to the President and a copy thereof to the appropriate committees of each House of the Congress; (2) the President finds, by Executive order, that a waiver for the action is (A) necessary because of an imminent threat to health or safety or other emergency, or (B) necessary for the enforcement of criminal laws; and (3) the Federal agency head publishes the finding and waiver in the Federal Register.
Exclusions.--The head of an agency shall publish in the Federal Register any action excluded because of a certification under section 5(4)(B).
For purposes of this Act: (1) Federal agency.--The term ``Federal agency'' means any agency as that term is defined in section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code (relating to administrative procedure).
Moratorium period.--The term ``moratorium period'' means that period of time beginning February 3, 1995, and ending January 31, 1996.
Small business.--The term `small business' means a business which has 100 or fewer employees.
Regulatory rulemaking action.-- (A) In general.--The term ``regulatory rulemaking action'' means any rulemaking on any rule normally published in the Federal Register, including-- (i) the issuance of any substantive rule, interpretative rule, statement of agency policy, notice of inquiry, advance notice of proposed rulemaking, or notice of proposed rulemaking, and (ii) any other action taken in the course of the process of rulemaking (except a cost benefit analysis or risk assessment, or both).
Exclusions.--The term ``regulatory rulemaking'' does not include-- (i) any agency action that the head of the agency certifies is limited to repealing, narrowing, or streamlining a rule, regulation, or administrative process or otherwise reducing regulatory burdens; or (ii) any action that the head of the agency certifies is limited to matters relating to military or foreign affairs functions, statutes implementing international trade agreements, or agency management, personnel, or public property, loans, grants, benefits, or contracts.
Rule.--The term ``rule'' means the whole or a part of an agency statement of general or particular applicability and future effect designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy.
Such term does not include the approval or prescription, on a case-by-case or consolidated case basis, for the future of rates, wages, corporation, or financial structures or reorganizations thereof, prices, facilities, appliances, services or allowances therefor, or of valuations, costs, or accounting, or practices bearing on any of the foregoing.
Such term also does not include the granting an application for a license, registration, or similar authority, granting or recognizing an exemption, granting a variance or petition for relief from a regulatory requirement, or other action relieving a restriction or taking any action necessary to permit new or improved applications of technology.
Rulemaking.--The term ``rulemaking'' means agency process for formulating, amending, or repealing a rule.
License.--The term ``license'' means the whole or part of an agency permit, certificate, approval, registration, charter, membership, statutory exemption, or other form of permission.
In addition to any remedy otherwise available, whoever is adversely affected by any conduct of a Federal agency in violation of section 2 or 3 may obtain appropriate relief in a civil action against that agency.
The court may award a prevailing plaintiff in an action under this section reasonable attorney's fees.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAW; SEVERABILITY.
Applicability.--This Act shall apply notwithstanding any other provision of law.
Severability.--If any provision of this Act, or the application of any provision of this Act to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, and the remainder of this Act, shall not be affected thereby.