In this Act: (1) Historically black college or university.--The term ``historically black college or university'' means a part B institution (as defined in section 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1061)).
Historic building or structure.--The term ``historic building or structure'' means a building or structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or designated as a national historic landmark.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
TITLE I--HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES HISTORIC BUILDING RESTORATION AND PRESERVATION SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Historically Black Colleges and Universities Historic Building Restoration and Preservation Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the Nation's historically black colleges and universities have contributed significantly to the effort to attain equal opportunity through postsecondary education for African-American, low-income, and educationally disadvantaged Americans; (2) over our Nation's history, States and the Federal Government have discriminated in the allocation of land and financial resources to support historically black colleges and universities, forcing historically black colleges and universities to rely on the generous support of private individuals and charitable organizations; (3) the development of sources of private and charitable financial support for historically black colleges and universities has resulted in buildings and structures of historic importance and architecturally unique design on the campuses of those historically black colleges and universities; and (4) many of the buildings and structures are national treasures worthy of preservation and restoration for future generations of Americans and for the students and faculty of historically black colleges and universities.
PRESERVATION AND RESTORATION GRANTS FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AT HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES.
Authority To Make Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall make grants in accordance with this section to historically black colleges and universities for the preservation and restoration of historic buildings and structures on the campuses of the historically black colleges and universities.
Source of funding.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, grants under paragraph (1) shall be made out of amounts authorized to be appropriated to carry out the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes) for fiscal years 1996 through 1999.
Grant Conditions.--Grants made under subsection (a) shall be subject to the condition that the grantee covenant, for the period of time specified by the Secretary, that-- (1) no alteration will be made in the property with respect to which the grant is made without the concurrence of the Secretary; and (2) reasonable public access to the property with respect to which the grant is made will be permitted by the grantee for interpretive and educational purposes.
Matching Requirement for Buildings and Structures Listed on the National Register of Historic Places.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the Secretary may obligate funds made available under this section for a grant with respect to a building or structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places only if the grantee agrees to match, from funds derived from non-Federal sources, the amount of the grant with an amount that is equal or greater than the grant.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive paragraph (1) with respect to a grant if the Secretary determines from circumstances that an extreme emergency exists or that a waiver is in the public interest to ensure the preservation of historically significant resources.
Funding Provisions.-- (1) Amounts to be made available.--Not more than $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1995 and not more than $15,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998 may be made available under this section.
Allocations for fiscal year 1995.-- (A) In general.--Of the amounts made available under this section for fiscal year 1995-- (i) $5,000,000 shall be available only for grants under subsection (a) to Fisk University; and (ii) $10,000,000 shall be available only for grants under subsection (a) to the historically black colleges and universities identified for inclusion in the Department of the Interior Historically Black College and University Historic Preservation Initiative.
Less than $20,000,000 available.--If less than $20,000,000 is made available for fiscal year 1995 for the purpose of subparagraph (A), the amount that is made available shall be allocated as follows: (i) 25 percent shall be made available as provided in subparagraph (A)(i).
50 percent shall be made available as provided in subparagraph (A)(ii).
25 percent shall be made available for grants under subsection (a) to other eligible historically black colleges and universities.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this title.
TITLE II--COOPER HALL AND SCIENCE HALL PRESERVATION AND RESTORATION SEC.
AUTHORITY TO MAKE GRANTS.
In General.--The Secretary shall make grants in accordance with this title to preserve and restore-- (1) Cooper Hall, Sterling College, Sterling, Kansas; and (2) Science Hall, Simpson College, Indianola, Iowa.
Source of Funding.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, grants under subsection (a) shall be made out of amounts authorized to be appropriated to carry out the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes).
The Secretary may obligate funds made available under this title only if the grantee agrees to match, from funds derived from non- Federal sources, the amount of the grant with an amount that is equal or greater than the grant.
Not more than $3,600,000 may be made available for grants for Cooper Hall and not more than $1,500,000 may be made available for grants for Science Hall under this title.