This Act may be cited as the ``Regulatory Sunset and Review Act of 1995''.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To require agencies to regularly review their regulations and make recommendations to terminate, continue in effect, modify, or consolidate those regulations.
To require agencies to submit those recommendations to the Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs and to the Congress.
To provide for the automatic termination of regulations that are not continued in effect after such review.
To designate a Regulatory Review Officer within each agency, who is responsible for the implementation of this Act by the agency.
REVIEW AND TERMINATION OF REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the effectiveness of a regulation issued by an agency shall terminate on the applicable termination date under subsection (b), and the regulation shall have no force or effect after that termination date, unless the head of the agency-- (1) reviews the regulation in accordance with section 4; (2) after the review, and at least 120 days before that termination date, submits in accordance with section 5(a) a preliminary report on the findings and proposed recommendations of that review in accordance with section 5(a)(2); (3) reviews and considers comments regarding the preliminary report that are transmitted to the agency by the Administrator and appropriate committees of the Congress during the 60-day period beginning on the date of submission of the preliminary report; and (4) after the 60-day period beginning on the date of submission of the preliminary report to the Congress, but not later than 60 days before that termination date, submits to the President, the Administrator, and the Congress, and publishes in the Federal Register-- (A) a final report on the review under section 4 in accordance with section 5(a)(3), and (B) a notice extending the effectiveness of the regulation, with or without modifications, as of the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date of that publication.
Termination Dates.--For purposes of subsection (a), the termination date of a regulation is as follows: (1) Existing regulations.--For a regulation in effect on the date of the enactment of the Act, the termination date is the last day of the 7-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
New regulations.--For a regulation that first takes effect after the date of the enactment of this Act, the termination date is the last day of the 5-year period beginning on the date the regulation takes effect.
Regulations continued in effect.--For a regulation the effectiveness of which is extended under subsection (a), the termination date is the last day of the 7-year period beginning on the date of publication of a notice under subsection (a)(4) for that extension.
Temporary Extension.--The termination date under subsection (b) for a regulation may be delayed by not more than 6 months by the head of the agency that issued the regulation if the agency head submits to the Congress and publishes in the Federal Register a preliminary report that describes modifications that should be made to the regulation.
Relationship to Other Law.--Section 553 of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to the extension or modification of a regulation in accordance with this Act.
REVIEW OF REGULATIONS BY AGENCY.
In General.--The head of each agency shall, under the criteria set forth in subsection (b)-- (1) conduct thorough and systematic reviews of all regulations issued by the agency to determine if those regulations are obsolete, inconsistent, or duplicative or impede competition; and (2) issue reports on the findings of those reviews, which contain recommendations for-- (A) terminating or extending the effectiveness of those regulations; (B) any appropriate modifications to a regulation recommended to be extended; or (C) any appropriate consolidations of regulations.
Criteria for Review.--The head of an agency shall review, make recommendations, and terminate or extend the effectiveness of a regulation under this section under the following criteria: (1) The extent to which the regulation is outdated, obsolete, or unnecessary.
The extent to which the regulation or information required to comply with the regulation duplicates, conflicts with, or overlaps requirements under regulations of other agencies.
The extent to which the regulation impedes competition.
Whether the benefits to society from the regulation exceed the costs to society from the regulation.
Whether the regulation is based on adequate and correct information.
Whether the regulation is worded as simply and clearly as possible.
Whether the most cost-efficient alternative was chosen in the regulation to achieve the objective of the regulation.
The extent to which information requirements under the regulation can be reduced, particularly for small businesses.
Whether the regulation is fashioned to maximize net benefits to society.
Whether the regulation is clear and certain regarding who is required to comply with the regulation.
Whether the regulation maximizes the utility of market mechanisms to the extent feasible.
Whether the condition of the economy and of regulated industries is considered.
Whether the regulation imposes on the private sector the minimum economic burdens necessary to achieve the purposes of the regulation.
Whether the total effect of the regulation across agencies has been examined.
Whether the regulation is crafted to minimize needless litigation.
Whether the regulation is necessary to protect the health and safety of the public.
Whether the regulation has resulted in unintended consequences.
Whether performance standards or other alternatives were utilized to provide adequate flexibility to the regulated industries.
Requirement to Solicit Comments From the Public and Private Sector.--In reviewing regulations under this section, the head of an agency shall publish in the Federal Register a solicitation of comments from the public (including the private sector) regarding the application of the criteria set forth in subsection (b) to the regulation, and shall consider such comments, before making determinations under this section and sending a report under section 5(a) regarding a regulation.
Preliminary and Final Reports on Reviews of Regulations.-- (1) In general.--The head of an agency shall submit to the President, the Administrator, and the Congress and publish in the Federal Register a preliminary report and a final report for each review of a regulation under section 4.
Preliminary report.--A preliminary report shall contain-- (A) specific findings of the agency regarding-- (i) application of the criteria set forth in section 4(b) to the regulation; (ii) the need for the function of the regulation; and (iii) whether the regulation duplicates functions of another regulation; and (B) proposed recommendations on whether-- (i) the effectiveness of the regulation should terminate or be extended; (ii) the regulation should be modified; and (iii) the regulation should be consolidated with another regulation.
Final report.--A final report on the findings and recommendations of the agency head regarding extension of the effectiveness of the regulation and any appropriate modifications to the regulation shall include-- (A) a full justification of the decision to extend and, if applicable, modify the regulation; and (B) the basis for all determinations made with respect to that extension or modification under the criteria set forth in section 4(b).
Report on Schedule for Reviewing Existing Regulations.--Not later than 100 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and on or before March 1, annually thereafter, the head of each agency shall submit to the Administrator and the Congress and publish in the Federal Register a report stating a schedule for the review of regulations in accordance with this Act.
The schedule shall identify the review actions intended to be conducted during the calendar year in which such report is submitted.
In General.--The Administrator shall-- (1) review and evaluate each report submitted by the head of an agency under section 5(a), regarding-- (A) the quality of the analysis in the reports; (B) whether the agency has properly applied the criteria set forth in section 4(b); and (C) the consistency of the agency action with actions of other agencies; and (2) transmit to the head of the agency the recommendations of the Administrator regarding the report.
Guidance.--The Administrator shall provide guidance to agencies on the conduct of reviews and the preparation of reports under this Act.
DESIGNATION OF AGENCY REGULATORY REVIEW OFFICERS.
In General.--The head of each agency shall designate an officer of the agency as the Regulatory Review Officer of the agency.
Functions.--The Regulatory Review Officer of an agency shall-- (1) be responsible for the implementation of this Act by the agency; and (2) report directly to the head of the agency with respect to that responsibility.
Limitation of Action.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action seeking judicial review of an agency action under this Act extending, terminating, modifying, or consolidating a regulation shall not be brought after the 30-day period beginning on the date of the publication of a notice under section 3(a)(4) for that action.
Scope of Review.--Agency compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this Act shall be subject to judicial review only pursuant to section 706(1) of title 5, United States Code.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Office.
Agency.--The term ``agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code.
Appropriate committee of the congress.--The term ``appropriate committee of the Congress'' means with respect to a regulation each standing committee of the Congress having authority under the rules of the House of Representatives or the Senate to report a bill to enact or amend the provision of law under which the regulation is issued.
Office.--The term ``Office'' means the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs in the Office of Management and Budget.
Regulation.--The term ``regulation'' means the whole or a part of an agency statement of general or particular applicability and future effect designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy, other than such a statement to carry out a routine administrative function of an agency.