This Act may be cited as the ``Patient Freedom from Restraint Act of 1999''.
LIMITATION ON USE OF PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL RESTRAINTS AND SECLUSION IN CERTAIN MEDICARE OR MEDICAID FUNDED TREATMENT FACILITIES.
In General.--Part B of title XI of the Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``limitation on use of restraints and seclusion in certain medicare and medicaid funded treatment facilities ``Sec.
Freedom From Restraints and Seclusion.--As a condition of participation or receipt of funds under the medicare program under title XVIII or under a State medicaid program under title XIX, a covered facility (as defined in subsection (b)) shall-- ``(1) protect and promote the right of each resident or patient to be free from physical or mental abuse, corporal punishment, involuntary seclusion, and any physical or chemical restraints (as defined in subsection (g)) imposed for purposes of discipline or convenience; ``(2) meet the requirements of subsection (d) (relating to recording and reporting on the use of restraints and seclusion and sentinel events); ``(3) provide for annual training of all staff with direct resident or patient care responsibility on the proper use of restraints and seclusion, their alternatives, and techniques and methods to identify and defuse potential emergency situations; and ``(4)(A) make available to each resident or patient, and to the guardian of each such resident or patient, a statement of their rights to freedom from restraints and seclusion as required by this section and information on the purpose of the appropriate protection and advocacy agencies (as defined in subsection (g)(4)) and their addresses and telephone numbers; and ``(B) clearly and conspicuously post such information in the facility.
Covered Facility Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `covered facility` means any of the following: ``(1) A facility that provides inpatient or residential psychiatric treatment or treatment of mental illness (including a psychiatric hospital, as defined in section 1861(f), and an institution for mental diseases, as defined in section 1905(i)).
An intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded (as defined in section 1905(d)).
A facility that provides residential treatment for children.
Requirements Relating to Restraints and Seclusion.-- ``(1) General limitations.-- ``(A) In general.--A covered facility may only impose restraints and seclusion-- ``(i) to ensure the immediate physical safety of the resident or patient or others; and ``(ii) only upon the written order of a physician that specifies the duration (not to exceed 2 consecutive hours) and circumstances under which the restraints and seclusion are to be used.
Emergency exception.--Subparagraph (A)(ii) shall not apply in emergency circumstances specified by the Secretary during the period before a written order can reasonably be obtained.
Prohibition of use of standing orders.--Written orders for such restraints or seclusion shall never be written as a standing order.
Use as last resort.--A covered facility may only use restraints and seclusion as an emergency safety measure and as a last resort and only after other less restrictive approaches have failed.
Least restrictive manner.--A covered facility shall use restraints and seclusion only in the least restrictive manner possible, to protect the resident or patient or others from harm, and must remove or end restraints and seclusion at the earliest possible time.
No simultaneous use.--A covered facility may not use restraints and seclusion simultaneously.
Recording and Reporting Requirements.--In accordance with the protocol established under subsection (e)(1)-- ``(1) Recording uses of restraint and seclusion in patient records.-- ``(A) In general.--Each covered facility shall record and maintain, as part of a resident's or patient's medical record, the following information on each incident in which restraints or seclusion are used with respect to a resident or patient of the facility: ``(i) The uses of restraint and seclusion, including the type of restraint or seclusion used and the time and duration of its use.
The rationale for restraint or seclusion and types of less restrictive alternatives that were tried or considered.
Evidence of treatment planning to reduce the probability of future incidents that would lead to use of restraint or seclusion.
Availability to p&a agencies.--Each covered facility shall make available the information recorded under subparagraph (A) for inspection by staff of the appropriate protection and advocacy agencies.
Submission of periodic reports on overall use of restraints and seclusion.--Each covered facility shall submit to the Secretary and to the appropriate protection and advocacy agencies a report that specifies the number of times restraints or seclusion were used during the reporting period.
Such report shall be submitted on a periodic basis specified by the Secretary, but in no case less often than annually.
Submission of reports on all sentinel events.-- ``(A) In general.--Each covered facility shall submit to the appropriate protection and advocacy agency a report on-- ``(i) each sentinel event (as defined in subsection (g)(6)) that occurs respecting a resident or patient, including only the name of the resident or patient and a general description of the event; and ``(ii) if information is available to the facility, information on the death of any individual who died within 14 days after the date of discharge from the facility.
Deadline for submission.--Each report under subparagraph (A)(i) shall be submitted within 7 days of the date of the incident involved and each report under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be submitted within 7 days of receipt of information concerning the death of the former resident or patient.
Annual report.--Each covered facility shall submit on an annual basis to the Secretary an annual report on sentinel events for which reports were made during the previous year under subparagraph (A).
Implementation.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish a protocol for the recording and reporting of information under subsection (d).
To the extent feasible, the Secretary shall establish the protocol in a manner that is consistent with medical records recording systems and that is coordinated with other applicable health care information reporting systems.
The Secretary shall consult with appropriate protection and advocacy agencies in establishing and implementing the protocol.
Publication of summary.--The Secretary shall compile and publish on an annual basis a comprehensive summary of the reports received under subsection (d)(3).
Establishment of guidelines for peer review organizations.--The Secretary shall establish guidelines for the use of utilization and quality control peer review organizations (as defined in section 1152(a)) in reviewing policies and procedures of covered facilities regarding the use of restraints and seclusion consistent with this section.
Sanctions.-- ``(1) Loss of medicare and medicaid funding.--A covered facility that fails to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) (including failure to provide for annual training of staff in accordance with subsection (a)(3)) is subject to disqualification from participation in the medicare program under title XVIII and the medicaid program under title XIX for such period at the Secretary may specify.
Civil money penalty for failure to file sentinel reports.--A covered facility that fails to file a report required to be made under subsection (b)(3) within the period so required is subject to a civil money penalty not to exceed $5,000 for each such violation.
The provisions of section 1128A (other than subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to civil money penalties under this subsection in the same manner as they apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Restraints.--The term `restraints' means any chemical or physical restraint (as defined in paragraphs (2) and (3)).
Chemical restraint.--The term `chemical restraint' means the use of any medication or biological for the purpose of immobilizing the individual, inducing a state of sleep or unconsciousness, or reducing the ability to move freely.
Such term does not include involuntary administration of medication when administered pursuant to a court order or the administration of medication for voluntary or emergency treatment (such as anesthesia administered before a surgical procedure).
Physical restraint.--The term `physical restraint' means any mechanical or personal restriction that immobilizes or reduces an individual's ability to move arms, legs, or head freely.
Such term does not include devices, such as orthopedically prescribed appliances, surgical dressings and bandages, protective helmets and supportive body bands, and other physical holding when necessary for routine physical examinations or tests or for orthopedic surgical or other similar medical treatment purposes or when used to provide support for the achievement of functional body position or proper balance or to permit an individual to participate in ongoing activities with the risk of physical harm.
Protection and advocacy agency.--The term `protection and advocacy agency' means an appropriate board under the protection and advocacy system established under part C of title I of the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (42 United States Code 6041 et sequentes).
Seclusion.--The term `seclusion' means the involuntary confinement of a resident or patient in a room from which the resident or patient is physically prevented from leaving.
Sentinel event.--The term `sentinel event' means an unexpected occurrence involving a substantial impairment of the physical or psychological condition of a resident or patient, including any burn, laceration, or abrasion of the skin, fracture of any bone, substantial hematoma, injury to any internal organ, or any injury that occurs as a result of repeated harm to any bodily function or organ (including the skin), if the occurrence is unrelated to the natural course of the individual's illness or underlying condition, and includes the death of the individual in any case.''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Protection against use of punitive restraints and seclusion.--The requirements of subsections (a)(1) and (c) of section 1164 of the Social Security Act, as added by subsection (a), apply to restraints and seclusion used on or after the first date of the first month that begins more than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Reporting requirements.-- (A) Deadline for establishing protocol.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall first establish the protocol described in section 1164(e)(1) of the Social Security Act, as added by subsection (a), within 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Reports.--Covered facilities are first required to record information and submit reports under section 1164(c) of the Social Security Act, as so added, for restraints and seclusion used on and after a date (specified by the Secretary of Health and Human Services ) that is not later than 2 months after the date of the establishment of the protocol under section 1164(e)(1) of such Act.
Annual training.--The requirement of section 1164(a)(3) of the Social Security Act, as so added, applies for annual periods beginning after the effective date described in paragraph (1).
Posting information.--The requirement of section 1164(a)(4) of the Social Security Act, as so added, takes effect on such date, not later than the effective date described in paragraph (1), as the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall specify.