This Act may be cited as the ``Carrizo Plain National Conservation Area Act of 1998''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The public lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management in the State of California within the Carrizo Plain contain the last remnants of the once vast San Joaquin Valley grasslands that covered a large expanse of central California.
As a remnant ecosystem, these lands provide the best remaining contiguous habitat for a number of State or federally listed endangered species or threatened species, including the San Joaquin kit fox, the blunt-nosed leopard lizard, the giant kangaroo rat, and the San Joaquin antelope squirrel, and numerous other federally or State listed or sensitive plant and animal species.
Many other important species of native wildlife inhabit the area, such as pronghorn antelope and tule elk.
In addition to its biological diversity, Carrizo Plain contains nationally significant cultural and historical sites which are very important to indigenous peoples in the area for religious and traditional cultural purposes.
The Carrizo Plain area also contains one of the best and most visible exposures of the geologically unique San Andreas fault, which is the boundary between the Pacific Plate (on the west) which moves northward relative to the North American Plate (on the east) and has and will continue to play a critical role in the evolution and future of California.
The Carrizo Plain offers unique research, interpretive, and educational opportunities, and significant recreation opportunities for the public.
Since 1985, the Carrizo Plain has been cooperatively managed by the Bureau of Land Management, the California Department of Fish and Game, and The Nature Conservancy, each of which owns a part of the Carrizo Plain and all of which work closely together in a manner that makes jurisdictional differences among them nearly transparent.
A cooperative management plan has been prepared for the Carrizo Plain by the Bureau of Land Management, the California Department of Fish and Game, and The Nature Conservancy, with full public involvement, that sets the stage for long-term joint management of the area for public use and enjoyment.
This management plan is based on the agencies' joint primary mission as set forth in the plan to ``manage the Carrizo Plain .
so indigenous species interact within a dynamic and fully functioning ecosystem in perpetuity while conserving unique natural and cultural resources and maintaining opportunities for compatible scientific, cultural, social, and recreational activities''.
In this context, and under the basic principles of multiple use and sustained yield, other resource uses, such as livestock grazing and recreation use, are allowed under the management plan in the conservation area if they are managed in a manner compatible with that primary mission.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA.
Establishment and Purposes.--To preserve the nationally significant biological, geological, cultural, and recreation values found in the Carrizo Plain, California, as an enduring legacy of our heritage, and to secure for future generations the opportunity to experience those values in an environment rich in biological diversity and natural beauty, the area described in subsection (b) is hereby designated as the Carrizo Plain National Conservation Area.
Area Described.-- (1) Boundary map.--The area referred to in subsection (a) consists of approximately 250,000 acres of lands and waters, and interests therein, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Boundary Map, Carrizo Plain National Conservation Area'', dated October 1997.
Legal description.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a legal description of the conservation area with the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Such legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, subject to paragraph (3).
Revisions and corrections.--The Secretary may-- (A) make minor revisions in the boundary of the conservation area; and (B) correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal description referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively.
Public availability.--The Secretary shall keep the map and legal description referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively, on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Director in the District of Columbia and in Sacramento and Bakersfield, California.
MANAGEMENT OF THE CONSERVATION AREA.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director, shall manage the public lands within the conservation area in accordance with all applicable laws and the management plan.
Review and Revision of Management Plan.--The Secretary of the Interior, in cooperation with the Director, the California Department of Fish and Game, affected landowners, and The Nature Conservancy-- (1) shall, by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, review the management plan referred to in section 9(4) and make such revisions in that plan as are necessary to ensure that it is consistent with the this Act and with the conservation, enhancement, and protection of the conservation area; and (2) may from time to time thereafter make such revisions as are necessary to ensure that consistency.
Gifts.--The Secretary may accept, receive, hold, administer, and use any gift, devise, or bequest, absolutely or in trust, of real or personal property, including any income from or interest in property or any funds, for management of the conservation area for the purposes for which the conservation area is established under section 3(a).
Funding Account.-- (1) In general.--To fund management activities for the conservation area, there is established in the Treasury a separate account to be known as the Carizzo Plain National Conservation Area Management Fund.
Contents.--The account shall consist of-- (A) amounts received as fees for activities in the conservation area; (B) amounts received by the United States as a gift, devise, or bequest authorized by subsection (c); and (C) amounts appropriated to the account.
Use.--Amounts in the account shall be available to the Secretary for management of the conservation area pursuant to the purposes for which the conservation is established under section 3(a).
Land Acquisition.--The Secretary may acquire nongovernment, privately owned lands and interests therein within the conservation area by donation, by exchange, or by purchase with the consent of the owner thereof.
Management.--Lands or interests therein within the conservation area so acquired by the United States shall, after the date of the enactment of this Act, be incorporated into and managed as part of the conservation area.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal lands within the conservation area, including all lands or interests acquired by the United States after the date of enactment of this Act, are hereby withdrawn from all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws and from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws of the United States.
Mineral Development.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), mineral development may occur in the conservation area pursuant to the Act of February 25, 1920 (30 United States Code 181 et sequentes; popularly known as the Mineral Leasing Act), and laws supplementary thereto, or the Act of July 31, 1947 (30 United States Code 601 et sequentes; popularly known as the Materials Act of 1947), and laws supplementary thereto, only to the extent that development is consistent with the management plan.
State and private lands and interests not affected.-- This subsection shall not affect any State or privately owned lands or interests in lands.
The Secretary may, consistent with the management plan, enter into any cooperative agreements or shared management arrangements with any person for the purposes of management, interpretation, and research of the conservation area's resources.
Native American Uses.--The Secretary shall ensure nonexclusive access to and use of the public lands in the conservation area by Native Americans for traditional cultural and religious purposes consistent with the American Indian Religious Freedom Act (42 United States Code 1996).
Temporary Closure.--To implement this section, the Secretary may from time to time temporarily close to general public use any specific areas of public lands in the conservation area in order to protect the privacy of Native American religious activities in such areas.
Any such closure shall be made in such manner as will affect the smallest practicable area for the minimum period necessary for such purposes.
In this Act: (1) Conservation area.--The term ``conservation area'' means the Carrizo Plain National Conservation Area designated under section 3(a).
California department of fish and game.--The term ``California Department of Fish and Game'' means the public entity within the State of California's Resources Agency established by the laws of the State of California to administer the fish and wildlife resources in the State on behalf of the people of California.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan developed cooperatively by the Bureau of Land Management, the California Department of Fish and Game, and The Nature Conservancy, entitled ``The Carrizo Plain Natural Area Management Plan'' and dated November 1996, as such plan may be revised by the Secretary under section 4(b).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The nature conservancy.--The term ``The Nature Conservancy'' means the nonprofit organization established under laws of the State of Virginia and doing business in that name.