This Act may be cited as the ``Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta National Heritage Area Establishment Act''.
SACRAMENTO-SAN JOAQUIN DELTA NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Heritage area.--The term ``Heritage Area'' means the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Heritage Area established by this section.
Heritage area management plan.--The term ``Heritage Area management plan'' means the plan developed and adopted by the management entity under this section.
Management entity.--The term ``management entity'' means the management entity for the Heritage Area designated by subsection (b)(4).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Heritage Area.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established the ``Sacramento- San Joaquin Delta Heritage Area'' in the State of California.
Boundaries.--The boundaries of the Heritage Area shall be in the counties of Contra Costa, Sacramento, San Joaquin, Solano, and Yolo in the State of California, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta National Heritage Area Proposed Boundary'', numbered T27/ 105,030, and dated September 2010.
Availability of map.--The map described in paragraph (2) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service and the Delta Protection Commission.
Management entity.--The management entity for the Heritage Area shall be the Delta Protection Commission established by section 29735 of the California Public Resources Code.
Administration; management plan.-- (A) Administration.--For purposes of carrying out the Heritage Area management plan, the Secretary, acting through the management entity, may use amounts made available under this section in accordance with section 8001(c) of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-11; 123 United States Statutes at Large 991).
Management plan.-- (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), the management entity shall submit to the Secretary for approval a proposed management plan for the Heritage Area in accordance with section 8001(d) of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-11; 123 United States Statutes at Large 991).
Restrictions.--The Heritage Area management plan submitted under this paragraph shall-- (I) ensure participation by appropriate Federal, State, tribal, and local agencies, including the Delta Stewardship Council, special districts, natural and historical resource protection and agricultural organizations, educational institutions, businesses, recreational organizations, community residents, and private property owners; and (II) not be approved until the Secretary has received certification from the Delta Protection Commission that the Delta Stewardship Council has reviewed the Heritage Area management plan for consistency with the plan adopted by the Delta Stewardship Council pursuant to State law.
Relationship to other federal agencies; private property.-- (A) Relationship to other federal agencies.--The provisions of section 8001(e) of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-11; 123 United States Statutes at Large 991) shall apply to the Heritage Area.
Private property.-- (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), the provisions of section 8001(f) of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-11; 123 United States Statutes at Large 991) shall apply to the Heritage Area.
Opt out.--An owner of private property within the Heritage Area may opt out of participating in any plan, project, program, or activity carried out within the Heritage Area under this section, if the property owner provides written notice to the management entity.
Evaluation; report.--The provisions of section 8001(g) of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-11; 123 United States Statutes at Large 991) shall apply to the Heritage Area.
Effect of designation.--Nothing in this section-- (A) precludes the management entity from using Federal funds made available under other laws for the purposes for which those funds were authorized; or (B) affects any water rights or contracts.
Authorization of appropriations.-- (A) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $20,000,000, of which not more than $2,000,000 may be made available for any fiscal year.
Cost-sharing requirement.--The Federal share of the total cost of any activity under this section shall be determined by the Secretary, but shall be not more than 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total cost of any activity under this section may be in the form of-- (i) in-kind contributions of goods or services; or (ii) State or local government fees, taxes, or assessments.
Termination of authority.--If a proposed management plan has not been submitted to the Secretary by the date that is 5 years after the date of enactment of this title, the Heritage Area designation shall be rescinded.