SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Internet Gambling Regulation and Tax Enforcement Act of 2008''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
LICENSE FEE ON INTERNET GAMBLING OPERATORS; LICENSEE INFORMATION REPORTING.
In General.--Chapter 36 (relating to certain other excise taxes) is amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter: ``Subchapter E--Internet Gambling Operators ``Sec.
Imposition of Internet gambling license fee.
IMPOSITION OF INTERNET GAMBLING LICENSE FEE.
In General.--Each Internet gambling operator licensed by the Director in accordance with subchapter V of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, shall be required to pay to the Director by the end of each month an Internet gambling license fee.
Internet Gambling License Fee.--For purposes of this section, the Internet gambling license fee is an amount equal to 2 percent of all funds deposited during the preceding month with or on behalf of such Internet gambling operator into an account that can be used for the purpose of placing a bet or wager.
Deposits made by or on behalf of any such operator of Internet gambling winnings shall not be treated as a deposit for purposes of this section.
Disposition.--Amounts paid to the Director as Internet gambling license fees under this section shall be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury and treated as revenue.
Direct and Exclusive Obligation of Licensee.--The Internet gambling license fee shall be the direct and exclusive obligation of the Internet gambling operator and may not be deducted from the amounts available as deposits to the person placing a bet.
Director.--For purposes of this subchapter, the term `Director' shall have the meaning given such term by section 5382 of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code.
Administrative Provisions.--To the extent the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe, the Internet gambling license fee shall be treated as an excise tax for purposes of the administrative provisions of this title applicable to excise taxes imposed by chapter 35.''.
Information Returns.--Subpart A of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 (relating to information concerning persons subject to special provisions) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
RETURNS OF INTERNET GAMBLING OPERATORS.
Requirement.--Every person who is an Internet gambling operator subject to section 4491 during a taxable year shall furnish, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe, the information described in subsection (b), and such person shall maintain (in the location, in the manner, and to the extent prescribed in regulations) such records as may be appropriate to the information described in subsection (b).
Required Information.--For purposes of subsection (a), the information described in this subsection is such information as the Secretary may prescribe by regulations relating to-- ``(1) the Internet gambling operator's name, address, and tax information number, ``(2) the name, address, and tax information number of each person placing a wager with the Internet gambling operator during the calendar year, ``(3) the gross winnings, gross wagers, and gross losses of each such person during the year, ``(4) the amount of tax withheld with respect to each such person, ``(5) beginning and end-of-year account balances for each such person, and ``(6) amounts deposited and withdrawn by each such person during the calendar year.
Statement To Be Furnished to Persons With Respect to Whom Information Is Required.--Every person required to make a return under subsection (a) shall furnish to each person whose name is required to be set forth in such return a written statement showing-- ``(1) the name, address, and phone number of the information contact of the person required to make such return, and ``(2) the information required to be shown on such return with respect to such person.
The written statement required under the preceding sentence shall be furnished to the person on or before January 31 of the year following the calendar year for which the return under subsection (a) was required to be made.''.
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of subchapters for chapter 36 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``subchapter e. internet gambling operators.''.
The table of sections for subpart A of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 6039I the following new item: ``Sec.
Returns of Internet gambling operators.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to wagers made after December 31, 2008.
WITHHOLDING FROM CERTAIN GAMBLING WINNINGS.
Net Internet Gambling Winnings.--Paragraph (3) of section 3402(q) (relating to extension of withholding to certain gambling winnings) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Net internet gambling winnings.--Proceeds of net Internet gambling winnings of more than $5,000 in any one calendar year.''.
No Exemption for Certain Winnings.--Paragraph (5) of section 3402(q) is amended by inserting ``(other than winnings described in paragraph (3)(D)'' after ``winnings''.
Definitions.--Subsection (q) of section 3402 is amended by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8) and by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) Proceeds of net internet gambling winnings.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `proceeds of net Internet gambling winnings' means amounts of net Internet gambling winnings withdrawn from an account established for the purpose of Internet gambling.
Net internet gambling winnings.--The term `net Internet gambling winnings' means gross winnings from a wager placed over the Internet with a person required to be licensed under section 5382 of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, less the amount wagered.
Internet; wager.--The terms `Internet' and `wager' shall have the respective meanings given such terms by section 5382 of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code.''.
Backup Withholding.--Section 3406 (relating to backup withholding) is amended by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j) and by adding the following new subsection: ``(i) For purposes of this section, net Internet gambling winnings shall be treated as other reportable payments, an Internet gambling operator shall be treated as payor, and the person placing a wager with an Internet gambling operator shall be treated as payee.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, terms used in such sentence which are also used in section 3402(q)(7) shall have the meanings given such terms by such section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to wagers placed with a licensee after December 31, 2008.
WITHHOLDING OF TAX ON NONRESIDENT ALIENS.
Tax on Nonresident Alien Individuals.--Subparagraph (A) of section 871(a)(1) (relating to income not connected with United States business--30 percent tax) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and other fixed'' and inserting ``, other fixed'', and (2) by adding ``and net Internet gambling income,'' at the end.
Exemption for Certain Gambling Winnings.--Section 871(j) (relating to exemption for certain gambling winnings) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or to any wagers placed over the Internet (as such terms are defined in section 3402(q)(7))''.
Withholding of Tax on Nonresident Alien Individuals.--The first sentence of subsection (b) of section 1441 (relating to withholding of tax on nonresident aliens) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and gains on transfers'' and inserting ``gains on transfers'', and (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, and proceeds of net Internet gambling winnings (as defined in section 3402(q)(7)) of more than $5,000 in any one calendar year''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to wagers placed with a licensee after December 31, 2008.
Persons Liable for Tax.--Subsection (c) of section 4401 (relating to persons liable for tax on wagers) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following sentence: ``Any person placing a wager with a person who is required to obtain a license within the meaning of section 4491 but who has failed to obtain such license shall be liable for and pay the tax under this subchapter on all such wagers.''.
Territorial Extent.--Paragraph (2) of section 4404 is amended to read as follows: ``(2) placed within the United States or any Commonwealth, territory, or possession thereof by a United States citizen or resident.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to wagers made after December 31, 2008.