This Act may be cited as the ``Shasta-Trinity National Forest Administrative Jurisdiction Transfer Act''.
TRANSFER OF ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION TO THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT.
In General.--Administrative jurisdiction over the Federal land described in subsection (b) is transferred from the Secretary of Agriculture to the Secretary of the Interior.
Description of Land.--The Federal land referred to in subsection (a) is the land within the Shasta-Trinity National Forest in California, Mount Diablo Meridian, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Shasta-Trinity Administrative Jurisdiction Transfer: Transfer from Forest Service to BLM, Map 1'' and dated November 23, 2009.
Management and Status of Transferred Land.--The Federal land described in subsection (b) shall be administered in accordance with-- (1) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (2) any other applicable law (including regulations).
TRANSFER OF ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION TO THE FOREST SERVICE.
In General.--Administrative jurisdiction over the Federal land described in subsection (b) is transferred from the Secretary of the Interior to the Secretary of Agriculture.
Description of Land.--The Federal land referred to in subsection (a) is the land administered by the Director of the Bureau of Land Management in the Mount Diablo Meridian, California, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Shasta-Trinity Administrative Jurisdiction Transfer: Transfer from BLM to Forest Service, Map 2'' and dated November 23, 2009.
Management and Status of Transferred Land.-- (1) In general.--The Federal land described in subsection (b) shall be-- (A) withdrawn from the public domain; (B) reserved for administration as part of the Shasta- Trinity National Forest; and (C) managed in accordance with the laws (including the regulations) generally applicable to the National Forest System.
Wilderness administration.--The land transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture under subsection (a) that is within the Trinity Alps Wilderness shall-- (A) not affect the wilderness status of the transferred land; and (B) be administered in accordance with-- (i) this section; (ii) the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes); and (iii) the California Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 United States Code 1132 note; Public Law 98-425).
Corrections.-- (1) Minor adjustments.--The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior may, by mutual agreement, make minor corrections and adjustments to the transfers under this Act to facilitate land management, including corrections and adjustments to any applicable surveys.
Publications.--Any corrections or adjustments made under subsection (a) shall be effective on the date of publication of a notice of the corrections or adjustments in the Federal Register.
Hazardous Substances.-- (1) Notice.--The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall, with respect to the land described in sections 2(b) and 3(b), respectively-- (A) identify any known sites containing hazardous substances; and (B) provide to the head of the Federal agency to which the land is being transferred notice of any sites identified under subparagraph (A).
Cleanup obligations.--To the same extent as on the day before the date of enactment of this Act, with respect to any Federal liability-- (A) the Secretary of Agriculture shall remain responsible for any cleanup of hazardous substances on the Federal land described in section 2(b); and (B) the Secretary of the Interior shall remain responsible for any cleanup of hazardous substances on the Federal land described in section 3(b).
Effect on Existing Rights and Authorizations.--Nothing in this Act affects-- (1) any valid existing rights; or (2) the validity or term and conditions of any existing withdrawal, right-of-way, easement, lease, license, or permit on the land to which administrative jurisdiction is transferred under this Act, except that beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the head of the agency to which administrative jurisdiction over the land is transferred shall be responsible for administering the interests or authorizations (including reissuing the interests or authorizations in accordance with applicable law).
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.