This Act may be cited as the ``Colusa Basin Watershed Integrated Resources Management Act''.
The Secretary of the Interior (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting within existing budgetary authority, may provide financial assistance to the Colusa Basin Drainage District, California (in this Act referred to as the ``District''), for use by the District or by local agencies acting pursuant to section 413 of the State of California statute known as the Colusa Basin Drainage Act (California Stats.
1399) as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act (in this Act referred to as the ``State statute''), for planning, design, environmental compliance, and construction required in carrying out eligible projects in the Colusa Basin Watershed to-- (1)(A) reduce the risk of damage to urban and agricultural areas from flooding or the discharge of drainage water or tailwater; (B) assist in groundwater recharge efforts to alleviate overdraft and land subsidence; or (C) construct, restore, or preserve wetland and riparian habitat; and (2) capture, as an incidental purpose of any of the purposes referred to in paragraph (1), surface or stormwater for conservation, conjunctive use, and increased water supplies.
Eligible Projects.--A project shall be an eligible project for purposes of section 2 only if it is-- (1) consistent with the plan for flood protection and integrated resources management described in the document entitled ``Draft Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement/ Environmental Impact Report and Draft Program Financing Plan, Integrated Resources Management Program for Flood Control in the Colusa Basin'', dated May 2000; and (2) carried out in accordance with that document and all environmental documentation requirements that apply to the project under the laws of the United States and the State of California.
Compatibility Requirement.--The Secretary shall ensure that projects for which assistance is provided under this Act are not inconsistent with watershed protection and environmental restoration efforts being carried out under the authority of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (Public Law 102-575; 106 United States Statutes at Large 4706 et sequentes) or the CALFED Bay-Delta Program.
Non-Federal Share.--The Secretary shall require that the District and cooperating non-Federal agencies or organizations pay-- (1) 25 percent of the costs associated with construction of any project carried out with assistance provided under this Act; (2) 100 percent of any operation, maintenance, and replacement and rehabilitation costs with respect to such a project; and (3) 35 percent of the costs associated with planning, design, and environmental compliance activities.
Planning, Design, and Compliance Assistance.--Funds appropriated pursuant to this Act may be made available to fund 65 percent of costs incurred for planning, design, and environmental compliance activities by the District or by local agencies acting pursuant to the State statute, in accordance with agreements with the Secretary.
Treatment of Contributions.--For purposes of this section, the Secretary shall treat the value of lands, interests in lands (including rights-of-way and other easements), and necessary relocations contributed by the District to a project as a payment by the District of the costs of the project.
Amounts expended pursuant to this Act shall be considered nonreimbursable for purposes of the Act of June 17, 1902 (32 United States Statutes at Large 388; 43 United States Code 371 et sequentes), and Acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto.
Funds appropriated pursuant to this Act may be made available to the District or a local agency only if the District or local agency, as applicable, has entered into a binding agreement with the Secretary-- (1) under which the District or the local agency is required to pay the non-Federal share of the costs of construction required by section 4(a); and (2) governing the funding of planning, design, and compliance activities costs under section 4(b).
For project work (including work associated with studies, planning, design, and construction) carried out by the District or by a local agency acting pursuant to the State statute in section 2 before the date amounts are provided for the project under this Act, the Secretary shall, subject to amounts being made available in advance in appropriations Acts, reimburse the District or the local agency, without interest, an amount equal to the estimated Federal share of the cost of such work under section 4.
In General.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements and contracts with the District to assist the Secretary in carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Subcontracting.--Under such cooperative agreements and contracts, the Secretary may authorize the District to manage and let contracts and receive reimbursements, subject to amounts being made available in advance in appropriations Acts, for work carried out under such contracts or subcontracts.
RELATIONSHIP TO RECLAMATION REFORM ACT OF 1982.
Activities carried out, and financial assistance provided, under this Act shall not be considered a supplemental or additional benefit for purposes of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982 (96 United States Statutes at Large 1263; 43 United States Code 390aa et sequentes).
Within existing budgetary authority and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary is authorized to expend up to $25,000,000, plus such additional amount, if any, as may be required by reason of changes in costs of services of the types involved in the District's projects as shown by engineering and other relevant indexes to carry out this Act.
Sums appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.
Passed the House of Representatives September 18, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.