This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Reforming and Simplifying the Federal Tax Code Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission on Reforming and Simplifying the Federal Tax Code'' (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall-- (1) conduct a study and investigation of the internal revenue laws of the United States; and (2) make recommendations to reform and simplify such laws.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of nine members, of whom-- (1) three members shall be appointed by the President; (2) two members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (3) one member shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; (4) two members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; and (5) one member shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
The members of the Commission shall consist of individuals who are of recognized standing and distinction and who possess a demonstrated capacity to discharge the duties imposed on the Commission.
At least one of the members shall be appointed from individuals representing the interests of small business employers, at least one of the members shall be appointed from individuals representing the interests of farmers, and at least one of the members shall be appointed from individuals representing the interests of self-employed persons.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than five members appointed under subsection (a) may be of the same political party.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A quorum shall consist of five members of the Commission, except that three members may conduct a hearing under section 6.
Chairman; Vice Chairman.--At the time of the appointment-- (1) the Chairman of the Commission shall be designated by the President; and (2) the Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be designated by the President in consultation with the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate.
In the case of vacancy of the Chairmanship or Vice Chairmanship, another member of the Commission shall be appointed under paragraph (1) or (2), as the case may be.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman or a majority of its members.
Meetings shall be held not less frequently than once in each calendar month which begins after a majority of the authorized membership of the Commission has first been appointed.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Executive Director.--The Chairman shall appoint an executive director of the Commission.
The executive director shall be paid the rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the executive director may appoint such personnel as the executive director considers appropriate.
Applicability of Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title (relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates).
Experts and Consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the executive director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Physical Facilities.--The Administrator of General Services shall locate suitable office space for the operation of the Commission.
The facilities shall serve as the headquarters of the Commission and shall include all necessary equipment and incidentals required for the proper functioning of the Commission.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Restriction on disclosure of return information to commission members.--No return, return information, or taxpayer return information, as defined in section 6103(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, may be disclosed to any member of the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relating to any matter which the Commission is empowered to investigate by this Act.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within the United States at any designated place of hearing within the United States.
Failure to obey a subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), the Commission may apply to a United States district court for an order requiring that person to appear before the Commission to give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the matter under investigation.
The application may be made within the judicial district where the hearing is conducted or where that person is found, resides, or transacts business.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as civil contempt.
Service of subpoenas.--The subpoenas of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Service of process.--All process of any court to which application is made under paragraph (2) may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
Immunity.--Except as provided in this subsection, a person may not be excused from testifying or from producing evidence pursuant to a subpoena on the ground that the testimony or evidence required by the subpoena may tend to incriminate or subject that person to criminal prosecution.
A person, after having claimed the privilege against self- incrimination, may not be criminally prosecuted by reason of any transaction, matter, or thing which that person is compelled to testify about or produce evidence relating to, except that the person may be prosecuted for perjury committed during the testimony or made in the evidence.
The Commission shall transmit a report to the President and the Congress not later than one year after the date on which all members of the Commission are first appointed.
Such report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its report pursuant to section 7.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.