This Act may be cited as the ``Local Government Interstate Waste Control Act''.
INTERSTATE TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
In General.--Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6941 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
INTERSTATE TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
Restriction on Receipt of Out-Of-State Waste.-- ``(1) In general.-- ``(A) Authorization.--Subject to subsections (b) and (e), the owner or operator of a facility that is a landfill or incinerator in a State may not receive for disposal or incineration any out-of-State municipal solid waste unless the owner or operator obtains authorization to receive the waste from the affected local government.
Requirements for authorization.--An authorization granted pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be-- ``(i) granted by formal action at a meeting; ``(ii) recorded in writing in the official record of the meeting; and ``(iii) final.
Information.--Prior to taking formal action with respect to granting authorization to receive out-of-State municipal solid waste pursuant to this subsection, an affected local government shall require the owner or operator of the facility seeking the authorization to provide the following information (which the government shall make readily available to the Governor of the State, each adjoining local government and Indian tribe, and any other interested person for inspection and copying): ``(A) A brief description of the facility, including the size of, ultimate waste capacity of, and the anticipated monthly and yearly quantities (expressed in terms of volume) of waste to be handled by-- ``(i) the facility as in existence on the date of provision of the information; and ``(ii) the facility, including any planned expansion.
A map of the facility site indicating location in relation to the local road system and topography and hydrogeological features.
The map shall indicate any buffer zones to be acquired by the owner or operator as well as all facility units.
A description of the environmental characteristics of the site, as in existence on the date of provision of the information, including information regarding ground water resources, and a discussion of alterations in the characteristics of the site that may be necessitated by, or occur as a result of, the facility.
A description of appropriate environmental controls to be used on the site, including runon or runoff management (or both), air pollution control devices, source separation procedures (if any) methane monitoring and control, landfill covers, liners or leachate collection systems, and monitoring programs.
In addition, the description shall include a description of any waste residuals generated by the facility, including leachate or ash, and the planned management of the residuals.
A description of site access controls to be employed, and roadway improvements to be made, by the owner or operator, and an estimate of the timing and extent of increased local truck traffic.
A list of all required Federal, State, and local permits.
Estimates of the personnel requirements of the facility, including information regarding the probable skill and education levels required for jobs at the facility.
To the extent practicable, the information shall distinguish between employment statistics for skill and education levels required prior to operation of the facility, and the statistics for the levels required on or after the first day of operation of the facility.
Any information that is required by State law to be provided with respect to any violation of environmental laws (including regulations) by the owner, the operator, and any subsidiary of the owner or operator, the disposition of enforcement proceedings taken with respect to the violation, and corrective action and rehabilitation measures taken as a result of the proceedings.
Any information that is required by State law to be provided with respect to gifts and contributions made by the owner and operator.
Any information that is required by State law to be provided by the owner or operator with respect to compliance by the owner or operator with the State solid waste management plan in effect pursuant to section 4007.
Notification prior to formal action.--Prior to taking formal action with respect to granting authorization to receive out-of-State municipal solid waste pursuant to this subsection, an affected local government shall-- ``(A) notify the Governor, adjoining local governments, and any adjoining Indian tribes, of the proposed action; ``(B)(i) publish notice of the action in a newspaper of general circulation at least 30 days before holding a hearing and again at least 15 days before holding the hearing; or ``(ii) if State law provides for an alternative form of public notification, provide such notification concerning the action; and ``(C) provide an opportunity for public comment on the action, including at least 1 public hearing, in accordance with State law.
Notification of action.--The local government shall notify the Governor, adjoining local governments, and any adjoining Indian tribes of an authorization granted under this subsection.
Limitations and Applicability.-- ``(1) Landfills and incinerators in operation or under construction.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to an operator of a facility that is a landfill or incinerator with respect to the landfill or incinerator if-- ``(A)(i) during the 1-year period preceding the date of enactment of this section, the owner or operator received at the landfill or incinerator, in accordance with State law (as in effect during the 1- year period), documented shipments (within the meaning of paragraph (2)) of out-of-State municipal solid waste; or ``(ii) before the date of enactment of this section, entered into a host agreement or otherwise obtained legally binding, documented authorization from the affected local government to accept out-of-State municipal solid waste; and ``(B)(i) with respect to a landfill, the landfill is in compliance with all applicable Federal and State laws (including regulations) relating to design and location standards, leachate collection, ground water monitoring, and financial assurance for closure and post-closure care and corrective action; or ``(ii) with respect to an incinerator, the incinerator is in compliance with the applicable requirements of section 129 of the Clean Air Act (42 United States Code 7429) and applicable State laws and regulations relating to facility design.
Documentation of shipment.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A)(i), a shipment of municipal solid waste shall be considered a documented shipment if the owner or operator of the landfill or incinerator concerned provides documentation of the shipment (including the quantity, time, and place of the shipment) to the Governor of the State in which the landfill or incinerator is located.
Authority of Governor To Restrict Out-of-State Municipal Solid Waste Disposed Of at Landfills.-- ``(1) In general.-- ``(A) Limitations on exempted landfills.-- ``(i) In general.--In response to a written request by each of an affected local government and an affected local solid waste planning unit (if the local solid waste planning unit exists under State law), a Governor may limit the quantity of out-of-State municipal solid waste received for disposal, during a 1-year period, at a landfill described in clause (ii) to a quantity equal to the quantity of out-of-State municipal solid waste received for disposal at the landfill during the 1-year period preceding the date of enactment of this section.
Landfill.--The landfill referred to in clause (i) shall be a landfill in the State, the owner or operator of which is exempt, under subsection (b), from the requirements of subsection (a) on the basis of receiving shipments as describe in subsection (b)(1)(A)(i).
Procedureal requirements for request.--Prior to submitting a request under this subsection to limit the disposal of out-of-State municipal solid waste, an affected local government and the affected local solid waste planning unit, if any, shall-- ``(i) provide notice and an opportunity for public comment concerning the proposed request; and ``(ii) after providing the notice and opportunity for public comment, take formal action concerning the proposed request at a public meeting.
Response by governor.--With respect to request made by affected local governments under paragraph (1)(A), the Governor shall respond in a consistent manner that does not discriminate against any-- ``(A) particular landfill within the State; or ``(B) shipment of out-of-State municipal solid waste on the basis of State of origin.
Limitation on authority of governor.--A Governor may not exercise the authority granted under this subsection if the action would be inconsistent with State law or would result in the violation of or failure to perform any provision of a written, legally binding contract for disposal of out-of-State municipal solid waste at a landfill executed prior to the date of enactment.
Existing Agreements.-- ``(1) In general.--Nothing in this section is intended to affect an agreement in effect on the date of enactment of this section or other State law in effect on the date of enactment of this section (except as expressly provided otherwise in this section).
Availability of contracts.--The owner or operator of a landfill or incinerator that is exempt, under subsection (b), from the requirements of subsection (a), shall make available for inspection by the public, in the affected local community, a copy of each contract that the owner or operator has entered into for the disposal of out-of-State municipal solid waste at that landfill or incinerator.
The owner or operator may redact any proprietary information contained in such a copy of a contract, but shall ensure that at least information relating to the volume of out-of-State municipal solid waste to be received, the source of the waste, and the duration of the contract, is apparent in the copy.
Applicability.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), this section applies in and to each State.
Rejection of applicability.--A State may exercise the option to become exempt from the requirements of this section if the State-- ``(A) notifies the Administrator (in a manner prescribed by the Administrator) that the State is exercising the option; and ``(B) in taking any appropriate action to reject the applicability of this section, makes specific reference to this section.
Acknowledgement of exemption.--On receipt of a notification by a State pursuant to a paragraph (2)(A), the Administrator shall take such action as is appropriate to acknowledge the exemption of the State from the requirements of this section.
Definitions.--As used in this section: ``(1) Affected local government.--The term `affected local government', used with respect to a landfill or incinerator, means the elected officials of the city, town, borough, county, or parish, with primary jurisdiction over the use of the land on which the facility is located or proposed to be located.
Affected local solid waste planning unit.--The term `affected local solid waste planning unit' means a political subdivision of a State with authority relating to solid waste management planning in accordance with State law.
Host agreement.--The term `host agreement' means a written, legally binding agreement, lawfully entered into between an owner or operator of a landfill or incinerator and an affected local government that authorizes the landfill or incinerator to receive municipal solid waste generated outside the jurisdiction of the affected local government.
Municipal solid waste.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `municipal solid waste' means solid waste that is refuse (or refuse-derived fuel) generated by the general public or from residential, commercial institutional, or industrial sources and that consists of paper, wood, yard wastes, food wastes, plastics, leather, rubber, or other combustible materials or noncombustible materials such as metal, glass, and rock.
Exclusions.--The term does not include-- ``(i) hazardous waste or waste containing polychlorinated biphenyls; ``(ii) industrial waste; ``(iii) medical waste; ``(iv) recyclable materials that have been separated from waste otherwise destined for disposal (either at the source of the waste or at processing facilities) or that have been managed separately from waste destined for disposal; and ``(v) materials and products returned from a dispenser or distributor to the manufacturer or an agent of the manufacturer for credit, evaluation, and possible reuse.
Out-of-state municipal solid waste.--The term `out- of-State municipal solid waste', used with respect to a State, means municipal solid waste generated outside of the State.
Owner or operator.--The term `owner or operator', used with respect to a landfill or incinerator, does not include-- ``(A) a State or affected local government that owns or operates the landfill or incinerator, if the facility is located within the jurisdiction of the State or the affected local government; or ``(B) a person who owns or operates a facility, if the facility receives only waste generated by the person.''.
Table of Contents Amendment.--The table of contents of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code prec.
6901) is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to subtitle D the following new item: ``Sec.
Interstate transportation and disposal of municipal solid waste.