INCLUSION OF CERTAIN COVERED BENEFICIARIES IN FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM.
FEHBP Option.--Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1079a the following new section: ``Sec.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program ``(a) FEHBP Option.--(1) Covered beneficiaries described in subsection (b) shall be afforded an opportunity to enroll in any health benefits plan under the Federal Employee Health Benefits program offering medical and dental care that is comparable to the care authorized by section 1077 of this title to be provided under section 1076 of this title.
The Secretary of Defense and the other administering Secretaries shall jointly enter into an agreement with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management to carry out paragraph (1).
Eligible Covered Beneficiaries.--(1) A covered beneficiary referred to in subsection (a) is a member or former member of the uniformed services described in section 1074(b) of this title, and any dependent of the member described in section 1076(b) of this title, who, as determined pursuant to standards and procedures provided in the agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a)(2)-- ``(A) is not guaranteed access under CHAMPUS or TRICARE Standard to health and dental care that is comparable to the highest level of health and dental care benefits provided under the service benefit plan offered under the Federal Employee Health Benefits program; ``(B) is eligible to enroll in the TRICARE program but is not enrolled because of the location of the beneficiary, a limitation on the total enrollment, or any other reason; or ``(C) is entitled to hospital insurance benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395c et seq.).
A covered beneficiary shall not be required to satisfy any eligibility criteria specified in chapter 89 of title 5 as a condition for enrollment in a health benefits plan of the Federal Employee Health Benefits program under this section.
Contributions.--(1) Contributions shall be made for an enrollment of a covered beneficiary in a plan of the Federal Employee Health Benefits program under this section as if the beneficiary were an employee of the Federal Government.
The administering Secretary concerned shall be responsible for the Government contributions that the Director of the Office of Personnel Management determines would be payable by the Secretary under section 8906 of title 5 for an enrolled covered beneficiary if the beneficiary were an employee of the Secretary.
Each covered beneficiary enrolled in a health benefits plan under this section shall be required to contribute the amount that would be withheld from the pay of a similarly situated Federal employee who is enrolled in the same health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5.
Management of Participation.--The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall manage the participation of a covered beneficiary in a health benefits plan of the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to an enrollment under this section.
The Director shall maintain separate risk pools for participating covered beneficiaries until such time as the Director determines that a complete inclusion of participating covered beneficiaries under chapter 89 of title 5 will not adversely affect Federal employees and annuitants enrolled in health benefits plans under such chapter.
Reporting Requirements.--Not later than November 1 of each year, the Secretary of Defense and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall jointly submit to Congress a report describing the provision of health and dental care services to covered beneficiaries under this section during the preceding fiscal year.
The report shall address or contain the following: ``(1) The number of covered beneficiaries who are participating in health benefits plans of the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to an enrollment under this section, both in terms of total number and as a percentage of all covered beneficiaries who are receiving health care through the health care system of the uniformed services.
The extent to which covered beneficiaries use the health and dental care services available to the beneficiaries under health benefits plans pursuant to enrollments under this section.
The cost to covered beneficiaries for health and dental care under such health benefits plans.
The cost to the Department of Defense, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Health and Human Services, and any other departments and agencies of the Federal Government of providing care to covered beneficiaries pursuant to enrollments in such health benefits plans under this section.
A comparison of the costs determined under paragraphs (3) and (4) and the costs that would otherwise have been incurred by the United States and enrollees under alternative health care options available to the administering Secretaries.
The effects of the exercise of authority under this section on the cost, access, and utilization rates of other health care options under the health care system of the uniformed services.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 8905 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as subsections (e), (f), and (g), respectively; and (B) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection (d): ``(d) An individual whom the Secretary of Defense determines is an eligible covered beneficiary under subsection (b) of section 1079b of title 10 may enroll in a health benefits plan under this chapter in accordance with the agreement entered into under subsection (a) of such section between the Secretary and the Office and with applicable regulations under this chapter.''.
Section 8906 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subsection (b)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraphs (2) and (3)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraphs (2), (3), and (4)''; and (ii) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of individuals who enroll in a health plan under section 8905(d) of this title, the Government contribution shall be determined under section 1079b(c) of title 10.
''; and (B) in subsection (g)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraphs (2) and (3)''; and (ii) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) The Government contribution described in subsection (b)(4) for beneficiaries who enroll under section 8905(d) of this title shall be paid as provided in section 1079b(c) of title 10.''.
IMPROVED BENEFITS UNDER CHAMPUS AND TRICARE STANDARD.
Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, as amended by section 1(a), is further amended by inserting after section 1079b the following new section: ``Sec.
CHAMPUS and TRICARE Standard benefits: comparability with service benefit plan of the Federal Employees Health Benefits program ``(a) Benefits.--The health and dental care benefits provided under CHAMPUS and TRICARE Standard shall be comparable to the highest level of benefits provided under the service benefit plan of the Federal Employees Health Benefits program.
Provider Reimbursement Rates.--The rates prescribed for the reimbursement of health and dental care providers under CHAMPUS and TRICARE Standard shall be the same as those provided for the highest level of benefits under the service benefit plan of the Federal Employees Health Benefits program.''.
Section 1072 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4), by striking out ``The term `Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services' means'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``The terms `Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services' and `CHAMPUS' mean''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) The term `TRICARE program' means the managed health care program that is established by the Secretary of Defense under the authority of this chapter, principally section 1097 of this title, and includes the competitive selection of contractors to financially underwrite the delivery of health care services under CHAMPUS.
The term `TRICARE Standard' means a CHAMPUS health care benefits option that, subject to the deductibles and cost- sharing requirements under CHAMPUS, pays a share of the cost of covered health care services that are provided by health care providers outside the Federal Government who are not part of the CHAMPUS network of health care providers.
The term `Federal Employee Health Benefits program' means the Federal Employee Health Benefits program under chapter 89 of title 5.''.
The Secretary of Defense shall begin to offer the health benefits option under section 1079b(a) of title 10, United States Code (as added by section 1(a)), and the improved benefits under section 1079c of such title (as added by section 3) not later than November 1, 1997.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1079a the following: ``1079b.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program.
CHAMPUS and TRICARE Standard benefits: comparability with service benefit plan of the Federal Employees Health Benefits program.