This Act may be cited as the ``Soil and Water Protection Act of 1992''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) farmers, ranchers, and foresters have a sound understanding of protecting the Nation's rich natural resources; (2) soil and water damage and contamination have occurred and may occur in the future; (3) energy shortages have occurred and may occur in the future; (4) farmers, ranchers, and foresters are energy driven enterprises in conjunction with substantial soil and water usage; (5) farmers, ranchers and foresters can substantially make more efficient energy expenditures using energy saving management techniques; (6) practices such as fertility management, conservation tillage, and integrated pest management will provide future generations the enjoyment of improved environmental conditions such as better ground and surface water quality and soil fertility; (7) saving and conserving energy will benefit the public land; and (8) Federal agricultural policies and programs influence sound energy conservation and environmental objectives.
FEDERAL ENERGY CONSERVATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Soil Conservation Service, shall establish a Federal energy conservation program.
Criteria.--The Federal energy conservation program shall target and promote more efficient energy use in, and the conservation of energy with respect to, tillage practices, chemical and fertilizer management, irrigation management, livestock facility management, horticulture, and wood utilization.
The Secretary shall provide grants and technical and educational assistance for projects in eligible States including (but not limited to) projects for-- (1) demonstrating the advantages of conservation tillage practices that promote energy efficiency and conservation; (2) training, pest scouting, and soil sampling in order to promote education concerning prescription application of animal manures, fertilizers, lime, soil conditioners and pesticide usage; (3) improving the efficient use of irrigation systems to reduce energy consumption; (4) managing livestock facilities for energy conservation; (5) managing horticultural facilities for energy conservation; and (6) improving efficiency in utilization of wood, including milling of forest products and the use of wood for production of energy.
In General.--The Secretary, through the Soil Conservation Service, shall make grants to individuals or institutions that present to the Secretary an application and a plan for the energy conservation project-- (1) which was developed in consultation with an individual recognized by the Secretary to have expertise in energy conservation; and (2) that is within an eligible State which has an energy conservation program.
Advice From State Agriculture Energy Conservation Review Panel.--In making grants under this section, the Secretary shall take into consideration the advice received from the State agriculture energy conservation review panel pursuant to section 6(c)(2).
Limitations.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Federal grant under this section for a project may not exceed $5,000.
In the case of a project in which a school, hospital, or other similar institution that is improving its energy efficiency by converting its heating system to a wood burning system, the Federal grant may not exceed $150,000.
Funds made available under this Act may not be used to pay for labor costs associated with a project.
Grants for a project may not be made until after receipts have been provided to the Secretary for the actual cost incurred for the project.
ALLOCATION AMONG ELIGIBLE STATES.
The Secretary shall allocate funds made available to carry out this Act for a fiscal year to each State which is eligible for assistance.
The allocation among States shall be equitable, based on the following: (1) The number and size of farms.
The potential for energy conservation.
The number and size of forest industries.
The Secretary may allocate up to 25 percent of the funds allocated to any State with substantial forest industry to forest energy conservation projects.
STATE PARTICIPATION AND ASSISTANCE.
Eligible State.--The Secretary may provide assistance under this Act in a fiscal year for projects in a State which, before the beginning of that fiscal year-- (1) submits to the Secretary a plan describing in detail how the State will cooperate with the United States in carrying out this Act, including providing for-- (A) encouragement to persons to participate in the energy conservation program; (B) criteria to be used for recommending projects to be funded by the program; and (C) individuals with expertise in energy efficiency to advise program participants on energy conservation matters; and (2) has established an agriculture energy conservation review panel in accordance with subsection (c).
Cost Share.--The State may offer assistance and services in cooperation with the Secretary to enhance energy conservation efforts under this Act.
State Agriculture Energy Conservation Review Panel.--(1) An eligible State, together with the United States, shall establish an energy conservation review panel comprised of 6 members as follows: (A) The head of the State agricultural agency, or his designee.
The State forester or equivalent State official, or his designee.
The president of that State's Association of Conservation Districts, or his designee.
The State conservationist of the Soil Conservation Service for that State, or his designee.
The Cooperative Research Service Director for that State, or his designee.
The Cooperative Extension Director for the State, or his designee.
The State agriculture energy conservation review panel shall advise and recommend to the Secretary those projects that meet the requirements of this Act.
In providing such advice and recommendations, the panel shall review and evaluate each project using the criteria referred to in subsection (a)(1)(B).
DEMONSTRATIONS, EDUCATION, AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
Agricultural Experiment Stations.--The Secretary shall establish and maintain demonstrations of energy-saving and energy efficient practices at agricultural experiment stations that can be implemented by agriculture procedures and the public.
Extension Service.--The Secretary, through the Extension Service, shall disseminate informational and educational materials and conduct demonstrations and training sessions.
Technical and Material Assistance.--In carrying out the Federal energy conservation program, the Secretary, acting through the Soil Conservation Service, shall provide such technical and material assistance to participants as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Not later than March 31, 1994 and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Congress describing the results of the Federal energy conservation program.
In particular, the report shall include-- (1) the number and identification of States participating in the program; (2) a description of the projects for which grants were made pursuant to the program; (3) the energy efficiency practices performed and the estimated amount of conservation energy use as a result of the program; and (4) the number of States expected to participate in the program the next fiscal year.
There is authorized to be appropriated $150,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1996 to carry out this Act.