This Act may be cited as the ``Educational Opportunities Act of 1999''.
TITLE I--HELP SCHOLARSHIPS SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Helping Empower Low-Income Parents (HELP) Scholarships Amendments of 1999''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Congress strongly supports the efforts to expand educational opportunities for low-income families.
The HELP Scholarships and the education tax credit proposed under this Act are designed to provide additional learning opportunities and tools for individuals living in economically-disadvantaged communities in a manner consistent with the education flexibility initiatives already adopted by Congress.
Section 6003 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7303) is amended-- (1) in the section heading, by striking ``definition'' and inserting ``definitions''; (2) by striking ``(1)'', ``(2)'', and ``(3)''; (3) in the matter proceeding subparagraph (A), by striking ``title the term'' and inserting the following: ``title-- ``(1) the term''; (4) by striking the period at the end; and (5) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) the term `poverty line' means the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)) applicable to a family of the size involved; and ``(3) the term `voluntary public and private parental choice program' means a program that meets the requirements of section 6301(b)(10), is authorized by State law, and includes 1 or more private schools to allow low-income parents to choose the appropriate school for their children.''.
ALLOCATION TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
Subsection (a) of section 6102 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7312(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Distribution Rule.-- ``(1) State funds.-- ``(A) In general.--Of the amount made available to a State educational agency each fiscal year to carry out this title, the agency may reserve for State programs-- ``(i) not more than 10 percent; or ``(ii) in the case of a State that has in effect a law that establishes a voluntary public and private parental choice program, not more than 25 percent.
Limitation on use of certain reserved amounts.--If a State educational agency reserves under subparagraph (A) more than 10 percent of amounts made available to the agency for a fiscal year, the agency shall use amounts in excess of 10 percent of amounts so made available only for voluntary public and private parental choice programs.
Local funds.--A State educational agency shall distribute amounts made available to the agency under this title that are not reserved under paragraph (1) to local educational agencies within such State that are located in an area designated as an empowerment zone or an enterprise community under section 1391 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
State Uses of Funds.--Section 6201(a)(1) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7331(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; and (2) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following: ``(D) establishing voluntary public and private parental choice programs in accordance with section 6301(b)(10); and''.
Local Uses of Funds.--Section 6301(b) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7351) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (8), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in paragraph (9), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (9) the following: ``(10) voluntary public and private parental choice programs that-- ``(A) are located in an area designated as an empowerment zone or an enterprise community under section 1391 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; ``(B) ensure that participation in such a voluntary public and private parental choice program is limited to families whose family income does not exceed 185 percent of the poverty line; ``(C) ensure that-- ``(i) the maximum amount of a voluntary public and private parental choice scholarship does not exceed the per pupil expenditure of the local educational agency in which an applicant for a voluntary public and private parental choice scholarship resides; and ``(ii) the minimum amount of a voluntary public and private parental choice scholarship is not less than 60 percent of the per pupil expenditure of the local educational agency in which an applicant for a voluntary public and private parental choice scholarship resides or the cost of tuition at a private school, whichever is less; ``(D) ensure that for a private school, which may include a religiously affiliated school, choosing to participate in a voluntary public and private parental choice program-- ``(i) such a school is permitted to impose the same academic requirements for all students, including students selected for a scholarship as provided under this paragraph; ``(ii) receipt of funds under this title is not conditioned with requirements or regulations that preclude the use of such funds for sectarian educational purposes or require removal of religious art, icons, scripture, or other symbols; and ``(iii) such a school is in compliance with all State requirements applicable to the operation of a private school that are in effect in the year preceding the date of the enactment of the Helping Empower Low-income Parents (HELP) Scholarships Amendments of 1997; ``(E) may allow State, local, and private funds to be used for voluntary public and private parental choice programs; and ``(F) ensure priority for students who were enrolled in a public school in the school year preceding the school year in which a voluntary public and private parental choice school begins operation.''.
Part D of title VI of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7371 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of section 6402 the following new subsection: ``(j) Application.--This section shall not apply to funds that a State or local educational agency uses to establish a voluntary public and private parental choice program in accordance with section 6301(b)(10).
''; and (2) by adding at the end of such part the following new sections: ``SEC.
Annual Evaluation.-- ``(1) Contract.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall enter into a contract, with an evaluating agency that has demonstrated experience in conducting evaluations, for the conduct of an ongoing rigorous evaluation of the programs established under section 6301(b)(10).
Annual evaluation requirement.--The contract described in paragraph (1) shall require the evaluating agency entering into such contract to evaluate annually each program established under section 6301(b)(10) in accordance with the evaluation criteria described in subsection (b) and each such program that has applied for an education flexibility waiver under section 6304.
Transmission.--The contract described in paragraph (1) shall require the evaluating agency entering into such contract to transmit to the Comptroller General of the United States the findings of each annual evaluation under paragraph (1).
Evaluation Criteria.--The Comptroller General of the United States, in consultation with the Secretary, shall establish minimum criteria for evaluating each program established under section 6301(b)(10).
Such criteria shall provide for-- ``(1) a description of the implementation of each program established under section 6301(b)(10) and the program's effects on all participants, schools, and communities in the program area, with particular attention given to the effect of parent participation in the life of the school and the level of parental satisfaction with the program; and ``(2) a comparison of the educational achievement of all students in the program area, including a comparison between-- ``(A) students receiving a voluntary public and private parental choice scholarships under section 6301(b)(10); and ``(B) students not receiving a voluntary public and private parental choice scholarships under such section.
Evaluation Funds.--Pursuant to the authority provided under section 14701, the Secretary shall reserve not more than 0.50 percent of the amount of funds made available under section 6002 to carry out this section.
To determine the amount necessary for evaluation purposes, the Secretary shall consider the prospective scale and scope of the evaluation, including the number of local educational agencies conducting voluntary public and private choice programs.
Not School Aid.--Subject to subsection (b), funds used under this title to establish a voluntary public and private parental choice program shall be considered assistance to the student and shall not be considered as assistance to any school that chooses to participate in such program.
No Federal Control.--The Secretary is not permitted to exercise any direction, supervision, or control over curricula, program of instruction, administration, or personnel of any school that chooses to participate in a voluntary public and private choice program established under 6309(b)(10).''.
TITLE II--EDUCATION TAX CREDIT SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Children's Education Tax Credit Act''.
202. CREDIT FOR EDUCATION EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year the amount of the qualified education expenses paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year for the education of any individual with respect to whom the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under section 151(c).
Limitation.--The amount allowed as a credit under subsection (a) for any taxable year with respect to the qualified education expenses of any 1 individual shall not exceed $1,000.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified education expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified education expenses' means amounts paid for-- ``(i) tuition and fees required for the enrollment or attendance of a student at an eligible zone educational institution, and ``(ii) fees, tutoring, books, supplies, computer equipment (including related software and services) and other equipment required for courses of instruction at an eligible zone educational institution.
Meals and lodging expenses not included.-- Such term does not include any amount paid, directly or indirectly, for meals, lodging, or similar personal, living, or family expenses.
In the event an amount paid for tuition or fees includes an amount for meals, lodging, or similar expenses which is not separately stated, the portion of such amount which is attributable to meals, lodging, or similar expenses shall be determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Special rule for home schooling.--In the case of education furnished in the home (as a substitute for public education) which meets the requirements of State law relating to compulsory school attendance, the term `qualified education expenses' means amounts paid for tutoring, books, supplies, computer equipment (including related software and services), and other equipment used in furnishing such education.
Eligible zone educational institution.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible zone educational institution' means any school described in subparagraph (B) which is located in an area designated as an empowerment zone or an enterprise community under section 1391.
Schools described.--A school described in this subparagraph is any of the following: ``(i) A secondary school.
Any private, parochial, religious, or home school organized for the purpose of providing elementary or secondary education, or both.
Elementary and secondary schools.--The terms `elementary school' and `secondary school' have the respective meanings given such terms by section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Adjustment for certain scholarships.--The amounts otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) as qualified education expenses of any individual during any period shall be reduced (before the application of subsection (b)) by the sum of the amounts received with respect to such individual for the taxable year as a qualified scholarship which under section 117 is not includable in gross income.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking ``or'' after ``1978,'' and by inserting before the period ``, or enacted by the Children's Education Tax Credit Act''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.