COMMUNITY ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT PLAN FOR CLOSED OR REALIGNED MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.
In General.--The Secretary of Defense may not close or realign a military installation under a base closure law until a community economic adjustment plan with respect to the installation is prepared in accordance with this section.
Plan Preparation.--(1) The Secretary shall-- (A) ensure that the community economic adjustment plan, if any, prepared by a State or local government, or a regional economic organization or other organization, with respect to a military installation to be closed or realigned under a base closure law meets the requirements for such a plan under this section; or (B) in the event that no government or organization prepares such a plan, prepare a plan meeting such requirements.
(A) The Secretary may provide such assistance (including making grants and entering into cooperative agreements) as the Secretary determines appropriate to State or local governments, or regional economic organizations or other organizations, in the preparation of a community economic adjustment plans under paragraph (1)(A).
Any grants made by the Secretary under this paragraph shall meet the requirements of section 2391(b) of title 10, United States Code.
The Secretary shall carry out the requirements of this subsection through the Office of Economic Adjustment of the Department of Defense.
Plan Requirements.--Each community economic adjustment plan prepared under this section with respect to a military installation to be closed or realigned shall contain the following: (1) If the utilization of any portion of the installation for non-defense purposes is determined to be economically practicable, a proposal for the utilization of such portion for such purposes, including-- (A) a specific description of such utilization; (B) a proposal for notifying the public the availability of such portion for such purposes; (C) an assessment of the environmental hazards, if any, that exist at the installation, and a plan for the remediation of such hazards; (D) an assessment of (i) the number of civilian employees who will gain or lose employment as a result of the closure or realignment of the installation, and (ii) the number of such employees, if any, who will find alternative employment in the vicinity of the installation after such closure or realignment as a result of such utilization; and (E) an assessment of the affect on the tax base and expenditures of the State and local governments affected by the closure or realignment of (i) the closure or realignment, and (ii) such utilization.
If the utilization of any portion of the installation for non-defense purposes is determined not to be economically practicable, a detailed explanation of the analysis supporting that determination.
A proposal for the minimization of the economic impact of the closure or realignment on the region in which the installation is located, including means of-- (A) ensuring the economic stability of the region; (B) providing for job creation in the region; (C) providing for growth in rates of personal income throughout the region; and (D) stabilizing the tax base and projected expenditures of State and local governments in the region.
Notification.--Not later than 30 days after the Secretary determines that a community economic adjustment plan with respect to a military installation meets the requirements of subsection (c), the Secretary shall-- (1) submit to the appropriate committees of the Senate and House of Representatives a written notification of the completion of the plan; and (2) in the event that the Secretary prepares the plan under subsection (a)(1)(B), submit the plan to the governments of the State and localities in which the military installation is located and to such regional economic organizations or other organizations as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations for the purposes of carrying out this section.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``base closure law'' means the following: (1) Section 2687 of title 10, United States Code.
Title II of the Defense Authorization Amendments and Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Any other similar law enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Effective Date.--The provisions of this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and apply to military installations closed or realigned after such date.