This Act may be cited as the ``Residential, Farm, Ranch, and Small Business Wind Energy Systems Act of 2003'' or the ``Small Wind Energy Systems Act of 2003''.
CREDIT FOR RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY PROPERTY.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25B the following new section: ``SEC.
RESIDENTIAL SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 30 percent of the qualified wind energy property expenditures made by the taxpayer during such year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) shall not exceed $1,000 for each kilowatt of capacity.
Safety certifications.--No credit shall be allowed under this section for an item of property unless such property meets appropriate fire and electric code requirements.
Carryforward of Unused Credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by section 26(a) for such taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under this subpart (other than this section), such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
Qualified Wind Energy Property Expenditure.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified wind energy property expenditure defined.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified wind energy property expenditure' means an expenditure for qualified wind energy property installed on or in connection with a dwelling unit located in the United States and used as a residence by the taxpayer, including all necessary installation fees and charges.
Qualified wind energy property.--The term `qualified wind energy property' means a qualifying wind turbine-- ``(i) the original use of which commences with the taxpayer, and ``(ii) which carries at least a 5-year limited warranty covering defects in design, material, or workmanship, and, for any qualifying wind turbine that is not installed by the taxpayer, at least a 5-year limited warranty covering defects in installation.
Qualifying wind turbine.--The term `qualifying wind turbine' means a wind turbine of 75 kilowatts of rated capacity or less which at the time of manufacture and not more than one year from the date of purchase meets the latest performance rating standards published by the American Wind Energy Association or the International Electrotechnical Commission and which is used to generate electricity.
Labor costs.--Expenditures for labor costs properly allocable to the onsite preparation, assembly, or original installation of qualified wind energy property and for piping or wiring to interconnect such property to the dwelling unit or to the local energy grid shall be taken into account for purposes of this section.
Swimming pools, etc., used as storage medium.-- Expenditures which are properly allocable to a swimming pool, hot tub, or any other energy storage medium which has a function other than the function of storage shall not be taken into account for purposes of this section.
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Dollar amounts in case of joint occupancy.--In the case of any dwelling unit which is jointly occupied and used during any calendar year as a residence by 2 or more individuals the following shall apply: ``(A) The amount of the credit allowable, under subsection (a) by reason of expenditures (as the case may be) made during such calendar year by any of such individuals with respect to such dwelling unit shall be determined by treating all of such individuals as 1 taxpayer whose taxable year is such calendar year.
There shall be allowable, with respect to such expenditures to each of such individuals, a credit under subsection (a) for the taxable year in which such calendar year ends in an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount determined under subparagraph (A) as the amount of such expenditures made by such individual during such calendar year bears to the aggregate of such expenditures made by all of such individuals during such calendar year.
Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing corporation.--In the case of an individual who is a tenant- stockholder (as defined in section 216) in a cooperative housing corporation (as defined in such section), such individual shall be treated as having made his tenant- stockholder's proportionate share (as defined in section 216(b)(3)) of any expenditures of such corporation.
Condominiums.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of an individual who is a member of a condominium management association with respect to a condominium which the individual owns, such individual shall be treated as having made the individual's proportionate share of any expenditures of such association.
Condominium management association.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `condominium management association' means an organization which meets the requirements of paragraph (1) of section 528(c) (other than subparagraph (E) thereof) with respect to a condominium project substantially all of the units of which are used as residences.
Allocation in certain cases.--If less than 80 percent of the use of a qualified wind energy property is for nonbusiness purposes and for generation of energy to be sold to others, only that portion of the expenditures for such property which is properly allocable to use for nonbusiness purposes and for generation of energy to be sold to others shall be taken into account.
When expenditure made; amount of expenditure.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), an expenditure with respect to any qualified wind energy property shall be treated as made when the original installation of such property is completed and the property has begun to be used to generate energy.
Expenditures part of building construction.-- In the case of an expenditure in connection with the construction or reconstruction of a structure, such expenditure shall be treated as made when the original use of the constructed or reconstructed structure by the taxpayer begins.
Amount.--The amount of any expenditure shall be the cost thereof.
Property financed by subsidized energy financing.-- For purposes of determining the amount of expenditures made by any individual with respect to any dwelling unit, there shall not be taken into account expenditures which are made from subsidized energy financing (as defined in section 48(a)(5)(C)).
Basis Adjustments.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit is allowed under this section for any expenditure with respect to any qualified wind energy property, the increase in the basis of such property which would (but for this subsection) result from such expenditure shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so allowed.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to property installed in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2008.''.
Credit Allowed Against Regular Tax and Alternative Minimum Tax.-- (1) In general.--Section 25C(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by subsection (a), is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Limitation based on amount of tax.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed the excess of-- ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by section 55, over ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under this subpart (other than this section) and section 27 for the taxable year.''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 25C(c) of such Code, as added by subsection (a), is amended by striking ``section 26(a) for such taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under this subpart (other than this section)'' and inserting ``subsection (b)(3)''.
Section 23(b)(4)(B) of such Code is amended by inserting ``and section 25C'' after ``this section''.
Section 24(b)(3)(B) of such Code is amended by striking ``23 and 25B'' and inserting ``23, 25B, and 25C''.
Section 25(e)(1)(C) of such Code is amended by inserting ``25C,'' after ``25B,''.
Section 25B(g)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 23'' and inserting ``sections 23 and 25C''.
Section 26(a)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``and 25B'' and inserting ``25B, and 25C''.
Section 904(h) of such Code is amended by striking ``and 25B'' and inserting ``25B, and 25C''.
Section 1400C(d) of such Code is amended by striking ``and 25B'' and inserting ``25B, and 25C''.
Additional Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 23(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as in effect for taxable years beginning before January 1, 2004, is amended by striking ``section 1400C'' and inserting ``sections 25C and 1400C''.
Section 25(e)(1)(C) of such Code, as in effect for taxable years beginning before January 1, 2004, is amended by inserting ``, 25C,'' after ``sections 23''.
Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (27), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (28) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(29) to the extent provided in section 25C(f), in the case of amounts with respect to which a credit has been allowed under section 25C.''.
Section 1400C(d) of such Code, as in effect for taxable years beginning before January 1, 2004, is amended by inserting ``and section 25C'' after ``this section''.
The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25B the following new item: ``Sec.
Residential wind energy property.''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to expenditures after December 31, 2002, in taxable years ending after such date.
Subsection (b).--The amendments made by subsection (b) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.
CREDIT FOR BUSINESS INSTALLATION OF SMALL WIND ENERGY PROPERTY.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 48(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining energy property) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by adding ``or'' at the end of clause (ii), and by inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause: ``(iii) qualified wind energy property installed before January 1, 2009,''.
Qualified Wind Energy Property.--Subsection (a) of section 48 is amended by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs (5) and (6), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) Qualified wind energy property.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified wind energy property' means a qualifying wind turbine-- ``(i) installed on or in connection with a farm (as defined in section 6420(c)), a ranch, or an establishment of an eligible small business (as defined in section 44(b)) which is located in the United States and which is owned and used by the taxpayer, ``(ii) the original use of which commences with the taxpayer, and ``(iii) which carries at least a 5-year limited warranty covering defects in design, material, or workmanship, and, for any qualifying wind turbine that is not installed by the taxpayer, at least a 5-year limited warranty covering defects in installation.
Limitation.--In the case of any qualified wind energy property placed in service during the taxable year, the credit determined under paragraph (1) for such year with respect to such property shall not exceed an amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(i) 30 percent of the basis of such property, including all necessary installation fees and charges, or ``(ii) $1,000 for each kilowatt of capacity of such property.
Qualifying wind turbine.--For purposes of this paragraph the term `qualifying wind turbine' means a wind turbine of 75 kilowatts of rated capacity or less which at the time of manufacture and not more than one year from the date of purchase meets the latest performance rating standards published by the American Wind Energy Association or the International Electrotechnical Commission and which is used to generate electricity.
Safety certifications.--No credit shall be allowed under this section for any qualified wind energy property unless such property meets appropriate fire and electric code requirements.''.
Limitation.--Section 48(a)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to energy percentage) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) In general.--The energy percentage is-- ``(i) in the case of qualified wind energy property, 30 percent, and ``(ii) in the case of any other energy property, 10 percent.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 29(b)(3)(A)(i)(III) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``section 48(a)(4)(C)'' and inserting ``section 48(a)(5)(C)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2003, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).