This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Farmworkers and Federal Health Coverage Act of 2001''.
There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on Farmworkers and Federal Health Coverage (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall examine problems experienced by farmworkers (including their families) under medicaid and SCHIP.
Specifically, the Commission shall examine the following: (1) Barriers to enrollment.--Barriers to their enrollment, including a lack of outreach and outstationed eligibility workers, complicated applications and eligibility determination procedures, and linguistic and cultural barriers.
Lack of portability.--The lack of portability of medicaid and SCHIP coverage for farmworkers who are determined eligible in one State but who move to other States on a seasonal or other periodic basis.
Possible solutions.--The development of possible solutions to increase enrollment and access to benefits for farmworkers, because, in part, of the problems identified in paragraphs (1) and (2), and the associated costs of each of the possible solution described in subsection (b).
Possible Solutions.--Possible solutions to be examined shall include each of the following: (1) Interstate compacts.--The use of interstate compacts among States that establish portability and reciprocity for eligibility for farmworkers under the medicaid and SCHIP and potential financial incentives for States to enter into such compacts.
Demonstration projects.--The use of multi-state demonstration waiver projects under section 1115 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1315) to develop comprehensive migrant coverage demonstration projects.
Use of current law flexibility.--Use of current law medicaid and SCHIP State plan provisions relating to coverage of residents and out-of-State coverage.
National migrant family coverage.--The development of programs of national migrant family coverage in which States could participate.
Public-private partnerships.--The provision of incentives for development of public-private partnerships to develop private coverage alternatives for farmworkers.
Other possible solutions.--Such other solutions as the Commission deems appropriate.
Definitions.--For purposes of this Act: (1) Farmworker.--The term ``farmworker'' means a migratory agricultural worker or seasonal agricultural worker, as such terms are defined in section 330(g)(3) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254c(g)(3)), and includes a family member of such a worker.
Medicaid.--The term ``medicaid'' means the program under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
SCHIP.--The term ``SCHIP'' means the State children's health insurance program under title XXI of the Social Security Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services from among the following: (1) Farmworkers affected by the lack of portability of coverage under the medicaid program or the State children's health insurance program (under titles XIX and XXI of the Social Security Act).
Representatives with expertise in providing health care to farmworkers, including designees of national and local organizations representing migrant health centers and other providers.
Researchers with expertise in health care financing.
Representatives of foundations and other nonprofit entities that have conducted or supported research on farmworker health care financial issues.
Representatives of Federal agencies which are involved in the provision or financing of health care to farmworkers, including the Health Care Financing Administration and the Health Research and Services Administration.
Representatives of State governments.
Representatives from the farm and agricultural industries.
Designees of labor organizations representing farmworkers.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be designated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services at the time of the appointment of members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Compensation and Expenses.-- (1) Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission, except that, to the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriation Acts, farmworker members described in subsection (a)(1) shall be entitled to receive reasonable compensation for lost wages for days (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
In no case shall such reasonable compensation exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Commission.
To the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriation Acts, the Commission shall establish the rate of pay for the Director, which shall not exceed the rate of basic pay for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the Director may appoint and fix the pay of such additional personnel as the Director considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay for level GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Experts and Consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Any such detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of the Federal employee.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--To the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriation Acts, the Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Chairperson.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall transmit a report to the President, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the Congress on the study conducted under this Act.
The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of submission of the report under section 7.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.