This Act may be cited as the ``National Foreign Language Coordination Act of 2009''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL FOREIGN LANGUAGE COORDINATION COUNCIL.
Establishment.--There is established in the Executive Office of the President a National Foreign Language Coordination Council (in this Act referred to as the ``Council''), directed by a National Language Advisor (in this Act referred to as the ``Advisor'') appointed by the President.
Membership.--The Council shall consist of the following members or their designees: (1) The Advisor, who shall serve as the chairperson of the Council.
The Secretary of Education.
The Secretary of Defense.
The Secretary of State.
The Secretary of Homeland Security.
The Director of National Intelligence.
The Secretary of Labor.
The Secretary of Commerce.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The Director of the Office of Personnel Management.
The heads of such other Federal agencies as the Council considers appropriate.
Responsibilities.-- (1) In general.--The Council shall be charged with-- (A) overseeing, coordinating, and implementing continuing national security and education language initiatives; (B) not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, developing a national foreign language strategy, building upon efforts such as the National Security Language Initiative, the National Language Conference, the National Defense Language Roadmap, the Language Continuum of the Department of State, and others, in consultation with-- (i) State and local government agencies; (ii) academic sector institutions; (iii) foreign language-related interest groups; (iv) business associations, including industry; (v) heritage associations; and (vi) other relevant stakeholders; (C) conducting a survey of the status of Federal agency foreign language and area expertise and agency needs for such expertise; and (D) monitoring the implementation of such strategy through-- (i) application of current and recently enacted laws; and (ii) the promulgation and enforcement of rules and regulations.
Strategy content.--The strategy developed under paragraph (1) shall include-- (A) recommendations for amendments to title 5, United States Code, in order to improve the ability of the Federal Government to recruit and retain individuals with foreign language proficiency and provide foreign language training for Federal employees; (B) the long-term goals, anticipated effect, and needs of national security language initiatives; (C) identification of crucial priorities across all sectors; (D) identification and evaluation of Federal foreign language programs and activities, including-- (i) any duplicative or overlapping programs that may impede efficiency; (ii) recommendations on coordination; (iii) program enhancements; and (iv) allocation of resources so as to maximize use of resources; (E) needed national policies and corresponding legislative and regulatory actions in support of, and allocation of designated resources to, promising programs and initiatives at all levels (Federal, State, and local), especially in the less commonly taught languages that are seen as critical for national security and global competitiveness during the next 20 to 50 years; (F) effective ways to increase public awareness of the need for foreign language skills and career paths in all sectors that can employ those skills, with the objective of increasing support for foreign language study among-- (i) Federal, State, and local leaders; (ii) students; (iii) parents; (iv) elementary, secondary, and postsecondary educational institutions; and (v) employers; (G) recommendations for incentives for related educational programs, including foreign language teacher training; (H) coordination of cross-sector efforts, including public-private partnerships; (I) coordination initiatives to develop a strategic posture for language research and recommendations for funding for applied foreign language research into issues of national concern; (J) identification of and means for replicating best practices at all levels and in all sectors, including best practices from the international community; and (K) recommendations for overcoming barriers in foreign language proficiency.
Submission of Strategy to President and Congress.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Council shall prepare and submit to the President and the relevant committees of Congress the strategy required under subsection (c).
Meetings.--The Council may hold such meetings, and sit and act at such times and places, as the Council considers appropriate, but shall meet in formal session not less than 2 times a year.
State and local government agencies and other organizations (such as academic sector institutions, foreign language-related interest groups, business associations, industry, and heritage community organizations) shall be invited, as appropriate, to public meetings of the Council at least once a year.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Advisor may-- (A) appoint, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing the competitive service, such personnel as the Advisor considers necessary; and (B) compensate such personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title.
Detail of government employees.--Upon request of the Council, any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Council without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Experts and consultants.--With the approval of the Council, the Advisor may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Travel expenses.--Council members and staff shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Council.
Security clearance.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the appropriate Federal agencies or departments shall cooperate with the Council in expeditiously providing to the Council members and staff appropriate security clearances to the extent possible pursuant to existing procedures and requirements.
Exception.--No person shall be provided with access to classified information under this section without the appropriate required security clearance access.
Compensation.--The rate of pay for any employee of the Council (including the Advisor) may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Powers.-- (1) Delegation.--Any member or employee of the Council may, if authorized by the Council, take any action that the Council is authorized to take in this Act.
Information.-- (A) Council authority to secure.--The Council may secure directly from any Federal agency such information, consistent with Federal privacy laws, including The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (20 United States Code 1232g) and Department of Education's General Education Provisions Act (20 United States Code 1232(h)), the Council considers necessary to carry out its responsibilities.
Requirement to furnish requested information.-- Upon request of the Advisor, the head of such agency shall furnish such information to the Council.
Donations.--The Council may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Mail.--The Council may use the United States mail in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Conferences, Newsletter, and Website.--In carrying out this Act, the Council-- (1) may arrange Federal, regional, State, and local conferences for the purpose of developing and coordinating effective programs and activities to improve foreign language education; (2) may publish a newsletter concerning Federal, State, and local programs that are effectively meeting the foreign language needs of the Nation; and (3) shall create and maintain a website containing information on the Council and its activities, best practices on language education, and other relevant information.
Annual Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Council shall prepare and transmit to the President and the relevant committees of Congress a report that describes-- (1) the activities of the Council; (2) the efforts of the Council to improve foreign language education and training; and (3) impediments to the use of a National Foreign Language program, including any statutory and regulatory restrictions.
Establishment of a National Language Advisor.-- (1) In general.--The National Language Advisor appointed by the President shall be a nationally recognized individual with credentials and abilities across the sectors to be involved with creating and implementing long-term solutions to achieving national foreign language and cultural competency.
Responsibilities.--The Advisor shall-- (A) develop and monitor the implementation of a national foreign language strategy, built upon the efforts of the National Security Language Initiative, across all sectors; (B) establish formal relationships among the major stakeholders in meeting the needs of the Nation for improved capabilities in foreign languages and cultural understanding, including Federal, State, and local government agencies, academia, industry, labor, and heritage communities; and (C) coordinate and lead a public information campaign that raises awareness of public and private sector careers requiring foreign language skills and cultural understanding, with the objective of increasing interest in and support for the study of foreign languages among national leaders, the business community, local officials, parents, and individuals.
Encouragement of State Involvement.-- (1) State contact persons.--The Council shall consult with each State to provide for the designation by each State of an individual to serve as a State contact person for the purpose of receiving and disseminating information and communications received from the Council.
State interagency councils and lead agencies.--Each State is encouraged to establish a State interagency council on foreign language coordination or designate a lead agency for the State for the purpose of assuming primary responsibility for coordinating and interacting with the Council and State and local government agencies as necessary.
Congressional Notification.--The Council shall provide to Congress such information as may be requested by Congress, through reports, briefings, and other appropriate means.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as necessary to carry out this Act.