This Act may be cited as the ``Environmentally Responsible Windpower Act of 2005''.
LOCAL CONTROL FOR SITING OF WINDMILLS.
Local Control.--Prior to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission issuing to any onshore and above-water wind turbine project its Exempt-Wholesale Generator Status, Market-Based Rate Authority, or Qualified Facility rate schedule, the wind project shall file with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission its Local Approval Authorization.
Local Approval Authorization.-- (1) In this section, the term ``Local Authorities'' means the governing body, and the senior executive of the body, at the lowest level of government that possesses authority under State law to carry out this Act.
Local Approval Authorization is a resolution from the local governing body and local senior executive (collectively, the ``Local Authorities'') approving or denying the siting of such wind project.
Such resolution approving or denying the project shall be produced by the Local Authorities within 120 days of the filing of the Market-Based Rate application or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Form number 556 (or a successor form) at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
If such resolution is not issued by the local authorities within 120 days of the filing of the Market-Based Rate application or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Form number 556 (or a successor form) at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, then such project is deemed to have obtained its Local Approval Authorization.
Applicant shall notify in writing the local authorities on the day of the filing of such Market-Based Rate application or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Form number 556 (or a successor form) at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
Evidence of such notification shall be submitted to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall notify in writing the local authorities within 10 days of the filing of such Market-Based Rate application or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Form number 556 (or a successor form) at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
If the Local Authorities deny the siting of a wind project, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall not issue to the project Market-Based Rate Authority, Exempt Wholesaler Generator Status, or Qualified Facility rate schedule.
Determination of Neighboring States.-- (1) In this subsection, the term ``viewshed'' means the area located within 20 miles of the boundary of a State.
If an offshore, above-water windmill project under this section is located within the viewshed of an adjacent State, the adjacent State may determine that the project is inconsistent with the development plan of the State under the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1451 et sequentes).
If a State makes a determination under paragraph (2), the affected windmill project shall terminate.
Highly Scenic Area and Federal Land.-- (1) A Highly Scenic Area is-- (A) an offshore area; (B) any area listed as an official United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization World Heritage Site, as supported by the Department of the Interior, the National Park Service, and the International Council on Monuments and Sites; (C) any area nominated by the Department of the Interior and the Federal Interagency Panel for World Heritage to become an official United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization World Heritage Site; or (D) any Armed Forces base located in the United States.
A Qualified Wind Project is any above-water wind- turbine project located in a Highly Scenic Area or within 20 miles of the boundaries of an area described in subparagraph (B), (C), or (D) of paragraph (1).
Prior to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission issuing to a Qualified Wind Project its Exempt-Wholesale Generator Status, Market-Based Rate Authority, or Qualified Facility rate schedule, an environmental impact statement shall be conducted and completed by the lead agency in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes).
If no lead agency is designated, the lead agency shall be the Department of the Interior.
The environmental impact statement determination shall be issued within 12 months of the date of application.
Such environmental impact statement review shall include a cumulative impacts analysis addressing visual impacts and avian mortality analysis of a Qualified Wind Project.
A Qualified Wind Project shall not be eligible for any Federal tax credit.
Effective Date.-- (1) This section shall expire 7 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Nothing in this section shall prevent or discourage environmental review of any wind projects or any Qualified Wind Project on a State or local level.