This Act may be cited as the ``Hydrographic Services Amendments of 2004''.
TITLE I--NOAA HYDROGRAPHIC SERVICES IMPROVEMENT SEC.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Hydrographic Services Improvement Act of 1998 (33 United States Code 892 et sequentes).
Regional Navigation Response Teams.--Section 303(a) (33 United States Code 892a(a)) is amended by striking paragraphs (7) and (8) and inserting the following: ``(7) establish, equip, and maintain up to 4 Regional Navigation Response teams in priority coastal areas identified by the Secretary, in consultation with the Commandant of the Coast Guard, to conduct activities related to navigational safety and the validation of hydrographic data; ``(8) to the greatest extent practicable and cost- effective, fulfill the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (7) through contracts or other agreements with private sector entities; and ``(9) participate in the development of, and implement for the United States in cooperation with other appropriate Federal agencies, international standards for hydrographic data and hydrographic services.''.
Authority To Accept Volunteer Services.--Section 303 (33 United States Code 892a) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Authority To Accept Volunteer Services.-- ``(1) In general.--To help fulfill the duties of the Administrator, including authorities under the Act of 1947 (33 United States Code 883a et sequentes), this Act, or in response to a maritime emergency, the Administrator may-- ``(A) establish a volunteer program; and ``(B) enter into special agreements with qualified organizations to assist in the implementation of a volunteer program.
Legal status of volunteers.-- ``(A) Paragraphs (1) through (5) of section 7(c) of the Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956 (16 United States Code 742f(c)) shall apply to volunteers who provide services to the Administrator under a volunteer program established under paragraph (1).
For purposes of subparagraph (A), any reference in section 7(c) of the Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956 (16 United States Code 742f(c)) to the Secretary of Interior or the Secretary of Commerce is deemed to refer to the Administrator.
Qualified organization.--In this subsection, the term `qualified organization' means a nongovernmental, not-for- profit organization, determined by the Administrator to have demonstrated expertise in boating safety and a commitment to improving the quality of hydrographic services and related oceanographic and meteorological information that is made available to mariners.
Participation in Joint Institute.--The Secretary may participate in a joint institute that develops new hydrographic technology and conducts academic, educational, and outreach activities that assist the Administrator in fulfilling the functions of the Administrator under this section.''.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law or existing policy, the cove described in subsection (b) shall be known and designated as ``Koss Cove'', in honor of the late Able Bodied Seaman Eric Steiner Koss of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration vessel RAINIER who died in the performance of a nautical charting mission off the Alaskan coast.
Cove Described.--The cove referred to in subsection (a) is-- (1) adjacent to and southeast of Point Elrington, Alaska, and forms a portion of the southern coast of Elrington Island; (2) \3/4\ mile across the mouth; (3) centered at 59 degrees 56.1 minutes North, 148 degrees 14 minutes West; and (4) 45 miles of Seward, Alaska.
References.--Any reference in any law, regulation, document, record, map, or other paper of the United States to the cove described in subsection (b) is deemed to be a reference to Koss Cove.
DEPICTION OF SAME SHORELINES ON CHARTS AND MAPPING PRODUCTS.
Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Federal Emergency Management Agency, shall provide to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a plan to depict the same shorelines on National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration nautical charts and United States Geological Survey mapping products.
AMENDMENTS TO THE HYDROGRAPHIC SERVICES PANEL.
Section 305 of the Hydrographic Services Improvement Act of 1998 (33 United States Code 892c) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``Secretary'' and inserting ``Secretary of Commerce''; and (2) in subsection (c)(3), subsection (d), and subsection (e), by striking ``Secretary'' each place it appears and inserting ``Administrator''.
GREAT LAKES WATER LEVEL MEASUREMENTS.
Section 306(5) of the Hydrographic Services Improvement Act of 1998 (33 United States Code 892d(5)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (E) as clauses (i) through (v), respectively; (2) by striking ``(5)'' and inserting ``(5)(A)''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(B) Of the amounts authorized under subparagraph (A), $2,000,000 in each fiscal year is authorized for the Great Lakes Water Level Observation Network.''.
TITLE II--FISHERY SURVEY VESSELS SEC.
Section 302(c) of the Fisheries Survey Vessel Authorization Act of 2000 (33 United States Code 891b note) is amended by striking ``$60,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 and 2003'' and inserting ``$51,000,000 for fiscal year 2005 and $39,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.
ACQUISITION OF HYDROGRAPHIC SURVEY VESSEL.
No later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall submit to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate-- (1) a detailed requirements package and cost estimate for the construction and equipping of a hydrographic survey vessel that is capable of-- (A) staying at sea continuously for at least 30 days; (B) carrying at least 4 hydrographic survey launches; (C) conducting hydrographic surveys; and (D) conducting other work necessary to provide mariners with the accurate and timely data needed to conduct safe and efficient maritime commerce; (2) an explanation of what vessel or vessels would be retired if a vessel described in paragraph (1) were to become operational; and (3) a comparison of the 10-year estimated costs of operation and maintenance of a new vessel described in paragraph (1) versus such costs for a vessel or vessels proposed for retirement under paragraph (2).
Passed the House of Representatives March 23, 2004.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.
By Gerasimos C. Vans, Deputy Clerk.