This Act may be cited as the ``National Financial Crimes Strategy Act of 1996''.
FINANCIAL CRIMES INVOLVING MONEY LAUNDERING AND RELATED CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES.
In General.--Title IX of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (relating to regulatory enforcement authority and criminal enhancements) is amended by adding at the end the following new subtitle: ``Subtitle G--National Financial Crimes Strategy ``SEC.
NATIONAL FINANCIAL CRIMES STRATEGY.
Development and Submission to Congress.-- ``(1) In general.--Before the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this subtitle and before February 1 of each subsequent year, the President, acting through the Secretary of the Treasury, shall develop a national strategy for combating financial crimes which shall be submitted to the Congress.
Separate presentation of classified material.--Any part of the strategy that involves information which is properly classified under criteria established by Executive order shall be submitted to the Congress separately.
Development of Strategy.--The national strategy for combating financial crimes shall include the following: ``(1) Long-range goals.--Comprehensive, research-based, long-range goals for reducing financial crime in the United States.
Short-term objective.--A short-term objective which the Secretary determines may be realistically achieved by the end of the 2-year period beginning on the date of transmission of the strategy.
Allocation of law enforcement resources.--A description of the manner in which law enforcement resources will be allocated.
Review of nonfederal financial crime control activities.--A review of the financial crime control activities of State and local governments and recommendations for sufficient cooperation between Federal agencies and such State and local governments to achieve a well-coordinated and effective policy for fighting financial crimes by all levels of government.
All other goals, objectives, and strategies.--A complete list of goals, objectives, and priorities for reducing financial crimes in addition to the goals and objectives described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
Private sector initiatives; intergovernmental cooperation.--A description of private sector initiatives, cooperative efforts between the Federal Government and State and local governments, and cooperative efforts among the several States and between State and local governments for financial crimes control which could be utilized or should be encouraged.
Project and budget priorities.--A 3-year projection for program and budget priorities and achievable projects for reductions in financial crimes.
Assessment of funding.--A complete assessment of how the proposed budget is intended to implement the strategy and whether the funding levels contained in the proposed budget are sufficient to implement the strategy.
Designated areas.--A description of geographical areas designated as `high-intensity financial crime areas' in accordance with section 3.
Improved communications systems.--A plan for improving the compatibility of automated information and information systems to provide the Federal Government and State and local governments with timely, accurate, and complete information.
Consultations.--In developing the national strategy for combating financial crimes, the Secretary shall consult with-- ``(1) Department of the Treasury law enforcement organizations; ``(2) the Attorney General and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation; ``(3) Members of Congress; ``(4) State and local officials, including State and local prosecutors; and ``(5) private citizens with experience and expertise in the field of financial crimes law enforcement.
Submission of Reports by Secretary.-- ``(1) Report on consultations.--At the time the President transmits the national strategy on combating financial crimes, the Secretary shall submit a report indicating the persons consulted by the director pursuant to subsection (c).
Effectiveness report.--At the time each national strategy for combating financial crimes is transmitted by the President to the Congress (other than the 1st transmission of any such strategy) pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit a report containing a complete evaluation of the effectiveness of policies to combat financial crimes.
HIGH-INTENSITY FINANCIAL CRIME AREAS.
Designation of Areas.--The Secretary, in consultation with the heads of the Department of the Treasury law enforcement organizations, the Attorney General, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Governors of the several States, and other State and local officials and after taking into consideration the factors specified in subsection (b), may designate any geographical area of the United States as a `high-intensity financial crime area'.
Factors.--In considering the designation of any area as a high-intensity financial crime area, the Secretary shall take into account the following factors: ``(1) The population of the area and the demographics of the population.
The number of bank transactions which originate in such area or involve institutions located in such area.
The number of electronic funds transfers which originate in such area or involve institutions located in such area.
The number of stock or commodities transactions which originate in such area or involve institutions located in such area.
The number of requests for information which are made to the financial crimes enforcement network and which originate from such area or involve institutions or businesses located in such area or residents of such area.
Whether the area is a key transportation hub with any international ports or airports or an extensive highway system.
Whether the area is an international center for banking or commerce.
The extent to which the area is a center of financial crimes.
The extent to which financial crimes and financial crime-related activities in such area are having a harmful impact in other areas of the country.
The extent to which State and local governments and State and local law enforcement agencies have committed resources to respond to the financial crime problem in the area and the degree to which the commitment of such resources reflects a determination by such government and agencies to address the problem aggressively.
The extent to which a significant increase in the allocation of Federal resources to combat financial crimes in such area is necessary to provide an adequate State and local response to financial crimes and financial crime-related activities in such area.
DESIGNATION OF LEAD AGENCY.
In General.--The Secretary shall have the principal responsibility for carrying out the national strategy for combating financial crimes.
Coordination of Law Enforcement Activities.-- ``(1) Notice of major crime reduction activities.--The heads of the Department of the Treasury law enforcement organizations, the Attorney General, and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall notify the Secretary, in writing, of any major financial crime reduction activity proposed to be carried out by the agency or organization of which such person is the head in an area designated as a high- intensity financial crime area.
Advance notice.--The notice required to be submitted under paragraph (1) shall be provided in advance of the initiation of the activity with respect to which such notice is submitted unless extenuating circumstances require otherwise.
Objection of secretary.--If the Secretary objects to the proposed activity for which the Secretary receives notice under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall notify the agency in writing of the basis for the Secretary's objection.
Federal Responses Authorized.--With respect to any area designated under section 3(a) as a high-intensity financial crime area, the Secretary may take the following initiatives: ``(1) Develop a plan for the redistribution or the temporary reassignment of the personnel and physical resources of the Department of the Treasury law enforcement organizations, the Department of Justice (including the offices of the United States Attorneys, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and, when appropriate, the United States Marshals Service), and any other Federal law enforcement organization the President determines to be appropriate in order to more effectively combat financial crimes in such area and make recommendations to the head of each such agency or department for such redistribution or temporary reassignment.
Recommend increases in Federal assistance which the Secretary determines is necessary to combat financial crimes in such areas.
Establish joint cooperative efforts, and coordinate enforcement activities, between Federal law enforcement agencies and State and local law enforcement agencies with respect to financial crimes in such area.
GRANTS FOR FIGHTING FINANCIAL CRIMES.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to any consortium consisting of 3 or more State or local law enforcement agencies and prosecutors to provide funding necessary to investigate and prosecute financial crimes in high-intensity financial crime areas.
Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years beginning after fiscal year 1996 to carry out this section.
BUDGETS FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES RELATING TO FINANCIAL CRIMES.
``Section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ```(h) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall establish the funding for law enforcement activities with respect to financial crimes for each applicable department or agency as a separate object class in each budget annually submitted to the Congress under this section.'.
``For purposes of this subtitle, the following definitions shall apply: ``(1) Department of the treasury law enforcement organizations.--The term `Department of the Treasury law enforcement organizations' has the meaning given to such term in section 9703(p) of title 31, United States Code.
Financial crime.--The term `financial crime' means an offense under section 1956 of title 18, United States Code, or section 5324 of title 31 of such Code, and any related Federal, State, or local criminal offense.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Treasury.''.
Report and Recommendations.--Before January 1, 1997, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate on the effectiveness of and the need for the designation of areas, under section 972 of Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (as added by subsection (a) of this section), as high-intensity financial crime areas, together with such recommendations for legislation as the Secretary may determine to be appropriate to carry out the purposes of such section.