TERMINATION OF THE UNITED STATES ARMY SCHOOL OF THE AMERICAS Section 4415 of chapter 407 of title 10, United States Code is repealed.
ESTABLISHMENT OF ACADEMY FOR DEMOCRACY AND CIVIL-MILITARY RELATIONS.
In General.--Chapter 407 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
United States Academy for Democracy and Civil-Military Relations ``(a) Establishment of Academy.--The Secretary of the Army, in cooperation with the Secretary of State, may operate an educational facility known as the United States Academy for Democracy and Civil- Military Relations (in this section referred to as the ``Academy'').
Purposes of Academy.--The Academy shall be operated for the purposes of-- ``(1) identifying the proper role for the military in a democratic society; and ``(2) improving civil-military relations and civilian control over military matters in Latin American countries and Caribbean countries.
Instruction at Academy.-- ``(1) Areas of instruction.--Instruction at the Academy shall be provided to civilian and military personnel of Latin American countries and Caribbean countries, through seminars, roundtable discussions, conferences, and a guest instructor program, in the following areas: ``(A) The principles of respect for democracy, human rights, and civilian control of the military in a democratic society.
Mechanisms and skills necessary for the exercise of civilian control and oversight over the mission, structure, and operations of security forces.
Mechanisms and procedures for ensuring accountability within the armed forces and for institutionalizing within the armed forces rules of engagement and an approach to the conduct of military operations in accordance with recognized principles of international law and human rights.
Mechanisms and skills necessary for the exercise of civilian control and oversight over budgets of security forces.
Mechanisms and skills necessary for the exercise of civilian control over, and merit based procedures in, promotions in security forces.
Mechanisms and skills necessary for the exercise of civilian control over, and clear human rights guidelines for, intelligence operations of security forces.
Mechanisms and skills necessary to establish and operate military justice and disciplinary systems in accordance with international human rights procedures.
Mechanisms and skills necessary to ensure professional resource and personnel management in security forces.
Mechanisms and skills necessary to ensure civilian control and oversight over security force involvement in the civilian economy.
Principles of multilateral cooperation in internationally sanctioned peacekeeping operations.
Strategies for cooperative threat reduction, including diplomatic approaches to addressing border disputes, defensive configuration of armed forces, and full compliance with the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms.
Additional strategies designed to achieve responsible reductions in military spending so that resources may be used to promote development in Latin American countries and Caribbean countries.
Combat and lethal skills training.--Combat and lethal skills training shall not be offered as part of the curriculum of the Academy.
Course catalogue and curriculum.--The course catalogue and curriculum of the Academy shall be available for public inspection.
Screening of Instructors and Students.--The Secretary of the Army, in cooperation with the Secretary of State, shall conduct a thorough screening of potential instructors and students at the Academy and ensure that they exhibit the highest level of commitment to and respect for democracy and human rights.
The instructors of the Academy shall consist of civilians and military personnel.
Every course and program at the Academy shall involve civilians, including civilian personnel in defense establishments, elected officials and civil servants, and representatives of human rights and other civic organizations.
The number of civilians attending the Academy should be at least 20 percent of the total number of students, with the goal of reaching 50 percent within five years after the establishment of the Academy.
Advisory Committee.--The Secretary of the Army, in consultation with the Secretary of State, shall establish an advisory committee to provide advice on establishing and operating the Academy and the content of the curriculum.
The advisory committee shall be comprised of five members from civilian life and shall include representatives of human rights organizations based in the United States and in Latin American and Caribbean countries with widely recognized expertise in investigating violations of human rights violations in those countries.
The Advisory Committee shall approve all instructors of the Academy.
Human Rights Violators.--If it becomes known to the Secretary of State that persons who have attended the Academy have violated human rights, then the Secretary shall determine whether elements of the curriculum of the Academy are inconsistent with the purposes of the Academy.
Funding.--The cost of operating and maintaining the Academy may be paid from funds available under chapter 5 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2347) (related to international military education and training assistance).''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 407 of such title is amended-- (1) by striking the item relating to section 4415; and (2) by inserting after the item relating to section 4414 the following new item: ``4416.
United States Academy for Democracy and Civil-Military Relations''.
Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this Act shall be interpreted to affect the authority to conduct countermine programs at other facilities at Fort Benning, Georgia, being carried out on the date of enactment of this Act at the School of the Americas in response to a request from the Organization of American States.
After the United States Academy for Democracy and Civil-Military Relations, established pursuant to section 4416 of title 10, United States Code, has been in operation for a period of two years, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to Congress a report on the achievements of the Academy, and on the desirability and feasibility of opening its courses and programs to attendees from outside of Latin America countries and Caribbean countries.
It is the sense of Congress that resources made available to operate the United States Academy for Democracy and Civil-Military Relations, established pursuant to section 4416 of title 10, United States Code, should be commensurate with the total resources that were dedicated to the United States School of the Americas in fiscal year 1996.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on October 1, 1996.