This Act may be cited as the ``Burma Freedom and Democracy Act of 1995''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Since 1962, Burma has been ruled by a military dictatorship.
As part of a crackdown against the Burmese pro- democracy movement, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) was established by the military dictatorship in 1988.
On May 27, 1990 the people of Burma voted overwhelmingly in a free election for Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and the National League for Democracy (NLD).
Despite numerous pledges, the SLORC has failed to honor the results of the 1990 elections.
The United States has not sent an ambassador to Rangoon in protest of the failure of the SLORC to honor the 1990 elections and the continued human rights abuses suffered by the Burmese people.
In response to the massacre of thousands of Burmese participating in peaceful democratic demonstrations, Congress adopted a provision as part of the Customs and Trade Act of 1990 requiring the President to impose appropriate economic sanctions on Burma.
Currently the United States has suspended economic aid to Burma, placed an embargo on arms sales, denied GSP trade preferences, and decertified Burma as a narcotics cooperating country.
On April 30, 1994, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (Public Law 103-236), placed Burma on the list of international ``outlaw'' states that includes Libya, North Korea, and Iraq and which is set forth in section 307 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2227(a)), thus mandating that voluntary United States funding for any United Nations agency will be automatically reduced if the agency conducts programs in Burma.
On July 15, 1994 the Senate adopted Senate Resolution 234 calling on the Administration to encourage members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to work with the United States to achieve the transfer of power to the winners of Burma's 1990 democratic election.
On July 10, 1995 after six years of unlawful detention, the SLORC released Nobel Peace Prize winner Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the NLD.
Since the release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, SLORC has rejected her efforts to establish a timetable for dialogue and national reconciliation and has denied the NLD a meaningful role in a credible political process.
Congress declares that it is the policy of the United States-- (1) to support actively the prompt transition from a military dictatorship to a democratic government in Burma; (2) to encourage the State Law and Order Restoration Committee to immediately and unconditionally release all political prisoners and allow them to participate in the political process; (3) to recognize the individuals who won the 1990 democratic election as the legitimate representatives of the Burmese people; and (4) to expand contact with the democratically elected leaders of Burma through the United States mission in Rangoon in order to facilitate the democratic process in Burma.
Prohibition.--Until such time as the President determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that an elected government of Burma has been allowed to take power-- (1) the sanctions described in subsection (b) shall be imposed on Burma; and (2) the appropriate Government officials may apply the sanctions described in subsection (c) against Burma.
Mandatory Sanctions.-- (1) Investment sanction.--United States nationals shall not make any investment in Burma.
United states assistance.--United States assistance for Burma is prohibited.
Multilateral assistance.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States executive director of each financial institution to vote against any loan or other utilization of the funds of the respective bank to or for Burma.
Admission to united states.--Except as required by treaty obligations, any Burmese national who formulates, implements, or benefits from policies which hinder the transition of Burma to a democratic country, and any member of the immediate family of such national, shall be ineligible to receive a visa and shall be excluded from admission into the United States.
Discretionary Sanctions.-- (1) Import sanctions.--The President is authorized to prohibit the importation into the United States of articles which are produced, manufactured, grown, or extracted in Burma.
Ban on travel to burma.--The Secretary of State may prohibit the use of United States passports for travel to Burma, except for travel by United States officials.
Diplomatic representation.--The President is urged not to accept diplomatic representation from Burma at a level greater than the level of diplomatic representation accorded the United States in Burma.
Contributions to international financial institutions.--The President is authorized to withhold from each international organization that funds activities in Burma other than humanitarian activities an amount equal to the United States proportionate share of that funding.
REPORT ON BURMESE LABOR PRACTICES.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the Secretary of State, shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on-- (1) Burmese compliance with international labor standards including the use of forced labor, child labor, slave labor, and involuntary prison labor by the junta; (2) the degree to which foreign investment in Burma contributes to violations of fundamental worker rights; (3) labor practices in support of Burma's foreign tourist industry; and (4) efforts by the United States to end violations of fundamental labor rights in Burma.
As used in this Act: (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives.
International financial institutions.--The term ``international financial institutions'' includes the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the Asian Development Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
Investment.--The term ``investment'' includes any contribution or commitment of funds, commodities, services, patents, processes, or techniques, in the form of-- (A) a loan or loans; (B) the purchase of a share of ownership; (C) participation in royalties, earnings, or profits; and (D) the furnishing of commodities or services pursuant to a lease or other contract.
United states assistance.--The term ``United States assistance'' means assistance of any kind which is provided by grant, sale, loan, lease, credit, guaranty, or insurance, or by any other means, by any agency or instrumentality of the United States Government to any foreign country.