This Act may be cited as the ``Depository Institution Disaster Relief Act of 1997''.
TRUTH IN LENDING ACT; EXPEDITED FUNDS AVAILABILITY ACT.
Truth in Lending Act.--During the 180-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Board may make exceptions to the Truth in Lending Act (15 United States Code 1601 et sequentes) for transactions within an area in which the President, pursuant to section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5121 et sequentes), has determined that a major disaster exists, or within an area determined to be eligible for disaster relief under other Federal law by reason of damage related to the 1997 flooding of the Red River of the North and its tributaries, if the Board determines that the exception can reasonably be expected to alleviate hardships to the public resulting from such disaster that outweigh possible adverse effects.
Expedited Funds Availability Act.--During the 180-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Board may make exceptions to the Expedited Funds Availability Act (12 United States Code 4001 et seq.)
for depository institution offices located within any area referred to in subsection (a) if the Board determines that the exception can reasonably be expected to alleviate hardships to the public resulting from such disaster that outweigh possible adverse effects.
Time Limit on Exceptions.--Any exception made under this section shall expire not later than the earlier of-- (1) 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act; or (2) 1 year after the date of any determination referred to in subsection (a).
Publication Required.--Not later than 60 days after the date of a determination under subsection (a), the Board shall publish in the Federal Register a statement that-- (1) describes the exception made under this section; and (2) explains how the exception can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects.
DEPOSIT OF INSURANCE PROCEEDS.
The appropriate Federal banking agency may, by order, permit an insured depository institution, during the 18-month period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, to subtract from the institution's total assets, in calculating compliance with the leverage limit prescribed under section 38 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 18310), an amount not exceeding the qualifying amount attributable to insurance proceeds, if the agency determines that-- (1) the institution-- (A) had its principal place of business within an area in which the President, pursuant to section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, has determined that a major disaster exists, or within an area determined to be eligible for disaster relief under other Federal law by reason of damage related to the 1997 flooding of the Red River of the North and its tributaries, on the day before the date of any such determination; (B) derives more than 60 percent of its total deposits from persons who normally reside within, or whose principal place of business is normally within, areas of intense devastation caused by the major disaster; (C) was adequately capitalized (as defined in section 38 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 18310)) before the major disaster; and (D) has an acceptable plan for managing the increase in its total assets and total deposits; and (2) the subtraction is consistent with the purpose of section 38 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 18310).
BANKING AGENCY PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
In General.--During the 180-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, a qualifying regulatory agency may take any of the following actions with respect to depository institutions or other regulated entities whose principal place of business is within, or with respect to transactions or activities within, an area in which the President, pursuant to section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, has determined that a major disaster exists, or within an area determined to be eligible for disaster relief under other Federal law by reason of damage related to the 1997 flooding of the Red River of the North and its tributaries, if the agency determines that the action would facilitate recovery from the major disaster: (1) Procedure.--Exercise the agency's authority under provisions of law other than this section without complying with-- (A) any requirement of section 553 of title 5, United States Code; or (B) any provision of law that requires notice or opportunity for hearing or sets maximum or minimum time limits with respect to agency action.
Publication requirements.--Make exceptions, with respect to institutions or other entities for which the agency is the primary Federal regulator, to-- (A) any publication requirement with respect to establishing branches or other deposit-taking facilities; or (B) any similar publication requirement.
Publication Required.--Not later than 90 days after the date of an action under this section, a qualifying regulatory agency shall publish in the Federal Register a statement that-- (1) describes the action taken under this section; and (2) explains the need for the action.
Qualifying Regulatory Agency Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``qualifying regulatory agency'' means-- (1) the Board; (2) the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; (3) the Office of Thrift Supervision; (4) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; (5) the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council; (6) the National Credit Union Administration; and (7) with respect to chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, the Secretary of the Treasury.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that each Federal financial institutions regulatory agency should, by regulation or order, make exceptions to the appraisal standards prescribed by title XI of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 United States Code 3331 et sequentes) for transactions involving institutions for which the agency is the primary Federal regulator with respect to real property located within a disaster area pursuant to section 1123 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 United States Code 3352), if the agency determines that the exceptions can reasonably be expected to alleviate hardships to the public resulting from such disaster that outweigh possible adverse effects.
OTHER AUTHORITY NOT AFFECTED.
Nothing in this Act limits the authority of any department or agency under any other provision of law.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Appropriate federal banking agency.--The term ``appropriate Federal banking agency'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 18310).
Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Federal financial institutions regulatory agency.--The term ``Federal financial institutions regulatory agency'' has the same meaning as in section 1121 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 United States Code 3350).
Insured depository institution.--The term ``insured depository institution'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1813).
Leverage limit.--The term ``leverage limit'' has the same meaning as in section 38 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1813).
Qualifying amount attributable to insurance proceeds.-- The term ``qualifying amount attributable to insurance proceeds'' means the amount (if any) by which the institution's total assets exceed the institution's average total assets during the calendar quarter ending before the date of any determination referred to in section 3(1)(A), because of the deposit of insurance payments or governmental assistance made with respect to damage caused by, or other costs resulting from, the major disaster.