This Act may be cited as the ``Stop Turning Out Prisoners Act''.
APPROPRIATE REMEDIES FOR PRISON CONDITIONS.
In General.--Section 3626 of title 18, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Appropriate remedies with respect to prison crowding ``(a) Requirements for Relief.-- ``(1) Limitations on prospective relief.--Prospective relief in a civil action with respect to prison conditions shall extend no further than necessary to remove the conditions that are causing the deprivation of the Federal rights of individual plaintiffs in that civil action.
The court shall not grant or approve any prospective relief unless the court finds that such relief is narrowly drawn and the least intrusive means to remedy the violation of the Federal right.
In determining the intrusiveness of the relief, the court shall give substantial weight to any adverse impact on public safety or the operation of a criminal justice system caused by the relief.
Prison population reduction relief.--In any civil action with respect to prison conditions, the court shall not grant or approve any relief whose purpose or effect is to reduce or limit the prison population, unless the plaintiff proves that crowding is the primary cause of the deprivation of the Federal right and no other relief will remedy that deprivation.
Termination of Relief.-- ``(1) Automatic termination of prospective relief after 2- year period.--In any civil action with respect to prison conditions, any prospective relief shall automatically terminate 2 years after the later of-- ``(A) the date the court found the violation of a Federal right that was the basis for the relief; or ``(B) the date of the enactment of the Stop Turning Out Prisoners Act.
Immediate termination of prospective relief.--In any civil action with respect to prison conditions, a defendant or intervenor shall be entitled to the immediate termination of any prospective relief, if that relief was approved or granted in the absence of a finding by the court that prison conditions violated a Federal right.
Procedure for Motions Affecting Prospective Relief.-- ``(1) Generally.--The court shall promptly rule on any motion to modify or terminate prospective relief in a civil action with respect to prison conditions.
Automatic stay.--Any prospective relief subject to a pending motion shall be automatically stayed during the period-- ``(A) beginning on the 30th day after such motion is filed, in the case of a motion made under subsection (b); and ``(B) beginning on the 180th day after such motion is filed, in the case of a motion made under any other law; and ending on the date the court enters a final order ruling on that motion.
Standing.--Any Federal, State, or local official or unit of government-- ``(1) whose jurisdiction or function includes the prosecution or custody of persons in a prison subject to; or ``(2) who otherwise is or may be affected by; any relief whose purpose or effect is to reduce or limit the prison population shall have standing to oppose the imposition or continuation in effect of that relief and may intervene in any proceeding relating to that relief.
Standing shall be liberally conferred under this subsection so as to effectuate the remedial purposes of this section.
Special Masters.--In any civil action in a Federal court with respect to prison conditions, any special master or monitor shall be a United States magistrate and shall make proposed findings on the record on complicated factual issues submitted to that special master or monitor by the court, but shall have no other function.
The parties may not by consent extend the function of a special master beyond that permitted under this subsection.
Attorney's Fees.--No attorney's fee under section 722 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 United States Code 1988) may be granted to a plaintiff in a civil action with respect to prison conditions except to the extent such fee is-- ``(1) directly and reasonably incurred in proving an actual violation of the plaintiff's federal rights; and ``(2) proportionally related to the extent the plaintiff obtains court ordered relief for that violation.''.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- ``(1) the term `prison' means any Federal, State, or local facility that incarcerates or detains juveniles or adults accused of, convicted of, sentenced for, or adjudicated delinquent for, violations of criminal law; ``(2) the term `relief' means all relief in any form which may be granted or approved by the court, and includes consent decrees and settlement agreements; and ``(3) the term `prospective relief' means all relief other than compensatory monetary damages.''
Application of Amendment.--Section 3626 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by this section, shall apply with respect to all relief (as defined in such section) whether such relief was originally granted or approved before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.