This Act may be cited as the ``Emigrant Wilderness Preservation Act of 1999''.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN WATER IMPOUNDMENT STRUCTURES IN THE EMIGRANT WILDERNESS, STANISLAUS NATIONAL FOREST, CALIFORNIA.
Cooperative Agreement For Maintenance and Operation.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall enter into a cooperative agreement with a non-Federal entity described in subsection (c), under which the entity will retain, maintain, and operate at private expense the water impoundment structures specified in subsection (b) that are located within the boundaries of the Emigrant Wilderness in the Stanislaus National Forest, California, as designated by section 2(b) of Public Law 93-632 (88 United States Statutes at Large 2154; 16 United States Code 1132 note).
Covered Water Impoundment Structures.--The cooperative agreement required by subsection (a) shall cover the water impoundment structures located at the following: (1) Cow Meadow Lake.
Eligible Entity.--The following non-Federal entities are eligible to enter into the cooperative agreement under subsection (a): (1) A non-profit organization as defined in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 501(c)(3)).
The State of California or a political subdivision of the State.
A private individual, organization, corporation, or other legal entity.
Responsibilities of the Secretary.-- (1) Map.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall prepare a map identifying the location, size, and type of each water impoundment structure covered by the cooperative agreement under subsection (a).
Terms and conditions of agreement.--The Secretary shall prescribe the terms and conditions of the cooperative agreement, which shall set forth the rights and obligations of the Secretary and the non-Federal entity.
At a minimum, the cooperative agreement shall-- (A) require the non-Federal entity to operate and maintain the water impoundment structures covered by the agreement in accordance with a plan of operations approved by the Secretary; (B) require approval by the Secretary of all operation and maintenance activities to be conducted by the non-Federal entity; (C) require the non-Federal entity to comply with all applicable State and Federal environmental, public health, and safety requirements; and (D) establish enforcement standards, including termination of the cooperative agreement for noncompliance by the non-Federal entity with the terms and conditions.
Compliance.--The Secretary shall ensure that the non- Federal entity remains in compliance with the terms and conditions of this section and the cooperative agreement.
Responsibilities of the Non-Federal Entity.--The non-Federal entity shall be responsible for-- (1) carrying out its operation and maintenance activities with respect to the water impoundment structures covered by the cooperative agreement under subsection (a) in conformance with this section and the cooperative agreement; and (2) the costs associated with the maintenance and operation of the structures.
Prohibition on Use of Mechanized Transport and Motorized Equipment.--The non-Federal entity may not use mechanized transport or motorized equipment-- (1) to operate or maintain the water impoundment structures covered by the cooperative agreement under subsection (a); or (2) to otherwise conduct activities in the Emigrant Wilderness pursuant to the cooperative agreement.
Expansion of Agreement to Cover Additional Structures.--In the case of the six water impoundment structures located within the boundaries of the Emigrant Wilderness, but not specified in subsection (b), the Secretary of Agriculture may expand the scope of the cooperative agreement under subsection (a), with the consent of the State of California and the other party to the agreement, to include one or more of these structures, subject to the same terms and conditions as apply to the structures specified in subsection (b).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Agriculture $20,000 to cover administrative costs incurred by the Secretary to comply with the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) in carrying out this section.
Passed the House of Representatives November 8, 1999.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.