This Act may be cited as the ``21st Century Technology Resources and Commercial Leadership Act''.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States Department of Commerce, through its Office of Technology Policy, has reported in June, 1999, that the United States will require more than 1.3 million new highly-skilled core information technology workers by the year 2006.
The need for computer scientists, computer engineers, and systems analysts by 2006 is projected to be more than double the number of such scientists, engineers, and analysts in 1996.
The supply of new graduates qualified for the positions described in paragraph (2) is anticipated to be well short of half the number needed.
The lack of qualified workers is due in part to a lack of sufficient numbers of students pursuing advanced degrees in mathematics, science, and engineering technology.
The number of degrees in technical science and engineering fields awarded by United States institutions of higher learning have declined since 1990.
Foreign national students in the United States were awarded 47 percent of Doctorate degrees in engineering, 38 percent of Master's degrees, and 46 percent of Doctorate degrees in computer science in 1996.
The United States is a leader in the global development of technology related enterprises.
If the United States cannot meet the needs of industry to allow continued expansion and innovation in the 21st century, American companies will locate in those countries which do have the technical base to meet those needs and this will be counterproductive to the American economy.
Section 8 of Article I of the Constitution grants Congress the power ``To regulate Commerce with foreign nations and among the several States.''.
In order to maintain a strong domestic economy and provide for the national defense, it is critical that the United States maintain its leadership position in technology.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide incentives and opportunities for the United States' improving the mathematics, science, engineering, and technology resources in order to maintain the United States leadership in technology, and to permit United States companies to continue the technology-related expansion of the United States' domestic economy and international economic presence.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Science Technology and the Director of the National Science Foundation, shall establish and administer a program under this Act to strengthen the scientific, mathematical, engineering, and technology resources of the United States in order to ensure the United States continued global leadership in technology- related commerce.
Grants.--The program shall include grants of financial assistance, awarded on a competitive basis, to support the advancement and improvement of mathematics, science, engineering, and technology competencies and resources to assure continued growth, leadership, and competitiveness of United States based companies in interstate and international commerce.
Recipients.--The Secretary may award grants under subsection (b) to business enterprises, organizations supporting mathematics, scientific, engineering, technology research and advancement, teachers, schools, school districts, or institutions of higher learning.
Criteria.--The Secretary shall award grants for programs that can demonstrate an economically beneficial return on investment and achievement in the advancement of science, math, engineering, and technology competencies and resources.
TEMPORARY SKILLED PERSONNEL IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE, ENGINEERING, AND TECHNOLOGY.
In General.--Notwithstanding clauses (iii), (iv), and (v) of section 214(g)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1184(g)(1)(A)), the total number of aliens who may be issued visas or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status during fiscal years 2000 through 2006 under section 101(a)(15)(H)(i)(b) of that Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(15)(H)(i)(b)) shall not be subject to numerical limitation, and shall be subject to numerical limitations after 2006 as provided by law.
Certain Applications Given Preference.--In processing applications for visas or other nonimmigrant status under the Immigration and Nationality Act, as modified by subsection (a), the Secretary of State shall give preferential consideration to applications from foreign national students who are graduates of post- secondary schools in the United States with advanced degrees in mathematics, science, engineering, or technology.
Funding for Grants.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 286(s) of such Act (8 United States Code 1356(s)), for fiscal years 2000 through 2006 51.3 percent of the amounts deposited into the H-1B Nonimmigrant Petitioner Account established by paragraph (1) of that section shall be available to the Secretary of Commerce until expended under section 3 of this Act.
Job training.--For fiscal years 2000 through 2006, section 286(s)(2) of such Act (8 United States Code 1356(s)(2)) shall be applied by substituting ``5 percent'' for ``56.3 percent''.