SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Democratic Rights for Union Members Act of 2000''.
References.--Whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (29 United States Code 401 et sequentes).
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The labor movement derives its strength from democracy and unions lacking true democracy cannot serve in full measure their economic, social, and political function in a democratic society.
Union officers should recognize that unions belong to rank-and-file members and strive to respond to their wishes on issues of policymaking and decisionmaking.
Authoritarian control of unions is contrary to the spirit, traditions, and principles that should guide the labor movement.
Purposes.--The purposes of the amendments made by this Act are-- (1) to strengthen the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 to protect and promote democratic processes and democratic rights of union members; (2) to ensure that labor organizations exist to express the will of the members; and (3) to further empower union members and make labor organizations institutions by which workers truly govern themselves.
In General.--Section 105 (29 United States Code 415) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``A labor organization shall provide such information-- ``(1) to each new member within 90 days after the member has joined the labor organization; and ``(2) periodically to all members in a manner which the Secretary of Labor determines will promote a fuller understanding of the member's rights and judicial remedies under this Act.''.
Enforcement.--Section 102 (29 United States Code 412) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Any person'' and inserting ``(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), any person''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Upon the written complaint of any member of a labor organization alleging that such organization has violated section 105, the Secretary shall investigate the complaint and if the Secretary finds probable cause to believe that such violation has occurred and has not been remedied, the Secretary shall, without disclosing the identity of the complainant, bring a civil action in any district court of the United States having jurisdiction of the labor organization for such relief (including injunctions) as may be appropriate.''.
Purposes of Establishment of Trusteeship.--Section 302 (29 United States Code 462) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``Trusteeships''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), a trusteeship may be authorized only after a fair hearing either before the executive board or such other body as may be provided by the constitution and bylaws of the labor organization and only if, in such hearing, the labor organization establishes by the preponderance of evidence that the trusteeship is necessary for a purpose allowable under this section.
Where immediate action is necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section, a temporary trusteeship may be established, for not more than 30 days, pending a hearing under paragraph (1).''.
Enforcement.--Section 304(c) (29 United States Code 464(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``Eighteen months after the authorization of a trusteeship, such trusteeship shall be presumed invalid in any proceeding pursuant to this section and its discontinuance shall be decreed unless the labor organization shall show by clear and convincing proof that the continuation of the trusteeship is necessary for a purpose allowable under section 302.
In the latter event the court may dismiss the complaint or retain jurisdiction of the cause on such conditions and for such period as it deems appropriate.''
Dissolution of Trusteeship.--Section 304 (29 United States Code 464) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Upon dissolution of a trusteeship, the previously elected officers of the local union shall be reinstated or a new election promptly held in conformity with title IV.
If the trusteeship is dissolved by order of a court pursuant to this title, and the court orders an election, such election shall be conducted under the supervision of the court.''.
ELECTIONS (a) Membership Lists.--Section 401(c) (29 United States Code 481(c)) is amended by striking ``to inspect a list'' and inserting ``to inspect and, upon request, to be provided with a copy of a list'' (b) District Council Officers.--Section 401(d) (29 United States Code 481(d)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Officers of intermediate bodies, such as general committees, system boards, joint boards or joint councils who engage in negotiation, administration or enforcement of collective agreements, or exercise control over the finances or other major functions of local unions, shall be elected not less often than once every 4 years by secret ballot among members in good standing.
Officers of other intermediate bodies may be elected by representatives of such members who have been elected by secret ballot.''.
Qualifications.--Section 401(e) (29 United States Code 481(e)) is amended by striking ``and to reasonable qualifications uniformly imposed'' and by inserting after ``eligible to be a candidate'' the following: ``(subject to reasonable qualifications which do not exclude a majority of the members and which are uniformly imposed)''.
Overturning.--Section 402(c)(2) (29 United States Code 482(c)(2)) is amended by striking ``affected the outcome of an election'' and inserting ``substantially understated or overstated the support of one of the candidates for office to the point that the democratic purposes of the election were undermined''.
Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall review and revise all regulations promulgated before such date to implement the amendments made in this Act to the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.