This Act may be cited as the ``National Preparedness Standards Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Second Report of the Advisory Panel to Assess Domestic Response Capabilities for Terrorism Involving Weapons of Mass Destruction (also known as the Gilmore Commission) called for standards for emergency preparedness and response.
The National Strategy for Homeland Security calls for the issuance of standards for emergency preparedness and response.
The standard-setting activities called for in the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-296) need to be accelerated and coordinated.
Actual preparedness against the threat of weapons of mass destruction is not being enhanced sufficiently.
The lack of standards for Federal, State, and local government emergency preparedness and response poses the risk of grant funds for emergency preparedness and response being wasted.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE STANDARDS.
In General.--Title V of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 311 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE STANDARDS.
Requirement to Establish Standards.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with other Federal agencies, State and local emergency responder agencies and officials, and standard-setting bodies from the emergency responder community, shall establish clearly defined standards and guidelines for Federal, State, and local government emergency preparedness and response capability, including for training, interoperable communication systems, and response equipment.
Content.--The Secretary shall design such standards to comply with the following: ``(A) Flexibility.--The standards shall be sufficiently flexible to allow local government officials to set priorities based on their needs, while reaching nationally determined preparedness levels within a fixed time period.
Measurable capabilities.--The standards shall be designed to develop emergency preparedness and response capabilities that are measurable and subject to Federal audit.
Determination of State and Local Government Minimum Essential Capability.--The Secretary shall-- ``(1) determine for each State the minimum essential emergency preparedness and response capability that should be achieved by the State, including State and local government emergency preparedness and response agencies of the State; and ``(2) measure for each State progress made by State and local government emergency preparedness and response agencies-- ``(A) in achieving the minimum essential capability determined for the State under paragraph (1); and ``(B) complying with standards issued by the Secretary under this section.
Improvement of Compliance With Standards.--To improve compliance with emergency preparedness and response capability standards under this section, the Secretary may-- ``(1) coordinate and consolidate the development by the Federal Government of standards for Federal, State, and local government for Federal, State, and local government emergency preparedness and response capability, including for training, interoperable communication systems, and response equipment; ``(2) establish and coordinate an integrated capability for Federal, State, and local governments and emergency responders to plan for and address potential consequences of terrorism; ``(3) coordinate provision of Federal terrorism preparedness assistance to State, tribal, and local governments; ``(4) establish standards for a national, interoperable emergency communications and warning system; and ``(5) establish standards for training of first responders, and for equipment to be used by first responders, to respond to incidents of terrorism, including incidents involving weapons of mass destruction.
Consultation.--In carrying out activities under this section, the Secretary shall consult with relevant private sector groups, including-- ``(1) the National Fire Protection Association; ``(2) National Association of County and City Health Officials; ``(3) Association of State and Territorial Health Officials; and ``(4) American National Standards Institute.
Annual Report.--The Secretary shall, by not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this section and annually thereafter, report to the Congress, on a State-by-State basis, regarding-- ``(1) progress achieved, by grant and training programs administered by the Department, in-- ``(A) increasing State and local government terrorism preparedness; and ``(B) conforming such State and local government terrorism preparedness to applicable standards issued by Federal agencies; ``(2) when State and local government terrorism preparedness will conform to such standards; and ``(3) the amount of expenditures required for State and local government terrorism preparedness to conform to such standards.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 509 the following: ``Sec.
Emergency preparedness and response standards.''.
STANDARD WITH RESPECT TO WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION.
The Secretary of Homeland Security shall, pursuant to the amendment made by section 3, include in the fiscal year 2005 budget request for the Department of Homeland Security a minimum essential emergency preparedness and response capability standard with respect to weapons of mass destruction- and terrorism-related disaster equipment and training, separately-- (1) for metropolitan areas, expressed per 100,000 persons in a metropolitan area; and (2) for rural areas.