SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Children First Child Support Reform Act of 2001''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Modification of rule requiring assignment of support rights as a condition of receiving TANF.
Increasing child support payments to families and simplifying child support distribution rules.
State option to discontinue certain support assignments.
MODIFICATION OF RULE REQUIRING ASSIGNMENT OF SUPPORT RIGHTS AS A CONDITION OF RECEIVING TANF.
Section 408(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 608(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) No assistance for families not assigning certain support rights to the state.--A State to which a grant is made under section 403 shall require, as a condition of paying assistance to a family under the State program funded under this part, that a member of the family assign to the State any rights the family member may have (on behalf of the family member or of any other person for whom the family member has applied for or is receiving such assistance) to support from any other person, not exceeding the total amount of assistance so paid to the family, which accrues during the period that the family receives assistance under the program.''.
INCREASING CHILD SUPPORT PAYMENTS TO FAMILIES AND SIMPLIFYING CHILD SUPPORT DISTRIBUTION RULES.
Distribution Rules.-- (1) In general.--Section 457(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 657(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsections (e) and (f), the amounts collected on behalf of a family as support by a State under a plan approved under this part shall be distributed as follows: ``(1) Families receiving assistance.--In the case of a family receiving assistance from the State, the State shall-- ``(A) pay to the Federal Government the Federal share of the amount collected, subject to paragraph (3)(A); ``(B) retain, or pay to the family, the State share of the amount collected, subject to paragraph (3)(B); and ``(C) pay to the family any remaining amount.
Families that formerly received assistance.--In the case of a family that formerly received assistance from the State: ``(A) Current support.--To the extent that the amount collected does not exceed the current support amount, the State shall pay the amount to the family.
Arrearages.--Except as otherwise provided in the State plan approved under section 454, to the extent that the amount collected exceeds the current support amount, the State-- ``(i) shall first pay to the family the excess amount, to the extent necessary to satisfy support arrearages not assigned under section 408(a)(3); ``(ii) if the amount collected exceeds the amount required to be paid to the family under clause (i), shall-- ``(I) pay to the Federal Government, the Federal share of the excess amount described in this clause, subject to paragraph (3)(A); and ``(II) retain, or pay to the family, the State share of the excess amount described in this clause, subject to paragraph (3)(B); and ``(iii) shall pay to the family any remaining amount.
Limitations.-- ``(A) Federal reimbursements.--The total of the amounts paid by the State to the Federal Government under paragraphs (1) and (2) with respect to a family shall not exceed the Federal share of the amount assigned with respect to the family under section 408(a)(3).
State reimbursements.--The total of the amounts retained by the State under paragraphs (1) and (2) with respect to a family shall not exceed the State share of the amount assigned with respect to the family under section 408(a)(3).
Families that never received assistance.--In the case of any other family, the State shall pay the amount collected to the family.
Families under certain agreements.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) through (4), in the case of an amount collected for a family in accordance with a cooperative agreement under section 454(33), the State shall distribute the amount collected under the terms of the agreement.
State financing options.--To the extent that the State share of the amount payable to a family under paragraph (2)(B) exceeds the amount that the State estimates (under procedures approved by the Secretary) would have been payable to the family under former section 457(a)(2)(B) (as in effect for the State immediately before the date on which this subsection, as amended by the Children First Child Support Reform Act of 2001, first applies to the State) if such former section had remained in effect, the State may elect to use the grant made to the State under section 403(a) to pay the amount, or to have the payment considered a qualified State expenditure for purposes of section 409(a)(7), but not both.
State option to pass through additional support with federal financial participation.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), a State shall not be required to pay to the Federal Government the Federal share of an amount collected on behalf of a family that is not a recipient of assistance under the State program funded under part A, to the extent that the State pays the amount to the family.
Recipients of tanf for less than 5 years.-- ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), a State shall not be required to pay to the Federal Government the Federal share of an amount collected on behalf of a family that is a recipient of assistance under the State program funded under part A and, if the family includes an adult, that has received the assistance for not more than 5 years after the date of enactment of this paragraph, to the extent that-- ``(I) the State pays the amount to the family; and ``(II) subject to clause (ii), the amount is disregarded in determining the amount and type of the assistance provided to the family.
Limitation.--Of the amount disregarded as described in clause (i)(II), the maximum amount that may be taken into account for purposes of clause (i) shall not exceed $400 per month, except that, in the case of a family that includes 2 or more children, the State may elect to increase the maximum amount to not more than $600 per month.
States with demonstration waivers.--Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, a State with a waiver under section 1115 that became effective on or before October 1, 1997, the terms of which allow passthrough of child support payments, may pass through such payments in accordance with such terms with respect to families subject to the waiver.''.
State plan to include election as to which rules to apply in distributing child support arrearages collected on behalf of families formerly receiving assistance.--Section 454 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 654) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (32); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (33) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by inserting after paragraph (33) the following: ``(34) include an election by the State to apply section 457(a)(2)(B) or former section 457(a)(2)(B) (as in effect for the State immediately before the date this paragraph, as amended by the Children First Child Support Reform Act of 2001, first applies to the State) to the distribution of the amounts which are the subject of such sections, and for so long as the State elects to so apply such former section, the amendments made by section 2 of the Children First Child Support Reform Act of 2001 shall not apply with respect to the State, notwithstanding section 6(a) of such Act.''.
Approval of estimation procedures.--Not later than October 1, 2002, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the States (as defined for purposes of part D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 651 et seq.
)), shall establish the procedures to be used to make the estimate described in section 457(a)(6) of such Act (42 United States Code 657(a)(6)).
Current Support Amount Defined.--Section 457(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 657(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Current support amount.--The term `current support amount' means, with respect to amounts collected as support on behalf of a family, the amount designated as the monthly support obligation of the noncustodial parent in the order requiring the support.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 404(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 604(a)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``; or''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) to fund payment of an amount under section 457(a)(2)(B), but only to the extent that the State properly elects under section 457(a)(6) to use the grant to fund the payment.''.
Section 409(a)(7)(B)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 609(a)(7)(B)(i)) is amended-- (A) in subclause (I)(aa), by striking ``457(a)(1)(B)'' and inserting ``457(a)(1)''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(V) Portions of certain child support payments collected on behalf of and distributed to families no longer receiving assistance.--Any amount paid by a State under section 457(a)(2)(B), but only to the extent that the State properly elects under section 457(a)(6) to have the payment considered a qualified State expenditure.''.
STATE OPTION TO DISCONTINUE CERTAIN SUPPORT ASSIGNMENTS.
Section 457(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 657(b)) is amended by striking ``shall'' and inserting ``may''.
In General.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 2005, and shall apply to payments under parts A and D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 601 et sequentes and 651 et sequentes) for calendar quarters beginning on or after such date, and without regard to whether regulations to implement the amendments (in the case of State programs operated under such part D) are promulgated by such date.
State Option To Accelerate Effective Date.--In addition, a State may elect to have the amendments made by section 2 or 3 apply to the State and to amounts collected by the State, on and after such date as the State may select that is after the date of enactment of this Act, by including an election to that effect in the State plan under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 651 et sequentes).