This Act may be cited as the ``Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands Reform Act''.
The Congress finds that: (1) The Covenant to Establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in Political Union with the United States of America was approved by Congress pursuant to Public Law 94-241, 90 United States Statutes at Large 263.
At the time that the Covenant was being negotiated, representatives of the government of the Northern Mariana Islands expressed concern that United States immigration laws would allow unrestricted immigration into their small island community.
In response to these concerns, section 503(a) of the Covenant provided that the Immigration and Naturalization Act did not immediately apply to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Congress expressly reserved the right to extend the Immigration and Naturalization Act to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands at a future date.
Following the enactment of the Covenant, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands instituted a largely unrestricted immigration policy, causing the Commonwealth's population to increase from 16,780 in 1980 to a population of over 58,800 in 1995, with foreign workers outnumbering United States citizens.
As a result of these immigration policies, 91 percent of the private sector work force in the Commonwealth is comprised of foreign workers.
The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands has used its immigration policy to recruit a large, low-cost foreign work force of desperately poor individuals with no meaningful opportunity to demand safe living and working conditions of fair wages and benefits.
Notwithstanding an unemployment rate of 14 percent among United States citizens, the Commonwealth has recruited increasing numbers of foreign workers.
Even though the Commonwealth alleges that unfilled job openings justify recruitment of an increasing number of foreign workers, the Commonwealth's own statistics indicate an unemployment rate of 4.5 percent among foreign workers.
The United States Immigration and Naturalization Service reported that the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands has no reliable records of aliens who have entered the Commonwealth, how long they remain, and when, if ever, they depart.
At the time that the Covenant was being negotiated, representatives of the government of the Northern Mariana Islands expressed concern that the minimum wage provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act would disrupt the Commonwealth's struggling local economy.
In response to these concerns, section 503(c) of the Covenant provided that the minimum wage provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act did not immediately apply to the Commonwealth.
Congress expressly reserved the right to extend the minimum wage provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands at a future date.
The economy of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands has grown significantly and, in 1996, annual gross business revenues rose to $1,500,000,000, a sixfold increase during the past decade.
The current minimum wage in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands is only $3.05 per hour for garment and construction industry workers and $3.05 per hour for those working in other industries.
The United States Department of Labor has uncovered a systematic pattern of labor abuses in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, including-- (A) involuntary servitude and peonage, (B) illegal withholding of wages earned, (C) nonpayment of overtime wages, (D) illegal deductions from paychecks, (E) kickbacks of wages paid to employees, (F) employee lockdowns in worksites and living barracks, and (G) unsafe and unhealthy working and living environments.
Despite an expectation that they will enjoy the American dream in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, foreign workers have been required to sign contracts with government representatives in the People's Republic of China which-- (A) waive rights guaranteed to United States workers, (B) forbid participation in religious and political activities while in the United States, (C) prohibit workers from dating or marrying in the United States, (D) subject employees to civil and labor penalties if returned to China, and (E) permit Chinese Government recruiters to charge a fee of 25 percent of an employee's net pay for a period of two years.
The United States Department of Justice has determined that the immigration and labor situation in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands has created a major organized crime problem in the Commonwealth which involves-- (A) immigration document fraud, (B) public corruption, (C) racketeering, (D) drug trafficking, (E) prostitution, (F) pornography, (G) extortion, (H) gambling, (I) smuggling, and (J) other forms of violent crime.
The United States Department of Justice is investigating numerous cases in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands of women being recruited from the Philippines, China, and other Asian countries expressly for criminal sexual activity, and has also described this situation as the ``systematic trafficking of women and minors for prostitution''.
The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands is exempt from Federal immigration law, the Federal minimum wage law, and Federal tariffs and taxes, yet its products are sold as ``Made in USA'' although 95 percent of the workers in the garment manufacturing industry are not United States citizens.
Garments made in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands carrying the ``Made in USA'' label compete directly with garments made on the United States mainland by workers and businesses that are subject to Federal immigration law, the Federal minimum wage law, and Federal taxes.
In 1996, garment manufacturers in the Commonwealth shipped garments to the Continental United States with a wholesale value of $555 million, a 30-percent increase over the previous year.
Congress appropriated $10 million to fund a three-year initiative by the United States Departments of Justice, Labor, and Interior to assist the Commonwealth in its efforts to improve its labor and immigration policies.
Despite this appropriation there has been little or no improvement in the immigration and labor policies of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
The government of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands has been ineffective in stemming the flow of immigration onto United States soil, raising the wage and living standards for workers, and aggressively prosecuting labor and human rights abuses.
Despite efforts by the Reagan, Bush, and Clinton administrations to persuade the government of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands to correct problems in the Commonwealth, the situation has only deteriorated.
The continuing concern about labor abuses, the Commonwealth's immigration policy, and the employment of foreign workers in a manner that unfairly competes with other United States manufacturing prompted President Clinton on May 30, 1997, to notify the Governor of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands that Federal immigration and minimum wage laws should be applied to the Commonwealth.
APPLICATION OF IMMIGRATION LAW.
Article V, section 506 of the Covenant to Establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in Political Union with the United States of America (approved by Public Law 94-241, 90 United States Statutes at Large 263) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(e)(1) For purposes of entry into the Northern Mariana Islands by any individual (but not for purposes of entry by an individual into the United States from the Northern Mariana Islands), the Immigration and Nationality Act shall apply as if the Northern Mariana Islands were a State (as defined in section 101(a)(36) of the Immigration and Nationality Act).
Notwithstanding paragraph (1), with respect to an individual seeking entry into the Northern Mariana Islands for purposes of employment in the textile, hotel, tourist, or construction industry (including employment as a contractor), the Federal statutes and regulations governing admission to Guam of individuals described in section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act shall apply.
For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(A) references in such statutes and regulations to United States resident workers shall be deemed to be references to United States citizens, national or resident workers; and ``(B) references in such statutes and regulations to Guam shall be deemed to be references to the Northern Mariana Islands.
When deploying personnel to enforce the provisions of this section, the Attorney General shall coordinate with, and act in conjunction with, State and local law enforcement agencies to ensure that such deployment does not degrade or compromise the law enforcement capabilities and functions currently performed by immigration officers.
The Attorney General shall prescribe and implement a transition period for the amendments made to section 506(a) of the Covenant.
The transition period shall not exceed 4 years from the effective date of this subsection.
Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands Reform Act, the Attorney General shall submit a report on the status of implementing this section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act except that the amendment designated as ``(e)(2)'' shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
LABELING REQUIREMENTS FOR TEXTILE FIBER PRODUCTS.
Public Law 94-241 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Labeling of textile fiber products ``(a) No textile fiber product that is made or assembled in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands shall have a stamp, tag, label, or other means of identification or substitute therefor on or affixed to the product stating `Made in USA' or otherwise stating or implying that the product was made or assembled in the United States unless the product is made or assembled using direct labor that meets the required percentage of qualified manhours.
A textile fiber product that does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) shall be deemed to be misbranded for purposes of the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act (Public Law 85-897, 72 United States Statutes at Large 1717).
In this section: ``(1) Direct labor.--The term `direct labor' includes any work provided to prepare, assemble, process, package, or transport a textile fiber product, but does not include supervisory, management, security, or administrative work.
Freely associated states.--The term `Freely Associated States' means the Republic of Palau, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia.
Qualified manhours.--The term `qualified manhours' means the manhours of direct labor performed by persons who are citizens or nationals of the United States or citizen of the Freely Associated States.
Required percentage.--The term `required percentage' means-- ``(A) 20 percent, for the period beginning January 1, 1998, through December 31, 1998; ``(B) 35 percent, for the period beginning January 1, 1999, through December 31, 1999; and ``(C) 50 percent, for the period beginning January 1, 2000, and thereafter.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.''.
Section 503 of Article V of the Covenant to Establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in Political Union with the United States of America (approved by Public Law 94-241) is amended by deleting ``States; and (c) the minimum wage provisions of Section 6, Act of June 25, 1938, 52 State.
and inserting in lieu thereof ``States.''.
Public Law 94-241, 90 United States Statutes at Large 263, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Sec.
Minimum wages in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands ``(a) The minimum wage provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 206(a)(1)) shall apply to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, except that-- ``(1) during the period beginning 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act and ending on December 31, 1997, the minimum wage rate applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Island shall be $3.05 an hour for an employee; ``(2) beginning on January 1, 1998, and each calendar year thereafter, the minimum wage rate applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands for an employee for each such calendar year shall be the minimum rate applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands for the preceding calendar year increased by 30 cents or the amount necessary to increase the minimum wage rate to the rate described in section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, whichever is less; and ``(3) after the calendar year in which the minimum wage rate applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands has been increased under subparagraph (A) to the minimum wage rate described in section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, the minimum wage rate applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands for an employee for any succeeding calendar year shall be the rate described in such section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with other Federal agencies, shall conduct a study of the extent of human rights violations and labor rights violations in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, including the use of forced or indentured labor, and any efforts being taken by the Government of the United States or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands to address or prohibit such violations.
The Secretary of the Interior shall include the results of such study in the annual report, entitled ``Federal CNMI Initiative on Labor, Immigration, and Law Enforcement,'' transmitted to Congress.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out provisions of this Act.