This Act may be cited as the ``Teenage Pregnancy Reduction Act of 1999''.
EVALUATION OF EFFECTIVE PROGRAMS FOR PREVENTION OF ADOLESCENT PREGNANCY.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall (directly or through grants or contracts awarded to public or nonprofit private entities) arrange for the evaluation of a wide variety of existing programs designed in whole or part to prevent pregnancy in adolescents, including programs that do not receive grants from the Federal Government for the operation of the programs.
The purpose of the evaluation shall be the determination of-- (1) the effectiveness of such programs in reducing adolescent pregnancy; (2) the factors contributing to the effectiveness of the programs; and (3) the feasibility of replicating the programs in other locations.
Participation of Federal Agencies and Private Organizations.-- In carrying out the evaluation under subsection (a), the Secretary shall as appropriate-- (1) provide for the participation of the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Director of the Office of Population Affairs, the Assistant Secretary for Children and Families, and the Director of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; and (2) provide for the participation of organizations with demonstrated expertise in conducting evaluations of adolescent pregnancy prevention programs, including the National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy, a nonpartisan organization.
Design of Evaluation.--Subject to subsection (d), the Secretary shall select a design for the evaluation under subsection (a) from among proposals that-- (1) provide for the evaluation of programs in various geographic regions; (2) with respect to the populations served by the programs, provide for determining factors that are specific to various socioeconomic, racial, ethnic, and age groups, and factors that are specific to gender; and (3) meet such other criteria as the Secretary may establish.
Measures of Effectiveness.--The Secretary shall define the measures of effectiveness used in evaluating the programs designed to reduce the rate of adolescent pregnancy, and shall include a variety of measures of effectiveness in the definition.
Scientific Peer Review.--The Secretary may provide funds for an evaluation pursuant to subsection (a) only if the evaluation has been recommended for approval pursuant to a process of scientific peer review utilizing one or more panels of experts.
Such panels shall include experts from public entities and from private entities.
Submission of Report to Congress and Secretary.--Not later than December 1, 2004, the evaluation under subsection (a) shall be completed and a report shall be submitted to the Congress that describes the findings made in the evaluation and provides recommendations for future programs designed to reduce the rate of adolescent pregnancy.
Dissemination of Information.--After the submission of the report under subsection (f), the Secretary shall disseminate the findings and recommendations presented in the report.
The categories of individuals to whom the information is disseminated shall include administrators of prevention programs, public and private entities providing financial support to such programs, organizations working on such programs, professional medical associations, entities providing public health services, entities providing social work services, and school administrators.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For purposes of carrying out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $3,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2005.
ONE-TIME INCENTIVE GRANTS FOR EFFECTIVE PREVENTION PROGRAMS.
In General.--In the case of a prevention program that pursuant to the evaluation under section 2 has been found to be effective, the Secretary may under this section make not more than one grant to the entity that operates the program.
The purpose of the grant shall be to assist the entity with the expenses of operating the program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For purposes of carrying out subsection (a), there is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000, in the aggregate, for the fiscal years 2004 through 2006.
Such authorization is in addition to any other authorization of appropriations that is available for making grants for the operational expenses of prevention programs.
Prevention Programs.-- (1) Rule of construction.--The provisions of this Act apply with respect to a prevention program without regard to which of the various programmatic approaches for the prevention of pregnancy in adolescents (as defined in paragraph (2)) is the focus of the program.
Programmatic approaches.--In this Act, the term ``programmatic approaches'', with respect to prevention programs, includes advocating abstinence from sexual activity; providing family planning services (including contraception); fostering academic achievement; mentoring by adults; providing employment assistance or job training; providing professional counseling or peer counseling; providing for recreational or social events; and any combination thereof.
Other Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Prevention program.--The term ``prevention program'' means a program for the prevention of pregnancy in adolescents.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.