This Act may be cited as the ``Helium Disposal Act of 1995''.
AMENDMENT OF HELIUM ACT.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Helium Act, as amended (50 United States Code 167 to 167n).
Sections 3, 4, and 5 are amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Extraction, Disposal, and Sale of Helium on Federal Lands.-- (1) The Secretary may enter into agreements with private parties for the recovery, disposal, and sale of helium on Federal lands upon such terms and conditions as he deems fair, reasonable, and necessary.
All money received by the Secretary from the sale, extraction, or other disposition of helium on Federal lands, including money received under contractual arrangements executed before the effective date of this Act, shall be deposited to the general fund of the Treasury.
Any agreement under this subsection shall be subject to the existing rights of any affected Federal oil and gas lessee.
Each such agreement (and any extension or renewal thereof) shall contain such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate by the Secretary.
Prior Agreements.--This subsection shall not in any manner affect or diminish the rights and obligations of the Secretary and private parties under agreements to dispose of helium produced from Federal lands in existence on the date of enactment of the Helium Disposal Act of 1995 except to the extent that such agreements are renewed or extended after that date.
Regulations.--Agreements under this subsection may be subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by the Secretary.
Helium on Public Domain.--Any known helium-gas-bearing land on the public domain not covered at the time by leases or permits under the Mineral Lands Leasing Act of February 25, 1920, as amended, may be reserved for the purposes of this Act, and any reservation of the ownership of helium may include the right to extract, or have extracted, such helium, under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Secretary, from all gas produced from lands so permitted, leased, or otherwise granted for development, except that in the extraction of helium from gas produced from such lands, it shall be extracted so as to cause no delay, except that required by the extraction process, in the delivery of gas produced from the well to the purchaser or purchasers thereof at the point of delivery specified in contracts for the purchase of such gas.
Storage, Transportation, and Sale.--The Secretary is authorized to store, transport, and sell or otherwise dispose of helium only in accordance with this Act.
Monitoring and Reporting.--The Secretary is authorized to monitor helium production and helium reserves and to prepare periodically reports regarding the amounts of helium produced and the quality of crude helium in storage.
STORAGE, TRANSPORTATION, AND WITHDRAWAL OF CRUDE HELIUM.
Storage, Transportation, and Withdrawal.--The Secretary is authorized to store, transport, and withdraw crude helium and to maintain and operate existing crude helium storage at the United States Bureau of Mines Cliffside Field, together with related helium transportation and withdrawal facilities only in accordance with this Act.
Fees for Storage, Transportation, and Withdrawal.--Whenever the Secretary provides crude helium storage, withdrawal, or transportation services to any person, the Secretary is authorized to impose fees on such person to reimburse the Secretary for the full costs or market value, whichever is greater, of providing such storage, transportation, and withdrawal services.
Helium Reserve Management Fund.--There is hereby established in the Treasury of the United States a revolving fund known as the Helium Reserve Management Fund.
The Secretary of the Interior is directed to deposit in this fund all fees collected under subsection (b).
This fund shall be available to the Secretary, without further appropriation and without fiscal year limitation, to cover the costs of this Act.
CESSATION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.
Cessation of Production, Refining, and Marketing.--Within three years after the date of enactment of the Helium Disposal Act of 1995, the Secretary shall cease producing, refining, and marketing refined helium.
Disposal of Facilities.--(1) Within two years after the cessation of activities referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the Secretary shall designate as excess property the facilities, equipment, and other real and personal property, together with all interests therein, held by the United States for the purpose of producing, refining, and marketing refined helium.
The disposal of such property shall be in accordance with the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949.
Proceeds from the asset sale described in paragraph (1) shall be paid to the general fund of the Treasury.
If the President so designates, the net proceeds shall be included in the budget baseline required by the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (the Act) and shall be counted for the purposes of section 252 of the Act as an offset to direct spending notwithstanding section 257(e) of the Act.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any facilities, equipment, or other real or personal property, or any interest therein, necessary for the storage and transportation of crude helium or any equipment needed to maintain the purity, quality control, and quality assurance of helium in the Bureau of Mines Cliffside Field.
Existing Contracts.--All contracts which were entered into by any person with the Secretary for the purchase by such person from the Secretary of refined helium and which are in effect on the date of the enactment of the Helium Disposal Act of 1995 shall remain in force and effect no longer than the date on which cessation of activities referred to in subsection (a) of this section occurs.
Any costs associated with the termination of such contracts shall be paid from the Helium Production Fund.
Any associated costs that may arise after the abolishment of the Helium Production Fund shall be paid from the Helium Reserve Management Fund established by section 4(c).''.
DISPOSAL OF CRUDE HELIUM.
Section 6 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
DISPOSAL OF CRUDE HELIUM.
Authority for Sale of Crude Helium.--The Secretary is directed to make sales of crude helium to reduce the helium reserves owned by the United States, consistent with section 8 of this Act.
Terms of Sale of Crude Helium.--Sales of crude helium under this section shall be in such quantities, under such terms and conditions, and at such prices to cover, at a minimum, all costs in carrying out the provisions of this Act, and shall on an annual basis at least be a volume equivalent to the amount of refined helium purchased by the Federal Government unless the Secretary determines and notifies the Congress in writing that such sales will unduly disrupt the usual markets of producers, processors, and consumers of helium and will not protect the United States against avoidable loss.
Abolish Helium Production Fund.--The Helium Production Fund, established by this section as it read prior to the amendment effected by this Act, shall continue to exist until the completion of the disposal of facilities, equipment, and other real and personal property under section 5(b)(1) of this Act, at which time the fund shall be abolished.
All money in the Helium Production Fund at that time shall be transferred to the general fund of the United States Treasury.
Crude Helium Sales Proceeds.--Proceeds from the sale of crude helium described in subsection (b) and in section 8(a) shall be credited to the Helium Production Fund until such fund is abolished pursuant to subsection (c).
Upon abolishment of the fund, the proceeds from the sale of crude helium shall be deposited in the general fund of the United States Treasury, except that the Secretary may retain proceeds, not to exceed $5,000,000 annually, to cover the costs of crude helium disposal as provided by this Act.
Amounts retained by the Secretary shall be deposited in the Helium Reserve Management and remain available without further appropriation or fiscal year limitation.
Asset Sale Waiver.--If the President so designates, proceeds from the asset sale described in paragraph (b) shall be included in the budget baseline required by the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (the Act) and shall be counted for the purposes of section 252 as an offset to direct spending notwithstanding section 257(e) of the Act.
Report to Congress.--Upon the abolishment of the Helium Production Fund pursuant to subsection (c), the Secretary shall submit to the House Committee on Resources and the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources a report specifying the current and projected costs for the disposal of crude helium reserves and the current and projected receipts from such disposal.''.
CANCELLATION OF HELIUM DEBT.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall cancel the interest accrued and unpaid as well as the outstanding principal of all notes issued by the Secretary pursuant to section 12 of the Helium Act and also cancel the outstanding interest accrued and unpaid as well as the principal of the net capital and retained earnings debt of the Helium Production Fund established pursuant to section 6 of the Helium Act Amendments of 1960 (Public Law 86-777).
REPEAL OF COOPERATIVE AUTHORITY.
Section 7 is repealed.
Section 8 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Stockpile Sales.--Not later than January 1, 1996, the Secretary shall commence making sales of crude helium from helium reserves owned by the United States and stored in the Bureau of Mines Cliffside Field, in such amounts as may be necessary to dispose of all such helium reserves in excess of an amount determined to be in the national interest by the Secretary by January 1, 2020.
The sales shall be at such times and in such lots as the Secretary determines in consultation with the helium industry and may be made by contract or other investment instrument.
The price for all such sales, as determined by the Secretary in consultation with the helium industry, shall be comparable to prices for helium sold by private industry.
An annual review of price comparability shall be made by the Secretary.
Price adjustments by the Secretary shall be made accordingly to protect the interests of the United States.
Discovery of Additional Reserves.--The discovery of additional helium reserves shall not affect the duty of the Secretary to make sales of helium as provided in subsection (a) of this section, as the case may be.''.
REPEAL OF ADMINISTRATION AND OTHER AUTHORITIES.
Sections 10 through 17 are repealed.