This Act may be cited as the ``Yellowstone National Park 125th Anniversary Commemorative Coin Act''.
YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK COMMEMORATIVE COIN.
The Secretary of the Treasury (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue coins in accordance with this Act to commemorate the 125th anniversary of Yellowstone National Park.
Denominations.-- (1) 5 dollar gold coins.--The Secretary shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 5 dollar coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 8.359 grams; (B) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
1 dollar silver coins.--The Secretary shall mint and issue not more than 2,500,000 1 dollar coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
\1/2\ dollar clad coins.--The Secretary shall issue not more than 2,500,000 \1/2\ dollar coins, each of which shall be minted to the specifications for \1/2\ dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain gold for the coins minted under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under existing law.
Silver.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act (50 United States Code 98 et sequentes).
In General.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of Yellowstone National Park.
On each coin, there shall be-- (1) a designation of the value of the coin; (2) an inscription of the year ``1997''; and (3) inscriptions of the words-- (A) ``Liberty''; (B) ``In God We Trust''; (C) ``United States of America''; and (D) ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection of Design.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the United States Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee in accordance with section 5134 of title 31, United States Code.
Period of Issuance.--The coins minted under this Act shall be issued only during the year 1997.
Quality of Coins.--The coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Not more than 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of coins minted under this Act.
Sale Price.--The Secretary shall sell the coins minted under this Act at a price equal to the face value, plus the cost of designing, minting, and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping) and the surcharge provided for in subsection (d).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins minted under this Act at a reasonable discount to reflect the lower costs of the sales.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act prior to their issuance.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.-- (1) 5 dollar coins.--All sales of 5 dollar coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $35 per coin.
1 dollar coins.--All sales of 1 dollar coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $7 per coin.
\1/2\ dollar coins.--All sales of \1/2\ dollar coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $1 per coin.
Surcharges received from the sale of coins minted under this Act shall be distributed by the Secretary as follows: (1) Yellowstone national park.--25 percent of the surcharges shall be paid to the Secretary of the Interior to be used for Yellowstone National Park, which amounts shall be in addition to any other amounts appropriated or otherwise made available for Yellowstone National Park.
National park service.--25 percent of the surcharges shall be paid to the Secretary of the Interior for use by the National Park Service.
Reduction of national debt.--50 percent of the surcharges shall be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury for the sole purpose of reducing the national debt.
The Secretary shall take actions necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the Federal Government.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services relating to the minting and selling of the coins authorized by this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
NUMISMATIC PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND.
The coins issued under this Act are subject to the provisions of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, relating to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.