Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers Valley National Heritage Corridor Reauthorization Act of 1999''.
Reference.--Whenever in this Act a section or other provision is amended or repealed, such amendment or repeal shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of the Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers Valley National Heritage Corridor Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-449; 16 United States Code 461 note).
Section 102 of the Act is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts'' after ``State of Connecticut''; (2) by striking paragraph (2) and redesignating paragraphs (3) through (9) as paragraphs (2) through (8), respectively; and (3) in paragraph (3) (as so redesignated), by inserting ``New Haven,'' after ``Hartford,''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF QUINEBAUG AND SHETUCKET RIVERS VALLEY NATIONAL HERITAGE CORRIDOR; PURPOSE.
Establishment.--Section 103(a) of the Act is amended by inserting ``and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts'' after ``State of Connecticut''.
Purpose.--Section 103(b) of the Act is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this title to provide assistance to the State of Connecticut and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, their units of local and regional government and citizens in the development and implementation of integrated natural, cultural, historic, scenic, recreational, land, and other resource management programs in order to retain, enhance, and interpret the significant features of the lands, water, structures, and history of the Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers Valley.''.
Boundaries.--Section 104(a) of the Act is amended-- (1) by inserting ``Union,'' after ``Thompson,''; and (2) by inserting after ``Woodstock'' the following: ``in the State of Connecticut, and the towns of Brimfield, Charlton, Dudley, E. Brookfield, Holland, Oxford, Southbridge, Sturbridge, and Webster in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which are contiguous areas in the Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers Valley, related by shared natural, cultural, historic, and scenic resources''.
Administration.--Section 104 of the Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Administration.-- ``(1) In general.--(A) The Corridor shall be managed by the management entity in accordance with the management plan, in consultation with the Governor and pursuant to a compact with the Secretary.
The management entity shall amend its by-laws to add the Governor of Connecticut (or the Governor's designee) and the Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (or the Governor's designee) as a voting members of its Board of Directors.
The management entity shall provide the Governor with an annual report of its activities, programs, and projects.
An annual report prepared for any other purpose shall satisfy the requirements of this paragraph.
Compact.--To carry out the purposes of this Act, the Secretary shall enter into a compact with the management entity.
The compact shall include information relating to the objectives and management of the Corridor, including, but not limited to, each of the following: ``(A) A delineation of the boundaries of the Corridor.
A discussion of goals and objectives of the Corridor, including an explanation of the proposed approaches to accomplishing the goals set forth in the management plan.
A description of the role of the State of Connecticut and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Authorities of management entity.--For the purpose of achieving the goals set forth in the management plan, the management entity may use Federal funds provided under this Act-- ``(A) to make grants to the State of Connecticut and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, their political subdivisions, nonprofit organizations, and other persons; ``(B) to enter into cooperative agreements with or provide technical assistance to the State of Connecticut and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, their political subdivisions, nonprofit organizations, and other persons; ``(C) to hire and compensate staff; and ``(D) to contract for goods and services.
Prohibition on acquisition of real property.--The management entity may not use Federal funds received under this Act to acquire real property or any interest in real property.''.
Section 105 of the Act is amended-- (1) by striking subsections (a) and (b); (2) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (a); (3) in subsection (a) (as so redesignated)-- (A) by striking the first sentence and all that follows through ``Governor,'' and inserting the following: ``The management entity shall implement the management plan.
Upon request of the management entity,''; and (B) in paragraph (5), by striking ``identified pursuant to the inventory required by section 5(a)(1)''; and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Grants and Technical Assistance.--For the purposes of implementing the management plan, the management entity may make grants or provide technical assistance to the State of Connecticut and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, their political subdivisions, nonprofit organizations, and other persons to further the goals set forth in the management plan.''.
DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY.
Section 106 of the Act is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by striking ``Governor'' each place it appears and inserting ``management entity''; (B) by striking ``preparation and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``Such assistance shall include providing funds authorized under section 109 and technical assistance necessary to carry out this Act.
''; and (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows: ``(b) Termination of Authority.--The Secretary may not make any grants or provide any assistance under this Act after September 30, 2009.''.
DUTIES OF OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Section 107 of the Act is amended by striking ``Governor'' and inserting ``management entity''.
Section 108 of the Act is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting before the period the following: ``and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts''.
in paragraph (3), by inserting before the period the following: ``and the Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts''; (3) in paragraph (5), by striking ``each of'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``the Northeastern Connecticut Council of Governments, the Windham Regional Council of Governments, and the Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments in Connecticut, (or their successors), and the Pioneer Valley Regional Planning Commission and the Southern Worcester County Regional Planning Commission (or their successors) in Massachusetts.
''; and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``(6) The term `management plan' means the document approved by the Governor of the State of Connecticut on February 16, 1999, and adopted by the management entity, entitled `Vision to Reality: A Management Plan', the management plan for the Corridor, as it may be amended or replaced from time-to-time.
The term `management entity' means Quinebaug-Shetucket Heritage Corridor, Inc., a not-for-profit corporation (or its successor) incorporated in the State of Connecticut.''.
Section 109 of the Act is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated under this title not more than $1,000,000 for any fiscal year.
Not more than a total of $10,000,000 may be appropriated for the Corridor under this title after the date of the enactment of the Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers Valley National Heritage Corridor Reauthorization Act of 1999.
Fifty Percent Match.--Federal funding provided under this title may not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of any assistance or grant provided or authorized under this title.''.
Long Title.--The long title of the Act is amended to read as follows: ``An Act to establish the Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers Valley National Heritage Corridor in the State of Connecticut and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and for other purposes.''.
Heading.--The heading for section 110 of the Act is amended by striking ``service'' and inserting ``system''.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.