This Act may be cited as the ``Section 515 Rural Housing Reform''.
Title V of the Housing Act of 1949 (42 United States Code 1471 et seq.)
is amended: (a) Section 502(c)(1) is amended by adding a new paragraph (C) to read as follows: ``(C) Effective May 26, 1994, the Secretary may not accept an offer to prepay, or request refinancing in accordance with subsection (b)(3) of, any loan made or insured under section 515 pursuant to a contract entered into before the enactment of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 for a period of not less than two years from the date of enactment of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1994.
The Secretary shall conduct either directly or through a contract an independent assessment of rural housing preservation provisions.
Such assessment, along with recommendations of changes in law and regulation shall be submitted to relevant committees of the Congress by May 31, 1996.''.
Section 502(c)(4)(C) is amended by revising it to read as follows: ``(C) Approval of assistance.--The Secretary may approve assistance under subparagraph (B) only if the restrictive period has expired for any loan made or insured under section 514 or 515 of this title pursuant to a contract entered into after December 21, 1979, but before the date of enactment of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 and the Secretary determines that the combination of assistance provided.''.
Title V of the Housing Act of 1949 (42 United States Code 1471 et seq.)
is amended: (a) Section 515(a)(2) is amended to change ``fifty'' to read ``thirty''.
Section 515(b)(2) is amended to read ``provide for amortization as if the term of the loan was for a period of not to exceed fifty years and may allow for a balloon payment at the end of the term of the loan.
Such loan may be, in the discretion of the Secretary, rescheduled for a period not to exceed fifty years from the date of the original loan.
The amount of the unpaid principal and interest of the prior loan rescheduled shall not create a new charge against any loan levels authorized by law.''
Title V of the Housing Act of 1949 (42 United States Code 1471 et seq.)
is amended: Section 515(t) is amended by deleting paragraphs (4) and (5) and renumbering paragraphs (6), (7), and (8) as paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) respectively.
Title V of the Housing Act of 1949 (United States Code 1471 et sequentes) is amended: Section 510(d)(1) is amended to read ``prosecution and defense of any litigation under sections 515 shall be conducted, at the discretion of the Secretary, by''.
Section 6103(1)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding a new subparagraph (x) to read ``(x) any housing assistance program administered by the Department of Agriculture that involves initial and periodic review of an applicant's or participant's income and only for use by officers and employees of the Department of Agriculture with respect to the applicants and participants in such programs.''.
Section 536 of the Housing Act (42 United States Code 1471 et sequentes) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), and (i) as paragraphs (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), and (j) respectively, adding a new paragraph (d), and amending the last sentence of redesignated paragraph (g) to read as follows: ``(d) Subsidy Layering.--The Secretary is authorized to establish a process for evaluating assistance provided under this title to ensure that excess assistance is not provided.
In conducting such an evaluation, the Secretary shall utilize information received under paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
To the extent practicable, the Secretary is authorized to make use of procedures, policies and regulations currently in use by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and may, to the extent practicable, develop memoranda of understanding with State housing agencies to implement the provisions of this section.
Limitation of Assistance.--* * *Notwithstanding the provisions of section 515(r), the Secretary may decrease the amount of assistance provided under this title if he/she determines that other assistance reported under paragraphs (b) and (c) will provide excess assistance and/or profits to the recipient.''.
Section 509(f) of the Housing Act of 1949 (United States Code 1471 et seq.
), is amended to read as follows: ``(f) Underserved Housing.-- ``(1) Designation of underserved area.--The Secretary shall designate as targeted underserved areas 100 counties and communities in each fiscal year that have severe, unmet housing needs as determined by the Secretary.
A county or community shall be eligible for designation if, during the 5-year period preceding the year in which the designation is made, it has received an average amount of assistance that is substantially lower than the average annual amount of assistance received during that 5-year period by other counties and communities in the State that are eligible for such assistance calculated on a per capita basis, and has-- ``(A) 15 percent or more of its population at or below the poverty level; and ``(B) 5 percent of its population residing in substandard housing.
As used in this paragraph, the term `poverty level' has the meaning given the term in section 102(a)(9) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974.
Preferences.--In selecting projects to receive assistance with amounts set aside under paragraph (6), the Secretary shall give preference to any project located in a county or community that has, at the time of designation and as determined by the Secretary-- ``(A) 20 percent or more of its population at or below poverty level; and ``(B) 7 percent or more of its population residing in substandard housing.
In designating underserved areas under paragraph (1), in each fiscal year the Secretary shall designate not less than 5 counties or communities that contain tribal allotted or Indian trust land.
In designating underserved areas under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall not designate more than 10 counties or communities in one State or Puerto Rico during each designation cycle.
If in selecting the 100 underserved areas there are more than 10 counties or communities in one State or Puerto Rico which meet the requirements of this paragraph, the Secretary will select the 10 most underserved counties or communities utilizing the highest combined percentages of populations below the poverty level and households residing in substandard housing.
The remaining counties will be eligible for unused funds as described in paragraph (6)(A).
Other underserved areas.--In addition to the 100 targeted counties and communities, the Secretary may also designate other underserved areas that have a severe, unmet housing need based upon objective requirements.
Such objective requirements may include counties and communities experiencing trauma due to natural disasters or structural change; communities that have remained consistently poor; colonias as defined in paragraph (10) and communities that have experienced long-term populations decline and job deterioration.
Underserved applicants.--The Secretary may also set- aside funds under paragraph (6) for applicants who have been underserved.
A class of applicants shall be eligible for designation if, during the 5-year period preceding the year in which the designation is made, the class received an average annual amount of assistance under this title that is substantially lower than the class proportionate percentage of the rural population.
Such underserved applicants may include socially disadvantaged persons such as women, blacks, Hispanics, Asian and Pacific Islanders, and Native Americans.
Outreach program and review.-- ``(A) Outreach.--The Secretary shall publicize the availability to targeted underserved areas and applicants of grants and loans under this title and promote, to the maximum extent feasible, efforts to apply for those grants and loans.
Review.--Upon receipt of data from the 1990 decennial census, the Secretary shall conduct a review of any designations made under paragraph (1) and preferences given under paragraph (2) and the eligibility of communities and counties for such designation and preference, examining the effects of such data on such eligibility.
The Secretary shall submit to Congress, not later than 9 months after the availability of the data, a report regarding the review, which shall include any recommendations of the Secretary for modifications in the standards for designation and preference.
The Secretary shall also submit a report to Congress at any time between decennial census when recommendations for modification will promote targeting of assistance for underserved housing.
Set-aside for targeted underserved housing and colonias.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall set aside and reserve for assistance an amount not less than 5 percent but not greater than 10 percent in each fiscal year of the aggregate amount of lending authority under sections 502, 504, and 515.
During each fiscal year, the Secretary shall set aside an amount of section 521 rental assistance that is appropriate to provide assistance with respect to the appropriate lending authority set aside each year.
The Secretary shall also set aside a reasonable amount of assistance in other programs under this title if he/she deems necessary to provide for underserved housing.
The Secretary shall establish a procedure to reallocate any assistance set aside in any fiscal year for targeted underserved areas that has not been expended during a reasonable period in such year for use in (i) colonias that have applied for and are eligible for assistance under subparagraph (B) or paragraph (9) and did not receive assistance, and (ii) counties and communities eligible for designation as targeted underserved areas but which were not designated.
The procedure shall also provide that any assistance reallocated under the preceding sentence that has not been expended by a reasonable date established by the Secretary (which shall be after the expiration of the period referred to in the preceding sentence) shall be made available and allocated under the laws and regulations relating to such assistance, notwithstanding this subsection.
Length of designation.--In designating underserved areas under paragraph (1), each such area shall remain designated for a period of two years; except for counties which contain tribal allotted or Indian trust land which shall remain designated for three years.
Priority for colonias.-- ``(i) Notwithstanding the designation of counties and communities as targeted underserved areas under paragraph (1) and the provisions of section 520, colonias shall be eligible for assistance with amounts reserved under subparagraph (A), as provided in this subparagraph.
In providing assistance from amounts reserved under this paragraph in each fiscal year, the Secretary shall give priority to any application for assistance to be used in, or in close proximity to, and serving the residents of, a colonia located in a State described under clause (iii).
After the Secretary has provided assistance under the priority for colonias located in a State in amount equal to 10 percent of the total amount of assistance allocated under this title to such State in the fiscal year or an average size loan, whichever is greater, the priority shall not apply to any applications for colonias in such State.
This paragraph shall apply to any State for the total amount of assistance allocated to it under this title during each of such 2 fiscal years.
List of underserved areas.--The Secretary shall publish annually the current list of targeted underserved areas in the Federal Register.
Project preparation assistance.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall make grants to eligible applicants under subparagraph (D) to promote the development of affordable housing in targeted underserved areas and colonias.
Use.--A grant under this subparagraph shall not exceed an amount that the Secretary determines equal to the customary and reasonable costs incurred in preparing an application for a loan or a grant under section 502, 504, 514, 515, or 524 or a grant under section 516 or 533 (including preapplication planning, site analysis, market analysis and other necessary technical assistance).
The Secretary shall adjust the loan or grant amount under such sections to take account of project preparation costs that have been paid from grant proceeds under this paragraph and that normally would be reimbursed with proceeds of the loan or grant.
Approval.--The Secretary shall approve a properly submitted application or issue a written statement indicating the reasons for disapproval not later than 60 days after receipt of the application.
Eligibility.--For purpose of this paragraph, an eligible applicant may be a nonprofit organization or corporation, a community housing development organization, State, unit if general local government, or agency of a State or unit of general local government.
Availability of funding.--Any amounts appropriate to carry out this paragraph shall remain available until expended.
Priority for colonias.-- ``(A) In general.--In providing assistance under this title in any fiscal year described under paragraph (B), each State in which colonias are located shall give priority to any applications for assistance to be used in a colonia.
The priority under this subparagraph shall not apply in such State after 5 percent of the assistance available in such fiscal year has been allocated for colonias qualifying for the priority.
Covered years.--This paragraph shall apply to any fiscal year following 2 fiscal years in which the State did not obligate the total amount of assistance allocated it under this title during each of such 2 fiscal years.
Definition of colonia.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `colonia' means any identifiable community that-- ``(A) is in the State of Arizona, California, New Mexico or Texas; ``(B) is in the area of the United States within 150 miles of the border between United States and Mexico, except that the term does not include any standard metropolitan statistical areas that has a population exceeding 1,000,000; ``(C) is determined to be a colonia on the basis of objective criteria, including lack of potable water supply, lack of adequate sewage systems, and lack of decent, safe, and sanitary housing; and ``(D) was in existence as a colonia before the date of enactment of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act.''.
Section 515(s) of the Housing Act of 1949 (United States Code 1471 et seq.
), is amended to read as follows: ``(s) No fee other than a late fee or reasonable application fee not to exceed one-half of one percent of the proposed mortgage amount, may be imposed by or for the Secretary or any other Federal agency on or with respect to a loan made or insured under this section.
Such application fee will be used, in part, to defray the cost of professional market studies obtained by the Secretary to determine market feasibility.
Such application fee may be waived for non-profit applicants which are not receiving any tax credit benefits under section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code.