This Act may be cited as the ``Electric Reliability Act of 2004''.
Part II of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 824 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Bulk-power system.--The term `bulk-power system' means a network of interconnected transmission facilities and generating facilities.
Electric reliability organization.--The term `electric reliability organization' means a self-regulating organization certified by the Commission under subsection (c) the purpose of which is to promote the reliability of a bulk- power system.
Reliability standard.--The term `reliability standard' means a requirement to provide for reliable operation of a bulk-power system approved by the Commission under this section.
Jurisdiction and Applicability.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall have jurisdiction, within the United States, over each electric reliability organization, regional entity, and user, owner, and operator of a bulk-power system (including an entity described in section 201(f)), for the purpose of approving reliability standards and enforcing compliance with this section.
Compliance.--Each user, owner, and operator of the bulk-power system shall comply with reliability standards that take effect under this section.
Certification.-- ``(1) Final rule.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Commission shall promulgate a final rule to implement the requirements of this section.
Submission of application.--Following the promulgation of a Commission rule under paragraph (1), any person may submit an application to the Commission for certification as an electric reliability organization.
Requirements for certification.--The Commission may certify an applicant if the Commission determines that the applicant-- ``(A) has the ability to develop, and enforce, reliability standards that provide for an adequate level of reliability of the bulk-power system; ``(B) has established rules that-- ``(i) ensure the independence of the applicant from users, owners, and operators of the bulk-power system, while ensuring fair stakeholder representation in the selection of the directors of the applicant and balanced decisionmaking in any committee or subordinate organizational structure; ``(ii) allocate equitably dues, fees, and other charges among end users for all activities conducted under this section; ``(iii) provide fair and impartial procedures for enforcement of reliability standards through imposition of penalties (including limitations on activities, functions, or operations, or other appropriate sanctions); and ``(iv) provide for reasonable notice and opportunity for public comment, due process, openness, and balance of interests in developing reliability standards and otherwise exercising the duties of the applicant.
Multiple applications.--If the Commission receives 2 or more timely applications that satisfy the requirements of this subsection, the Commission shall approve only the application that the Commission concludes will best implement this section.
Reliability Standards.-- ``(1) Filing.--An electric reliability organization shall file a proposed reliability standard or modification to a reliability standard with the Commission.
Approval.-- ``(A) In general.--The Commission may approve a proposed reliability standard or modification to a reliability standard if the Commission determines that the standard is just, reasonable, not unduly discriminatory or preferential, and in the public interest.
Deferral to electric reliability organizations.--The Commission-- ``(i) shall give due weight to the technical expertise of the electric reliability organization with respect to the content of a proposed standard or modification to a reliability standard; but ``(ii) shall not defer with respect to the effect of the standard or modification on competition.
Rebuttable presumptions for interconnection-wide organizations.--The electric reliability organization and the Commission shall rebuttably presume that a proposal from a regional entity organized on an interconnection-wide basis for a reliability standard or modification to a reliability standard to be applicable on an interconnection-wide basis is just, reasonable, not unduly discriminatory or preferential, and in the public interest.
Disapproval.--The Commission shall remand to the electric reliability organization for further consideration a proposed reliability standard or a modification to a reliability standard that the Commission disapproves in whole or in part.
Mandatory submission.--The Commission, on its own motion or on complaint, may order an electric reliability organization to submit to the Commission a proposed reliability standard or a modification to a reliability standard that addresses a specific matter if the Commission considers such a new or modified reliability standard to be appropriate to carry out this section.
Enforcement.-- ``(1) Penalties by electric reliability organizations on users, owners, or operators.--An electric reliability organization may impose a penalty on a user, owner, or operator of a bulk-power system if the electric reliability organization, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing-- ``(A) finds that the user, owner, or operator of the bulk-power system has violated a reliability standard approved by the Commission under subsection (d); and ``(B) files notice with the Commission, which shall affirm, set aside, or modify the action.
Orders or penalties by commission on users, owners, or operators.--On its own motion or on complaint, the Commission may order compliance with a reliability standard, and may impose a penalty against a user, owner, or operator of a bulk-power system, if the Commission finds, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, that the user, owner, or operator of the bulk-power system has violated or threatens to violate a reliability standard.
Delegation to regional entity.-- ``(A) In general.--The Commission shall promulgate regulations authorizing the electric reliability organization to-- ``(i) enter into an agreement to delegate authority to a regional entity for the purpose of proposing and enforcing reliability standards (including related activities) if-- ``(I) the regional entity satisfies the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (c)(2); and ``(II) the agreement promotes effective and efficient administration of bulk-power system reliability; and ``(ii) modify the delegation.
Rebuttable presumptions for interconnection- wide organizations.--The electric reliability organization and the Commission shall rebuttably presume that a proposal for delegation to a regional entity organized on an interconnection-wide basis promotes effective and efficient administration of bulk-power system reliability and should be approved.
Direct delegation to regional entity.--The regulations may provide that the Commission may assign the authority of the electric reliability organization to enforce reliability standards directly to a regional entity consistent with this paragraph.
Compliance.--The Commission may take such action as is necessary or appropriate against the electric reliability organization or a regional entity to ensure compliance with a reliability standard or any Commission order affecting the electric reliability organization or regional entity.
Changes in Electricity Reliability Organization Rules.-- ``(1) Filing.--An electric reliability organization shall file with the Commission for approval any proposed rule or proposed rule change, accompanied by an explanation of the basis and purpose of the rule or change.
Commission initiative.--The Commission, on its own motion or complaint, may propose a change to the rules of the electric reliability organization.
Effective date.--A proposed rule or proposed rule change shall take effect on a finding by the Commission, after notice and opportunity for comment, that the change is just, reasonable, not unduly discriminatory or preferential, is in the public interest, and satisfies the requirements of subsection (c)(2).
Coordination With Canada and Mexico.-- ``(1) Recognition.--The electric reliability organization shall take all appropriate steps to gain recognition in Canada and Mexico.
International agreements.--The President shall, to the maximum extent practicable, enter into international agreements with the governments of Canada and Mexico to provide for effective compliance with reliability standards and the effectiveness of the electric reliability organization in the United States and Canada or Mexico.
Reliability Reports.--The electric reliability organization shall conduct periodic assessments of the reliability and adequacy of the interconnected bulk-power system in North America.
Savings Provisions.-- ``(1) Compliance.--The electric reliability organization shall have authority to develop and enforce compliance with standards for the reliable operation of only the bulk-power system.
Additional capacity; adequacy or safety.--This section does not provide the electric reliability organization or the Commission with the authority-- ``(A) to order the construction of additional generation or transmission capacity; or ``(B) to establish and enforce compliance with standards for adequacy or safety of electric facilities or services.
State action.--Nothing in this section preempts any authority of a State to take action to ensure the safety, adequacy, and reliability of electric service within that State, as long as the action is not inconsistent with any reliability standard.
Consistency with reliability standards.--Not later than 90 days after the filing of the application of the electric reliability organization or other affected party, and after notice and opportunity for comment, the Commission shall issue a final order determining whether a State action is inconsistent with a reliability standard, taking into consideration any recommendation of the electric reliability organization.
Stays.--The Commission, after consultation with the electric reliability organization, may stay the effectiveness of any State action, pending the issuance of a final order by the Commission.
Application of Antitrust Laws.-- ``(1) Definition of antitrust laws.--In this subsection: ``(A) In general.--The term `antitrust laws' has the meaning given the term in subsection (a) of the first section of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 12(a)).
Inclusion.--The term `antitrust laws' includes section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45), to the extent that section applies to unfair methods of competition.
Application.--To the extent undertaken to develop, implement, or enforce a reliability standard, each of the following activities shall not, in any action under the antitrust laws, be deemed illegal per se: ``(A) Activities undertaken by an electric reliability organization under this section.
Activities of a user, owner, or operator of the bulk-power system undertaken in good faith under the rules of an electric reliability organization.
Rule of reason.--In any action under the antitrust laws, an activity described in paragraph (2) shall be judged on the basis of the reasonableness of the activity, taking into account all relevant factors affecting competition and reliability.
Regional Advisory Bodies.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall establish a regional advisory body on the petition of at least \2/3\ of the States within a region that have more than \1/2\ of their electric loads served within the region.
Composition.--A regional advisory body-- ``(A) shall be composed of 1 member from each participating State in the region, appointed by the Governor of the State; and ``(B) may include representatives of agencies, States, and provinces outside the United States.
Advice.--A regional advisory body may provide advice to an electric reliability organization, a regional reliability entity, or the Commission regarding-- ``(A) the governance of an existing or proposed regional reliability entity within the same region; ``(B) whether a standard proposed to apply within the region is just, reasonable, not unduly discriminatory or preferential, and in the public interest; ``(C) whether fees proposed to be assessed within the region are just, reasonable, not unduly discriminatory or preferential, and in the public interest; and ``(D) any other responsibilities requested by the Commission.
Interconnection-wide basis.--The Commission may give deference to the advice of any such regional advisory body if the regional advisory board is organized on an interconnection- wide basis.
Nonapplication to Alaska and Hawaii.--This section does not apply to Alaska or Hawaii.