This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Payment for Quality and Value Act of 2003''.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS TO IMPROVE HEALTH CARE QUALITY AND REDUCE COSTS UNDER MEDICARE.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Demonstration project.--The term ``demonstration project'' means a demonstration project established by the Secretary under subsection (b)(1).
Low-cost high-quality state.--The term ``low-cost high- quality State'' means a State in the top quartile of cost and quality efficiency as measured by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services using 1999 program data.
Medicare beneficiary.--The term ``medicare beneficiary'' means an individual who is entitled to (or enrolled for) benefits under part A of the medicare program, enrolled for benefits under part B of the medicare program, or both (including an individual who is enrolled in a Medicare+Choice plan under part C of the medicare program).
Medicare program.--The term ``medicare program'' means the health benefits program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Demonstration Projects To Improve Health Care Quality and Reduce Costs Under Medicare.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established a demonstration program under which the Secretary shall establish demonstration projects in accordance with the provisions of this section for the purpose of improving the quality of care-- (A) provided to medicare beneficiaries with high- volume and high-cost conditions; and (B) for which payment is made under the medicare program.
Rewarding quality care.--Under the demonstration projects, the Secretary shall increase payments under the medicare program by an amount determined by the Secretary for purposes of the demonstration projects to health care providers (as defined by the Secretary) in low-cost high-quality States that demonstrate adherence to quality standards identified by the Secretary for purposes of the demonstration projects.
Conduct of Demonstration Projects.-- (1) Demonstration areas.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct demonstration projects in low-cost high-quality States selected on the basis of proposals submitted under subparagraph (B).
Each demonstration project shall be conducted on a statewide basis.
Proposals.--The Secretary shall accept proposals to establish the demonstration projects from entities that demonstrate an intent to include multiple public and private payers and a majority of practicing physicians in a low-cost high-quality State.
Duration.--The Secretary shall complete the demonstration projects by the date that is 5 years after the date on which the first demonstration project is implemented.
Report to Congress.--Not later than the date that is 6 months after the date on which the demonstration projects end, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the demonstration projects together with such recommendations for legislation or administrative action as the Secretary determines is appropriate.
Waiver of Medicare Requirements.--The Secretary shall waive compliance with such requirements of the medicare program to the extent and for the period the Secretary finds necessary to conduct the demonstration projects.
Funding.-- (1) Demonstration projects.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B) and paragraph (2), the Secretary shall provide for the transfer from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i) and Federal Supplementary Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395t), in such proportion as the Secretary determines appropriate, of such funds as are necessary for the costs of carrying out the demonstration projects under this section.
Limitation.--In conducting the demonstration projects under this section, the Secretary shall ensure that the aggregate payments made by the Secretary under the medicare program do not exceed the amount which the Secretary would have paid under the medicare program if the demonstration projects under this section were not implemented.
Evaluation and report.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for the purpose of developing and submitting the report to Congress under subsection (d).
INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE REPORT ON PAYMENT INCENTIVES AND PERFORMANCE UNDER THE MEDICARE+CHOICE PROGRAM.
Study.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall enter into an arrangement with the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences under which the Institute shall conduct a study on clinical outcomes, performance, and quality of care under the Medicare+Choice program under part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
Matters Studied.-- (1) In general.--In conducting the study under subsection (a), the Institute shall review and evaluate the public and private sector experience related to the establishment of performance measures and payment incentives.
The review shall include an evaluation of the success, efficiency, and utility of structural process and performance measurements, and different methodologies that link performance to payment incentives.
The review shall include the use of incentives-- (A) aimed at plans and their enrollees; (B) aimed at providers and their patients; (C) to encourage consumers to purchase based on quality and value; and (D) to encourage multiple purchasers, providers, beneficiaries, and plans within a community to work together to improve performance.
Identification of options.--As part of the study, the Institute shall identify options for providing incentives and rewarding performance, improve quality, outcomes, and efficiency in the delivery of programs and services under the Medicare+Choice program, including-- (A) periodic updates of performance measurements to continue rewarding outstanding performance and encourage improvements; (B) payments that vary by type of plan, such as preferred provider organization plans and MSA plans; (C) extension of incentives in the Medicare+Choice program to the fee for service program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act; and (D) performance measures needed to implement alternative methodologies to align payments with performance.
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Institute shall submit to Congress and the Secretary a report on the study conducted under subsection (a).