This Act may be cited as the ``National Center for Bioengineering Research Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Bioengineering is an interdisciplinary field that applies physical, chemical, and mathematical sciences and engineering principles to the study of biology, medicine, behavior, and health.
It advances knowledge from the molecular to the organ systems level, and develops new and novel biologics, materials, processes, implants, devices, and informatics approaches for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disease, for patient rehabilitation, and for improving health.
Efforts to reduce Federal budget deficits require that resources be managed in ways to maximize productivity.
As part of the NIH Revitalization Act of 1993, Congress asked for a report on the state of bioengineering research at the National Institutes of Health.
In 1994, as requested by the Congress, an External Consultants Committee submitted a report to the Director of the National Institutes of Health on support for bioengineering research.
In 1995, the Director of the National Institutes of Health submitted a report to Congress on Support for Bioengineering Research, that included recommendations for greater coordination of bioengineering research.
In 1996, an amendment to the National Institutes of Health Revitalization Act of 1996 directed the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the National Institutes of Health, to ``prepare and submit to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Commerce of the House of Representatives, a report containing specific plans and timeframes on how the Director will implement the findings and recommendations of the Report to Congress entitled Support for Bioengineering Research submitted to Congress in August 1995 in compliance with Public Law 103-43, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Revitalization Act of 1993, Section 1912''.
This legislation passed the Senate but was not acted upon by the House.
In the spring of 1997, the National Institutes of Health established the Bioengineering Consortium, with representation from each of the institutes, to advance bioengineering and its mission within the National Institutes of Health.
Legislation is needed to support and further the efforts already begun by the National Institutes of Health in order to maximize the health benefits for the American people.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTER FOR BIOENGINEERING RESEARCH.
In General.--Subpart 2 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR BIOENGINEERING RESEARCH.
Establishment.--The Director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute shall establish, within the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, a National Center for Bioengineering Research (in this section referred to as the `Center').
The Center shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed by the Director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
Purpose.--The purpose of the Center is to-- ``(1) promote basic research in bioengineering; and ``(2) establish an office to enhance the state of and improve coordination of bioengineering research conducted within the National Institutes of Health and throughout the Federal Government.
Duties.--The Center shall-- ``(1) enhance bioengineering research at the National Institutes of Health by-- ``(A) increasing the proportion of National Institutes of Health funds that are devoted to basic rather than applied bioengineering research; ``(B) improving the review of bioengineering grant applications; and ``(C) increasing intramural research in bioengineering; ``(2) convene a conference of bioengineering experts representing relevant Federal agencies, academia, and private sector entities to make recommendations to the Director of the Center regarding-- ``(A) setting the agenda of the Center; and ``(B) identifying promising research directions and emerging needs and opportunities in bioengineering research; ``(3) promote joint funding of collaborative bioengineering research projects conducted by the national research institutes and other agencies of the National Institutes of Health or conducted by any such institute and another Federal entity; ``(4) enhance communication among bioengineering investigators within Federal agencies and with private sector entities; ``(5) educate members of Congress and the public on the critical importance of bioengineering in enhancing the diagnosis and treatment of disease and strengthening the economy; ``(6) annually convene a group of bioengineering experts from Federal agencies and private sector entities to advise the Director of the Center; and ``(7) prepare and submit to Congress, through the Director of the National Institutes of Health, an annual report.
Limitation.--The Center may not use amounts provided under this section to award grants.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) For the center.--There is authorized to be appropriated $750,000 for each fiscal year for the general operation of the Center.
For general bioengineering activities.--There is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2007, to be allocated at the discretion of the Director of NIH among the bioengineering activities being carried out by the national research institutes and other agencies of the National Institutes of Health.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 401(b)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 281(b)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(F) The National Center for Bioengineering Research.