This Act may be cited as the ``Liberian Peace and Democracy Act''.
FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF POLICY.
Findings.--The Congress of the United States makes the following findings: (1) An estimated 150,000 people have died from war-related causes in the Liberian civil war begun in 1989, while an estimated 1,000,000 Liberians have been forced to flee to neighboring countries and many others displaced internally.
War crimes have been committed by all factions, including rape, torture, summary executions of innocent civilians, ritual murder, and cannibalism, with the goal of terrorizing the Liberian civilian population.
The Abuja Accord signed by Liberia's warring factions in August 1995 led to the creation of a Transitional Government after several years of fighting and political instability in Liberia.
The peace process has been derailed and the transitional arrangement disrupted when factional fighting erupted once again in the Liberian capital, Monrovia, in early April 1996.
The Economic Community Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), a West African peacekeeping force, originally intervened in August 1990 to stabilize the situation in Liberia.
ECOMOG forces have provided relative peace and stability intermittently to the capital, Monrovia, despite financial and logistical difficulties in a very hostile peacekeeping environment.
The United States Government has provided an estimated $5,000,000 in support of the ECOMOG's peacekeeping efforts over the past several years, $15 of which arrived in early February and has made commitments for additional $30,000,000.
The United States has provided over $100,000,000 in humanitarian and development assistance to Liberia since 1994.
The factional fighting that again erupted in the capital of Liberia in April 1996, has forced thousands to flee the capital to neighboring countries.
ECOMOG's failure to contain the April violence has been widely criticized by the international community, including the United States.
The United States evacuated an estimated 2,300 American and foreign nationals to neighboring countries during April's factional fighting in the Liberian capital.
United States troops entered Liberia on April 11, 1996, equipped for combat for the purpose of evacuating American citizens and to protect American embassy personnel and property.
An estimated 2,500 American troops are currently deployed in and near Liberia.
The governments of Cote d'Ivore, Burkina Faso, and Guinea have contributed to the political instability and violence in Liberia by providing financial, political, and material support to the Liberian factions since the war erupted in 1989.
The behavior of the above mentioned governments has directly contributed to the death, torture, and displacement of hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians.
The governments of the above mentioned countries have ignored pleas from the international community and the United States to cease their destructive activities.
The war crimes committed by all factions in Liberia are of such an egregious nature as to warrant total and complete isolation of those responsible for these crimes.
The United States and the international community should bring those responsible for war crimes to justice and prevent these individuals and their associates from holding positions of responsibility in government.
Statement of Policy.--It shall be the policy of the United States to help bring about lasting peace and stability in Liberia and to work toward establishing a just and democratic society.
3 REMOVING OBSTACLES TO PEACE AND STABILITY.
Policy Statement.--The governments of Cote d'Ivore, Burkina Faso, and Guinea have contributed to the continuing violence in Liberia by providing financial, political, and other types of assistance to Liberia's factions since the civil war erupted in 1989.
Authorization.--Not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall take the following measures against Cote d'Ivore, Burkina Faso, and Guinea: (1) Visa restrictions.--The Secretary of State shall deny a visa to, and the Attorney General shall exclude from the United States, any alien who the Secretary of State determines is a senior official, or a spouse, minor child, or agent of a senior official of such countries.
Denial of loans.--The President shall instruct the United States executive directors of international financial institutions to vote against any loans or grants for such countries.
Prohibition.--The President shall prohibit exporting or otherwise providing (by sale, lease or loan, grant, or other means), directly or indirectly, any defense articles or services, or licensing of defense articles or services under the Arms Export Control Act to such countries.
Waiver.--The President may waive any of the above mentioned measures if the President certifies to Congress that Cote d'Ivore, Burkina Faso, and Guinea have halted their assistance to Liberian factions, or upon an explicit finding that such measures would not be in the national interest of the United States.
Reporting Requirement.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees detailing the activities of the governments of Cote d'Ivore, Burkina Faso, and Guinea and the status of the Liberian civil war.
ENDING THE CIVIL WAR AND BRINGING WAR CRIMINALS TO JUSTICE.
Policy Statement.--It is the policy of the United States to help bring lasting peace to Liberia by-- (1) continuing financial, logistical, and technical support for peacekeeping purposes; (2) continuing humanitarian and development assistance through private and indigenous groups; (3) encouraging regional actors to become more actively engaged in Liberia to bring lasting peace; and (4) identifying and providing material assistance to groups in Liberia which are genuinely committed to restoring governance and effective rule of law.
Authority.--The President should use any measures necessary to bring to justice Liberian war criminals and their associates.
Request for Investigation.--The President should request the United Nations Security Council to investigate war crimes committed by any Liberian faction leaders (and their associates) who may be responsible for the eruption of violence and the continuation of the civil war.
Enforcement of United States Laws.--The President shall instruct all United States Government officials who engage in official contracts with the governments of Cote d'Ivore, Burkina Faso, or Guinea, to raise on a regular basis the extradition of or rendering to the United States all persons residing in such countries who are sought by the United States Department of Justice for crimes committed in the United States.
Blocking of Assets.--The President shall block all transactions in the United States of persons suspected to have committed war crimes in Cote d'Ivore, Burkina Faso, and Guinea.
The President shall seek the cooperation of other countries in blocking the assets of such individuals.
5 SENSE OF THE CONGRESS LAYING THE FOUNDATION FOR A DEMOCRATIC LIBERIA.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) The scheduled upcoming elections in Liberia should be postponed until demobilization disarmament of all faction leaders has occurred and a commitment to work with the democratic process.
The faction leaders should recommit themselves to the Abuja Accords.
The elections should be free and fair without violence and interference and intimidation.
The United States should provide technical assistance to Liberia in the areas of good governance, formation of a broad-based civilian led transitional government.
The international community should assist and aid Liberia to effectuate democratic reforms and institute elections at the appropriate time.