This Act may be cited as the ``Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians Land Exchange Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Since time immemorial, the ancestors of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians have lived in the Great Smoky Mountains of North Carolina.
The Eastern Band's ancestral homeland includes much of seven eastern States and the land that now constitutes the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
The Eastern Band has proposed a land exchange with the National Park Service and has spent over $1,500,000 for studies to thoroughly inventory the environmental and cultural resources of the proposed land exchange parcels.
Such land exchange would benefit the American public by enabling the National Park Service to acquire the Yellow Face tract, comprising 218 acres of land adjacent to the Blue Ridge Parkway.
Acquisition of the Yellow Face tract for protection by the National Park Service would serve the public interest by preserving important views for Blue Ridge Parkway visitors, preserving habitat for endangered species and threatened species including the northern flying squirrel and the rock gnome lichen, preserving valuable high altitude wetland seeps, and preserving the property from rapidly advancing residential development.
The proposed land exchange would also benefit the Eastern Band by allowing it to reclaim the Ravensford tract, comprising 144 acres adjacent to the Tribe's trust territory in Cherokee, North Carolina, and currently within the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
The Ravensford tract is part of the Tribe's ancestral homeland as evidenced by archaeological finds dating back no less than 6,000 years.
The Eastern Band has a critical need to replace the current Cherokee Elementary School, which was built by the Department of the Interior over 40 years ago with a capacity of 480 students.
The school now hosts 794 students in dilapidated buildings and mobile classrooms at a dangerous highway intersection in downtown Cherokee, North Carolina.
The Eastern Band ultimately intends to build a new three-school campus to serve as an environmental, cultural, and educational ``village,'' where Cherokee language and culture can be taught alongside the standard curriculum.
The land exchange and construction of this educational village will benefit the American public by preserving Cherokee traditions and fostering a vibrant, modern, and well-educated Indian nation.
The land exchange will also reunify tribal lands now separated between the Big Cove Community and the balance of the Qualla Boundary, reestablishing the territorial integrity of the Eastern Band.
The Ravensford tract contains no threatened species or endangered species listed pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
The 218-acre Yellow Face tract has a number of listed threatened species and endangered species and a higher appraised value than the 144-acre Ravensford tract.
The Congress and the Department of the Interior have approved land exchanges in the past when the benefits to the public and requesting party are clear, as they are in this case.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To acquire the Yellow Face tract for protection by the National Park Service, in order to preserve the Waterrock Knob area's spectacular views, pristine wetlands, and endangered species and threatened species from encroachment by housing development, for the benefit and enjoyment of the American public.
To transfer the Ravensford tract, to be held in trust by the Department of the Interior for the benefit of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, in order to provide for an education facility that promotes the cultural integrity of the Eastern Band and to reunify two Cherokee communities that were historically contiguous.
To promote cooperative activities and partnerships between the Eastern Band and the National Park Service within the Eastern Band's ancestral homelands.
In General.--Within 90 days after the effective date of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall exchange the Ravensford tract, currently in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, for the Yellow Face tract adjacent to the Waterrock Knob Visitor Center on the Blue Ridge Parkway.
Treatment of Exchanged Lands.--Effective upon receipt by the Secretary of a deed for the lands comprising the Yellow Face tract (as described in subsection (c)) to the United States, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the Ravensford tract, (as described in subsection (d)), including all improvements and appurtenances, are declared to be held in trust by the United States for the benefit of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians as part of the Cherokee Indian Reservation.
Yellow Face Tract.--To effectuate this land exchange, the Eastern Band shall cause the following lands to be deeded to the United States.
Parcels 88 and 89 of the Hornbuckle Tract, Yellow Face Section, Qualla Township, Jackson County, North Carolina, consisting respectively of 110.4 and 108.2 acres more or less, together with all improvements and appurtenances thereto.
The lands shall thereafter be included within the boundary of and managed as part of the Blue Ridge Parkway by the National Park Service.
Ravensford Tract.--The lands declared by subsection (b) to be held in trust for the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians are as follows: The tract currently located within the Great Smoky Mountains National Park and identified on Map No.
133/80020, entitled ``Ravensford Land Exchange Tract'', as on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, consisting of 144 acres more or less.
Legal Descriptions.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall file a legal description of the areas described in subsections (c) and (d) with the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Indian Affairs and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Such legal descriptions shall have the same force and effect as if the information contained in the description were included in those subsections except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal descriptions.
The legal descriptions shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the National Park Service and the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Government-to-Government Agreements.--In order to fulfill the purposes of this Act and to establish cooperative partnerships for purposes of this Act the Director of the National Park Service and the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians shall enter into government-to- government consultations and shall develop protocols to review planned construction on the Ravensford tract.
The Director of the National Park Service is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with the Eastern Band for the purpose of providing training, management, protection, and preservation of the natural and cultural resources on the Ravensford tract.
Construction Standards.--The National Park Service and the Eastern Band shall develop mutually agreed upon standards for size, impact, and design of construction consistent with the purposes of this Act on the Ravensford tract.
The standards shall be consistent with the Eastern Band's need to develop educational facilities and support infrastructure adequate for current and future generations and shall otherwise minimize or mitigate any adverse impacts on natural or cultural resources.
The standards shall be based on recognized best practices for environmental sustainability and shall be reviewed periodically and revised as necessary.
All development on the Ravensford tract shall be conducted in a manner consistent with such standards.
Tribal Employment.--In employing individuals to perform any construction, maintenance, interpretation, or other service in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, the Secretary of the Interior shall, insofar as practicable, give first preference to qualified members of the Eastern Band.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to satisfy the terms for an exception under section 20(b)(1) of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 United States Code 2719(b)(1)) to the prohibition on gaming on lands acquired by the Secretary of the Interior in trust for the benefit of an Indian tribe after October 17, 1988, under section 20(a) of such Act (25 United States Code 2719(a)).