This Act may be cited as the ``Medication Errors Reduction Act of 2001''.
INFORMATICS SYSTEMS GRANT PROGRAM FOR HOSPITALS AND SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a program to make grants to eligible entities that have submitted applications in accordance with subsection (b) for the purpose of assisting such entities in offsetting the costs related to purchasing, leasing, developing, and implementing standardized clinical health care informatics systems designed to improve patient safety and reduce adverse events and health care complications resulting from medication errors.
Duration.--The authority of the Secretary to make grants under this section shall terminate on September 30, 2011.
Costs defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``costs'' shall include total expenditures incurred for-- (A) purchasing, leasing, and installing computer software and hardware, including handheld computer technologies; (B) making improvements to existing computer software and hardware; (C) purchasing or leasing communications capabilities necessary for clinical data access, storage, and exchange; and (D) providing education and training to eligible entity staff on computer patient safety information systems.
Eligible entity defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means the following entities: (A) Hospital.--A hospital (as defined in section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(e))).
Skilled nursing facility.--A skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 1819(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395i-3(e))).
Application.--An eligible entity seeking a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form and manner, and containing such information as the Secretary specifies.
Special Considerations and Rural Hospital Reserve.-- (1) Special consideration for eligible entities that serve a large number of medicare, medicaid, and schip eligible individuals.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give special consideration to eligible entities in which individuals that are eligible for benefits under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, the medicaid program under title XIX of such Act, or under the State children's health insurance program under title XXI of such Act make up a high percentage of the total patient population of the entity.
Reserve 20 percent of grant funds for rural hospitals.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (C), the Secretary shall ensure that at least 20 percent of the funds available for making grants under this section are used for making grants to eligible entities that are rural hospitals.
Rural hospital defined.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ``rural hospital'' means a hospital that-- (i) is located in a rural area (as such term is defined for purposes of section 1886(d) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(d))); (ii) is located in an area designated by any law or regulation of the State as a rural area; or (iii) is designated by the State as a rural hospital.
Availability of reserve funds if limited number of rural hospitals apply for grants.--If the Secretary estimates that the amount of funds reserved under subparagraph (A) for hospitals described in such subparagraph exceeds the maximum amount of funds permitted for such hospitals under subsection (d), the Secretary may reduce the amount reserved for such hospitals by an amount equal to such excess and use such funds for awarding grants to other eligible entities.
Special consideration for compliance with recommended standards.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give special consideration to eligible entities for grants that are intended to comply with the requirements referred to in paragraph (1)(B) of section 3(c) (relating to interoperability standardization, common medical technology (lexicon), and records security) that are recommended under such section.
Limitation on Amount of Grant.-- (1) In general.--A grant awarded under this section may not exceed the lesser of-- (A) an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the costs incurred by the eligible entity for the project for which the entity is seeking funding under this section; or (B) in the case of a grant made to a-- (i) hospital, $750,000; or (ii) skilled nursing facility, $200,000.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the term ``applicable percentage'' means, with respect to an eligible entity, the percentage of total net revenues for such period as determined appropriate by the Secretary for the entity that consists of net revenues from the medicare and medicaid programs or the State children's health insurance program under titles XVIII, XIX, and XXI of the Social Security Act.
Eligible Entity Required To Furnish Secretary With Information.--An eligible entity receiving a grant under this section shall furnish the Secretary with such information as the Secretary may require to-- (1) evaluate the project for which the grant is made; and (2) ensure that funding provided under the grant is expended for the purposes for which it is made.
Reports.-- (1) Interim reports.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall submit, at least annually, a report to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate on the grant program established under this section.
Contents.--A report submitted pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall include information on-- (i) the number of grants made; (ii) the nature of the projects for which funding is provided under the grant program; (iii) the geographic distribution of grant recipients; and (iv) such other matters as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Final report.--Not later than 180 days after the completion of all of the projects for which a grant is made under this section, the Secretary shall submit a final report to the committees referred to in paragraph (1)(A) on the grant program established under this section, together with such recommendations for legislation and administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Authorization.-- (A) Hospitals.--There are authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i) $93,000,000, for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2011, for the purpose of making grants under this section to eligible entities that are hospitals.
Skilled nursing facilities.--There are authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i) $4,500,000, for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2011, for the purpose of making grants under this section to eligible entities that are skilled nursing facilities.
Availability.--Any amounts appropriated pursuant to the authority contained in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, through September 30, 2011.
MEDICAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ADVISORY BOARD.
Establishment.--No later than three months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall appoint a board to be known as the ``Medical Information Technology Advisory Board'' (in this section referred to as the ``MITAB'').
The Secretary shall designate one member as chairman and one as vice chairman.
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The MITAB shall consist of 17 members that include-- (A) experts from the fields of medical information, information technology, medical continuous quality improvement, medical records security and privacy, individual and institutional health care clinical providers, health researchers, and health care purchasers; (B) one or more Members of the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics and one or more Members of the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission or its staff; and (C) one or more staff experts from the National Library of Medicine, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Terms; etc.--The provisions of paragraphs (3) through (8) of section 4021(c) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 shall apply to the MITAB in the same manner as they applied to the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare.
Duties.-- (1) Initial report.--No later than 30 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the MITAB shall submit to Congress a report on the following: (A) The best current practices in medical information technology.
The requirements to be established (after appropriate development and testing) for-- (i) health care information technology interoperability standardization, (ii) common medical terminology (lexicon), and (iii) records security.
Certification of compliance with MITAB requirements, so that the goal of confidential information exchange among health care providers may be promoted and so that long-term compatibility among information systems is maximized, in order to promote one or more of the goals described in subsection (d).
Subsequent reports.--During the 6 years after the year in which the report is submitted under paragraph (1), the MITAB shall submit to Congress reports, every 24 months, relating to additional recommendations, best practices, results of information technology improvements financed under grants under section 2, and such other matters as may help ensure the most rapid dissemination of best practices in health care information technology.
Goals.--The goals described in this subsection are the following: (1) To maximize positive outcomes in clinical care-- (A) by providing decision support for diagnosis and care; and (B) by assisting in the emergency treatment of a patient presenting at a facility where there is no medical record of the patient.
To contribute to (and be consistent with) the development of the patient assessment instrument provided for under section 545 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as enacted into law by section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554), and to assist in minimizing the need for new and different records as patients move from provider to provider.
To reduce or eliminate the need for redundant records, paperwork, and the repetitive taking of patient histories and administering of tests.
To minimize medical errors, such as administration of contraindicated drugs.
To promote and ensure access to best practices of medicine through support of research across institutions.
To provide a compatible information technology architecture that facilitates future quality and cost-saving needs and that avoids the financing and development of information technology systems that are not readily compatible.
Staff and Administration.--The provisions of section 4021(d) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 shall apply to the MITAB in the same manner as they applied to the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare.
Powers.--The provisions of section 4021(e) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 shall apply to the MITAB in the same manner as they applied to the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare.
Termination.--The MITAB shall terminate 30 days after the date of submission of its final report under subsection (c)(2).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $2,500,000 in fiscal year 2002, $8,000,000 in fiscal year 2003, and $9,500,000 in fiscal year 2004 to carry out this section.
The full amount of such appropriation shall be payable from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i).
Funding for the reports provided under subsection (c)(2) shall be from funds appropriated for the administrative budget of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.