This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Facilities Clean Water Compliance Act of 1997''.
APPLICATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS TO FEDERAL FACILITIES.
Section 313(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1323(a)) is amended by striking the third sentence and all that follows through the period at the end of the last sentence and inserting the following: ``The Federal, State, interstate, and local substantive and procedural requirements, administrative authority, and process and sanctions referred to in this subsection include, but are not limited to, all administrative orders and all civil and administrative penalties and fines, regardless of whether such penalties or fines are punitive or coercive in nature or are imposed for isolated, intermittent, or continuing violations.
The United States hereby expressly waives any immunity otherwise applicable to the United States with respect to any such requirement, administrative authority, and process and sanctions (including, but not limited to, any injunctive relief, administrative order or civil or administrative penalty or fine referred to in the preceding sentence, or reasonable service charge).
The reasonable service charges referred to in this subsection include, but are not limited to, fees or charges assessed in connection with the processing and issuance of permits, renewal of permits, amendments to permits, review of plans, studies, and other documents, and inspection and monitoring of facilities, as well as any other nondiscriminatory charges that are assessed in connection with a Federal, State, interstate, or local water pollution regulatory program.
No agent, employee, or officer of the United States shall be personally liable for any civil penalty under any Federal, State, interstate, or local water pollution law with respect to any act or omission within the scope of the official duties of the agent, employee, or officer.
An agent, employee, or officer of the United States shall be subject to any criminal sanction (including, but not limited to, any fine or imprisonment) under any Federal or State water pollution law, but no department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the Federal Government shall be subject to any such sanction.''.
Section 309 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1319) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Federal Facility Enforcement.-- ``(1) Compliance orders.-- ``(A) In general.--Whenever on the basis of any information available to him-- ``(i) the Administrator determines that any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States has violated or is in violation of section 301, 302, 306, 307, 308, 311, 318, or 405 of this Act, or has violated or is in violation of any permit condition or limitation implementing any such section in a permit issued under section 402 of this Act by the Administrator or by a State, or in a permit issued under section 404 of this Act by a State, or any requirement imposed in a pretreatment program approved under section 402(a)(3) or 402(b)(8) of this Act, or any requirement imposed under section 402(b)(9) of this Act; ``(ii) the Secretary of the Army determines that any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States has violated or is in violation of section 301 with regard to discharges of dredged or fill material or any condition or limitation in a permit issued under section 404 of this Act; and ``(iii) the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating determines that any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States has violated any provision of section 311 of this Act or any of its implementing regulations; the Administrator or Secretary, as applicable, may issue an order to assess an administrative penalty for any past or current violation or require compliance or correction of any past or current violation immediately or within a specified time period, or both.
Required terms.--Any order issued under this subsection-- ``(i) by the Administrator may include a suspension or revocation of any permit issued by the Administrator or a State under sections 402 and 404 of this Act; and ``(ii) by the Secretary of the Army may include a suspension or revocation of any permit issued by the Secretary of the Army under section 404 of this Act; and shall state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation.
Any penalty assessed in the order shall not exceed $25,000 per day for each violation.
Public hearing.--Any order under this section shall become final unless, not later than 30 days after the order is served, a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States named therein requests a public hearing.
Upon such request, the Administrator or Secretary, as applicable, shall promptly conduct a public hearing.
Such public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 554 of title 5, United States Code.
In connection with any proceeding under this subsection, the Administrator or Secretary may issue subpoenas for the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers, books, and documents and may promulgate rules for discovery procedures.
Violation of compliance orders.--If a violator fails to take corrective action within the time specified in an order issued under paragraph (1)-- ``(A) the Administrator or Secretary, as applicable, may assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day of continued noncompliance with the order; and ``(B)(i) the Administrator may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to section 402 or 404 of this Act which is the subject of the order, whether issued by the Administrator or the State; and ``(ii) the Secretary of the Army may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to section 404 of this Act.
Determination of amount of penalty.--In determining the amount of any penalty assessed under this subsection, the Administrator or Secretary, as the case may be, shall consider the seriousness of each violation or violations, the violator's economic benefit or savings (if any) resulting from each violation, any history of prior violations, any good-faith efforts to avoid noncompliance or to comply with the applicable requirements, the violator's ability to pay the penalty, and such other matters in mitigation and aggravation as justice may require.
Emergency orders at federal facilities.--The Administrator may issue an emergency administrative order to, and assess an administrative penalty for violations of the order against, a Federal agency under the same circumstances as an emergency order may be issued to, and such penalty for violation of such order may be assessed, against any other person under this title.
Consultation with the administrator.--No administrative order, including any emergency order or field citation, issued to a Federal department, agency or instrumentality under this subsection shall become final until such department, agency, or instrumentality has had the opportunity to confer with the Administrator.
Existing compliance orders.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter, modify, or change in any manner any Federal facility compliance agreement, permit, administrative order or judicial order that is in effect on the effective date of this subsection.
Actions and rights of interested persons.--No administrative action which has been commenced by the Administrator or the Secretary under this subsection with respect to a violation shall preclude a civil enforcement action under section 505 of this Act for the same violation or violations.
Special rules.-- ``(A) Public notice.--Before issuing an order under this subsection, the Administrator or Secretary, as the case may be, shall provide public notice of and reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed issuance of such order.
Presentation of evidence.--Any person who comments on a proposed order under this subsection shall be given notice of any hearing held under paragraph (2) and the order.
In any hearing held under this subsection, such person shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard and to present evidence.
Rights of interested persons to a hearing.-- If no hearing is held under paragraph (2), any person who commented on the proposed order may petition, within 30 days after the issuance of such order, the Administrator or Secretary, as the case may be, to set aside such order and to provide a hearing on the order.
If the evidence presented by the petitioner in support of the petition is material and was not considered in the issuance of the order, the Administrator or Secretary shall immediately set aside such order and provide a hearing in accordance with paragraph (2).
The affected Federal department, agency, or instrumentality shall be given notice of any hearing and shall be permitted to participate in such hearing.
If the Administrator or Secretary denies a hearing under this subparagraph, the Administrator shall provide to the petitioner and to the affected Federal department, agency, or instrumentality, and publish in the Federal Register, notice of and the reasons for such denial.
Finality of order.--An order issued under this subsection shall become final 30 days after its issuance unless the order is withdrawn or a hearing is requested under paragraph (2) or (5).
If such a hearing is denied, such order shall become final 30 days after such denial.
If such a hearing is granted, the order shall become final 30 days after the decision to uphold the order or to issue a new order.
Citizen's civil action.--Any person may commence a civil action on his or her own behalf against-- ``(A) any Federal agency that is alleged to have violated or to be in violation of any order issued by the Administrator or the Secretary under this title; or ``(B) any Federal agency that fails, within 1 year of the effective date of a final order, to pay a penalty assessed by the Administrator or the Secretary under this subsection.''.
DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF CIVIL PENALTIES.
The second sentence of section 309(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1319(d)) is amended by inserting ``the amount of any penalty previously imposed on the violator by a court or administrative agency for the same violation or violations,'' after ``economic impact of the penalty on the violator,''.
General Definitions.--Section 502(5) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1362(5)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``and includes any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States''.
Oil and Hazardous Substance Liability Program.--Section 311(a)(7) of such Act (33 United States Code 1321(a)(7)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``and any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States''.
DEFINITION OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL.
Section 502 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1362) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(21) The term `radioactive materials' includes source materials, special nuclear materials, and byproduct materials (as such terms are defined under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954) which are used, produced, or managed at facilities not licensed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.