This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Adjustment Assistance for Self-Employment Act of 2003''.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT FOR SELF-EMPLOYMENT TRAINING AND ASSISTANCE UNDER THE TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
Establishment of Project.--Subchapter C of chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2311 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 246 the following new section: ``SEC.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT FOR SELF-EMPLOYMENT TRAINING AND ASSISTANCE.
In General.-- ``(1) Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Trade Adjustment Assistance for Self- Employment Act of 2003, the Secretary shall establish an alternative trade adjustment assistance program for workers that provides the benefits described in paragraph (2).
Benefits.-- ``(A) Training.--A State shall use the funds provided to the State under section 241 to provide, for a period not to exceed 2 years, to a worker described in paragraph (3)(B), self-employment training.
Payment for start-up costs.--A State shall use the funds provided to the State under section 241 to provide to a worker described in paragraph (3)(B) who successfully completes the self-employment training described in subparagraph (A), and for which a self- employment business plan described in paragraph (3)(B)(ii) is approved, an amount to pay, in whole or in part, the start up costs attributable to the business enterprise of the individual.
Eligibility.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall provide the opportunity for 1 or more workers in a group of workers on whose behalf a petition is filed under section 221 to request that the individual workers be certified for the alternative trade adjustment assistance program under this section at the time the petition is filed.
The Secretary shall determine whether the individual workers in the group are eligible for the alternative trade adjustment assistance program by the date specified in section 223(a).
Individual eligibility.--A worker that the Secretary has certified as eligible for the alternative trade adjustment assistance program under subparagraph (A) may elect to receive benefits under the alternative trade adjustment assistance program if the worker-- ``(i) is covered by a certification under subchapter A of this chapter; ``(ii) agrees to submit to the appropriate State agency for approval a self-employment business plan; ``(iii) is likely to obtain self-employment in accordance with such plan not later than 26 weeks after the date of separation from the adversely affected employment; ``(iv) is likely to be engaged in self- employment on a full-time basis; and ``(v) is likely not to return to the employment from which the worker was separated.
Total amount of payments.-- ``(A) Training.--The amount of payments described in paragraph (2)(A) made on behalf of a worker may not exceed $2,500 per worker during the 2-year eligibility period.
Start-up costs.--The amount of payments described in paragraph (2)(B) made to a worker may not exceed $10,000 per worker during the 2-year eligibility period.
Limitation on other benefits.--Except as provided in section 238(a)(2)(B), if a worker is receiving payments pursuant to the program established under paragraph (1), the worker shall not be eligible to receive any other benefits under this title.
Termination.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), no payments may be made by a State under the program established under subsection (a)(1) after the date that is 5 years after the date on which such program is implemented by the State.
Exception.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), a worker receiving payments under the program established under subsection (a)(1) on the termination date described in paragraph (1) shall continue to receive such payments provided that the worker meets the criteria described in subsection (a)(3)(B).
Definition.--In this section, the term `self-employment training' means entrepreneurial training, business counseling, technical assistance, and related activities, including training and services provided by federally-funded resource partners of the Small Business Administration, that are engaged in for the purpose of establishing a business and becoming self-employed, as approved by the appropriate State agency, or the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator of the Small Business Administration.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by striking the second item relating to section 246 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Demonstration project for self-employment training and assistance.''.
BENEFIT INFORMATION TO WORKERS.
Section 225(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2275(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``In providing full information to workers about benefit allowances, training, and other employment services available under this chapter in accordance with this subsection, the Secretary shall include information on the demonstration project for self-employment training and assistance under section 246A.