This Act may be cited as the ``Peopling of America Museum Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The history of the United States is in large measure the history of how the United States was populated.
The evolution of the American population is broadly termed the ``peopling of America'' and is characterized by the movement of groups of people across external and internal boundaries of the United States as well as by the interactions of the groups with each other.
Each of the groups has made unique, important contributions to American history, culture, art, and life.
The spiritual, intellectual, cultural, political, and economic vitality of the United States is a result of the pluralism and diversity of the population.
The Smithsonian Institution operates 16 museums and galleries, a zoological park, and 5 major research facilities.
None of these public entities is a national institution dedicated to presenting the history of the peopling of the United States, as described in paragraph (2).
The respective missions of the National Museum of American History of the Smithsonian Institution and the Ellis Island Immigration Museum of the National Park Service limit the ability of those museums to present fully and adequately the history of the diverse population and rich cultures of the United States.
The absence of a national facility dedicated solely to presenting the history of the peopling of the United States restricts the ability of the citizens of the United States to fully understand the rich and varied heritage of the United States derived from the unique histories of many peoples from many lands.
The establishment of a Peopling of America Museum to conduct educational and interpretive programs on the multiethnic and multiracial character of the history of the United States will assist in inspiring and better informing the citizens of the United States concerning the rich and diverse cultural heritage of the citizens.
In this Act: (1) Chairperson.--The term ``Chairperson'' means the Chairperson of the Committee.
Committee.--The term ``Committee'' means the Advisory Committee on American Cultural Heritage established under section 7(a).
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Museum.
Museum.--The term ``Museum'' means the National Museum for the Peopling of America established under section 4(a).
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM FOR THE PEOPLING OF AMERICA.
Establishment.--There is established within the Smithsonian Institution a facility that shall be known as the ``National Museum for the Peopling of America''.
Purposes of the Museum.--The purposes of the Museum are-- (1) to promote knowledge of the life, art, culture, and history of the many groups of people who comprise the citizens of the United States; (2) to illustrate how such groups cooperated, competed, or otherwise interacted with each other; and (3) to explain how the diverse, individual experiences of each group collectively helped forge a unified national experience.
Components of the Museum.--The Museum shall include-- (1) a location for permanent and temporary exhibits depicting the historical process by which the United States was populated; (2) a center for research and scholarship relating to the life, art, culture, and history of the groups of people of the United States; (3) a repository for the collection, study, and preservation of artifacts, artworks, and documents relating to the diverse population of the United States; (4) a venue for public education programs designed to explicate the multicultural past and present of the United States; (5) a location for the development of a standardized index of documents, artifacts, and artworks in collections that are held by the Smithsonian Institution, classified in a manner consistent with the purposes of the Museum; (6) a clearinghouse for information on documents, artifacts, and artworks relating to the groups of people of the United States that may be available to researchers, scholars, or the general public through non-Smithsonian collections, such as documents, artifacts, and artworks relating to the groups that are held by-- (A) other Federal agencies; (B) other museums; (C) universities; (D) individuals; and (E) foreign institutions; (7) a folklife center committed to highlighting the cultural expressions of various groups of people within the United States; (8) a center to promote mutual understanding and tolerance among the groups of people of the United States through exhibits, films, brochures, and other appropriate means; (9) an oral history library developed through interviews with volunteers, including visitors; (10) a location for a visitor center that shall provide individually tailored orientation guides for visitors to all Smithsonian Institution facilities; (11) a location for the training of museum professionals and others in the arts, humanities, and sciences with respect to museum practices relating to the life, art, history, and culture of the various groups of people of the United States; and (12) a location for developing, testing, demonstrating, evaluating, and implementing new museum-related technologies that assist in fulfilling the purposes of the Museum, enhance the operation of the Museum, and improve the accessibility of the Museum.
Location.--The Museum shall be located-- (1) in a facility of the Smithsonian Institution that is, or is not, in existence on the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) on or near the National Mall located in the District of Columbia.
Construction.--The Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution may plan, design, reconstruct, or construct appropriate facilities to house the Museum.
In General.-- (1) Appointments.--The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution shall appoint and fix the compensation and duties of-- (A) a Director, Assistant Director, Secretary, and Chief Curator of the Museum; and (B) any other officers and employees that are necessary for the operation of the Museum.
Qualifications.--Each individual appointed under paragraph (1) shall be an individual who is qualified through experience and training to perform the duties of the office to which that individual is appointed.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution may-- (1) appoint the Director and 5 employees under subsection (a), without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service; and (2) fix the pay of the Director and the 5 employees, without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON AMERICAN CULTURAL HERITAGE.
Establishment of Advisory Committee.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established an advisory committee to be known as the ``Advisory Committee on American Cultural Heritage''.
Membership.-- (A) Composition.--The Committee shall be composed of 15 members, who shall-- (i) be appointed by the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution; (ii) have expertise in immigration history, ethnic studies, museum science, or any other academic or professional field that involves matters relating to the cultural heritage of the citizens of the United States; and (iii) reflect the diversity of the citizens of the United States.
Initial appointments.--The initial appointments of the members of the Committee shall be made not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Period of appointment; vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Committee.
Any vacancy in the Committee shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Committee have been appointed, the Committee shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairperson, but shall meet not less frequently than 2 times each fiscal year.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The Committee shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
Duties of the Committee.--The Committee shall advise the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution and the Director concerning policies and programs affecting the Museum.
Committee Personnel Matters.-- (1) Compensation of members.-- (A) Non-federal members.--Each member of the Committee who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Committee.
Federal members.--Members of the Committee who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Committee.
Staff.-- (A) In general.--The Chairperson may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Committee to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Committee.
Compensation.--The Chairperson may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Committee without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.