This Act may be cited as the ``White House Commission on National Military Appreciation Month Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The vigilance of the United States Armed Forces, past and present, has been instrumental to the preservation of the freedom, security, and prosperity that the United States enjoys.
The vigilance and capabilities of the United States Armed Forces depend on the dedicated service of its members, their families, and the civilian employees of the Department of Defense and United States Coast Guard.
The role of the United States as a world leader, and the global scope that such role imparts to our Nation's interests, requires a military force that is well-trained, well-equipped, and appropriately sized.
For such a force to be fielded, the young men and women of the United States must possess a commitment to military service that is sufficient to achieve the levels of recruitment and retention of enlisted, officer, and civilian personnel necessary for sustaining the strength, vitality, and character of the United States Armed Forces.
To foster and sustain such a commitment, it is vital for youth in the United States to understand that the service provided by members of the United States Armed Forces is an honorable legacy that has protected the freedoms that are enjoyed by United States citizens and citizens of many other nations.
The Federal Government has a responsibility to raise awareness of and respect for this aspect of our national heritage and to encourage citizens to dedicate themselves to the values and principles for which Americans have served and sacrificed throughout our history.
Service in the United States Armed Forces entails special sacrifices and hazards.
The special duties required of those who serve in the United States Armed Forces demand special sacrifices from the families of service members, and the support of the families is an essential force multiplier that enhances the effectiveness and capabilities of the United States Armed Forces.
The Nation's observance of events recognizing the contributions of the Armed Forces is a tangible and highly effective way of sustaining morale and improving quality of life for the military family.
Senate Resolution 33 (106th Congress, 1st session), a resolution entitled ``Senate Resolution Designating May 1999 as `National Military Appreciation Month''', agreed to on April 30, 1999, called on the people of the United States, in a symbolic act of unity, to observe a National Military Appreciation Month in May 1999, to honor the service men and women of the United States past and present, including those who have died in the pursuit of freedom and peace.
It is important for the relevance of the history and activities of the United States Armed Forces to be emphasized to current and future citizens of the United States through an annual National Military Appreciation Month that includes associated local and national observances and activities.
ESTABLISHMENT OF WHITE HOUSE COMMISSION ON NATIONAL MILITARY APPRECIATION MONTH.
It is the sense of Congress that the President should establish a commission known as the ``White House Commission on National Military Appreciation Month'' to make recommendations to the President on the proclamation of ``National Military Appreciation Month'' to be celebrated in the month of May each year.
Recommendations.--The White House Commission on National Military Appreciation Month, if established pursuant to this Act, shall submit to the President its recommendations on actions that should be taken to-- (1) foster public service and civic virtue on the part of the people of the United States by-- (A) inspiring respect and understanding for the spirit of America; (B) recognizing the many sacrifices made by members of the United States Armed Forces and the members of their families; (C) recognizing the importance of maintaining a strong, well-equipped, educated, and trained military force for the United States to safeguard peace and freedom; (D) encouraging the citizens of the United States to take pride in the United States Armed Forces for the protection and service that the Armed Forces provide; (E) recognizing and honoring the dedication and commitment of members of the United States Armed Forces, and expressing appreciation for all contributions made by the members of the Armed Forces throughout the history of the United States; and (F) promoting education of America's youth that focuses on the history and world role of the United States Armed Forces; (2) inspire national, State, local, and tribal participation in the commemoration of the United States Armed Forces throughout the year in celebrations of National Military Appreciation Month and patriotic and military commemorative days, such as Flag Day, D-day, Veterans Day, and Pearl Harbor Day, by-- (A) encouraging the participation of diverse entities including-- (i) national humanitarian and patriotic organizations; (ii) elementary, secondary, and higher education institutions; (iii) veterans' societies and civic, patriotic, educational, sporting, artistic, cultural, and historical organizations; (iv) Federal departments and agencies; and (v) museums, including cultural and historical museums; and (B) recommending appropriate activities to observe National Military Appreciation Month and patriotic and military commemorative days including-- (i) the production, publication, and distribution of books, pamphlets, films, and other educational materials; (ii) bibliographical and documentary projects and publications; (iii) conferences, convocations, lectures, seminars, and other similar programs; (iv) the development of exhibits for libraries, museums, and other appropriate institutions; (v) ceremonies and celebrations commemorating specific events that relate to the establishment of the Armed Forces of the United States and the history of the Armed Forces participation in wars and other hostilities; (vi) competitions, commissions, and awards regarding historical, scholarly, artistic, literary, musical, and other works, programs, and projects related to such commemorations; (vii) recommendations to appropriate agencies or advisory bodies regarding the issuance by the United States of commemorative coins, medals, and stamps relating to National Military Appreciation Month and other military commemorative events; and (viii) recommendations for any legislation or administrative action that the Commission determines to be appropriate regarding the commemoration of National Military Appreciation Month and other military commemorative events; and (3) provide national coordination for the observance of National Military Appreciation Month.
Annual Report.-- (1) Requirement for report.--For each fiscal year in which the Commission carries out activities pursuant to this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President and Congress a report describing the activities.
Content.--The report under paragraph (1) shall include-- (A) an accounting of funds received and expended by the Commission in the fiscal year, including a detailed description of the sources and amounts of any donations of funds accepted by the Commission under any authority granted to the Commission by the President; and (B) a description of cooperative agreements and contracts entered into by the Commission under any authority granted to the Commission by the President.
It is the sense of Congress that any White House Commission on National Military Appreciation Month should be composed of the following members: (1) Five members appointed by the President, including at least 1 representative of tribal organizations (as defined in section 4(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(l))).
The Secretary of Defense.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.
The Director of the Office of Personnel Management.
The Administrator of General Services.
The Secretary of Transportation.
The Secretary of Education.
The Secretary of the Interior.
The Secretary of State.
The Executive Director of the President's Commission on White House Fellows.
The Secretary of the Army.
The Secretary of the Navy.
The Secretary of the Air Force.
The Commandant of the Marine Corps.
The Commandant of the Coast Guard.
The Chief of Staff of the Army.
The Chief of Naval Operations.
The Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
Any other persons appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the Commission.
SPIRIT OF AMERICA ALLIANCE.
Establishment.--It is the sense of Congress that, if the President establishes the White House Commission on National Military Appreciation Month, the President should also establish an alliance to be known as the ``Spirit of America Alliance'' that is composed of individuals, appointed by the Commission, who are representatives or members of-- (1) the print, broadcast, or other media industry; (2) the national sports community; (3) the recreation industry; (4) the entertainment industry; (5) the retail industry; (6) the food industry; (7) the health care industry; (8) the transportation industry; (9) the education community; (10) national veterans organizations; (11) families that have lost loved ones in combat or to terrorist acts; (12) the nonprofit community; and (13) honorary, nonvoting members appointed by the Commission.
Duties.--The Alliance shall assist the Commission-- (1) in the planning, organization, and conduct of an annual White House Conference on National Military Appreciation Month and other similar events; (2) in the promotion of the observance of National Military Appreciation Month and other military commemorative events through appropriate means, subject to any guidelines developed by the Commission; (3) in the establishment of necessary incentives for Federal, State, and local governments and private sector entities to sponsor and participate in programs initiated by the Commission or the Alliance; (4) in the evaluation of the effectiveness of efforts by the Commission and the Alliance in carrying out this Act; and (5) by the performance of any other related duties that are assigned by the Commission.