This Act may be cited as the ``Infrastructure Improvement Act of 1997''.
Required Auctions.--To the extent that portions of the public electromagnetic spectrum allocated for commercial use become available for licenses and construction during the period consisting of fiscal years 1998 through 2002, the Federal Communications Commission shall, during such period, conduct competitive bidding in accordance with section 309(j) of the Communications Act of 1934 for licenses and construction permits involving such portions which result in an amount of proceeds equal to the sum of (1) $26,000,000,000, and (2) the amount of any offsetting collections referred to in the first sentence of section 309(j)(8)(B) of such Act.
To the extent possible, the competitive bidding shall be conducted so that proceeds required under this subsection are obtained in equal amounts during each fiscal year during such period.
Treatment of Proceeds.--Notwithstanding section 309(j)(8)(A) of the Communications Act of 1934, the proceeds from competitive bidding conducted pursuant to subsection (a) (less any proceeds retained pursuant to the first sentence of section 309(j)(8)(B) of such section) shall be deposited in the Infrastructure Improvement Trust Fund established by section 9512 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 3 of this Act.
This subsection may not be construed to apply to any proceeds from competitive bidding conducted pursuant to subsection (a) in excess of the sum described in subsection (a).
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Trust Fund Code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Infrastructure Improvement Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such trust fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to the Infrastructure Improvement Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the revenues received in the Treasury from the proceeds of competitive bidding conducted by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to section 2(a) of the Infrastructure Improvement Act of 1997.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.--Amounts in the Infrastructure Improvement Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in the Infrastructure Improvement Act of 1997, only for purposes of making expenditures in accordance with section 5 of such Act.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Infrastructure Improvement Trust Fund.''
There shall be available to the Secretary of Transportation, out of the Infrastructure Improvement Trust Fund, for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2002, the amount transferred to the Trust Fund for such fiscal year pursuant to section 9512 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (plus any amount credited to the account during the preceding fiscal year pursuant to section 9602(b) of such Code) for carrying out section 5.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
In General.--On October 1 of each of fiscal years 1998 through 2002 (or as soon as possible thereafter), the Secretary of Transportation, after making the deduction under subsection (b), shall apportion funds made available by section 4 for such fiscal year among the States so that the percentage apportioned to each State is equal to the percentage of estimated tax payments attributable to highway users in the State paid into the Highway Trust Fund established by section 9503 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 in the latest fiscal year for which data are available.
Payments of funds apportioned to a State under this subsection shall be made in quarterly installments in the form of grants.
Deduction.--Whenever an apportionment of funds is made under subsection (a) or (d), the Secretary may make a deduction in an amount not to exceed 2 percent of such funds for administering the provisions of this section.
Use of Grants.--Funds apportioned to a State under subsection (a) shall be available only for the construction and maintenance of highways in the State.
Submission of Plan.--A State shall be eligible to receive an apportionment of funds under subsection (a) in a fiscal year only if the State submits to the Secretary, on or before September 1 of the preceding fiscal year, a plan describing how the funds will be used.
Amounts which would have been apportioned to a State but for the requirement of this subsection shall be reapportioned among the States in the manner specified for apportionments under subsection (a).
Applicability of Requirements.--A project carried out on a Federal-aid highway using funds apportioned under subsection (a) shall be subject to the same requirements as would have applied to the project if the project had been carried out under title 23, United States Code, except to the extent that the Secretary determines that any requirement of such title is not consistent with the objectives of this section.
Federal Share.--The Federal share payable on account of any project or activity carried out using funds apportioned under subsection (a) shall be 80 percent of the cost of the project or activity.
Definitions.--As used in this section, the terms ``construction'', ``Federal-aid highway'', and ``highway'' have the meanings given such terms by section 101(a) of title 23, United States Code.