Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Travelers' Rights Act of 1996''.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to ensure-- (1) the access to information by travelers in air commerce concerning the safety and security of air travel; and (2) the coordination of air carrier and governmental assistance to victims and survivors of victims of accidents in air commerce.
CONSUMER ACCESS TO INFORMATION.
In General.--Chapter 447 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Air traveler safety program ``(a) In General.-- ``(1) Written information.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary of Transportation (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Secretary') shall issue regulations, for a period determined by the Secretary, that require each air carrier that provides interstate air transportation or foreign air transportation to provide written information upon request, to passengers that purchase passage for interstate or foreign air transportation concerning: ``(A) safety inspection reviews conducted by the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration on the aircraft of that air carrier; ``(B) the safety ranking of that air carrier, as determined by the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, in accordance with applicable law; and ``(C) the compliance of the members of the crew of the aircraft with any applicable certification requirements under this subtitle.
Guidelines.--The regulations issued by the Secretary under this subsection shall provide guidelines for air carriers relating to the provision of the information referred to in paragraph (1).
Request for information.--An air carrier shall be required to provide to a passenger, on request, any information concerning the safety of aircraft and the competency of persons issued a certificate under this subtitle for the operation of the aircraft that the Secretary, to the extent allowable by law, determines to be appropriate.
Submission of Performance Review.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than December 31 of the calendar year in which this section is enacted, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Congress that reviews the safety of air carriers that provide interstate or foreign air transportation, including-- ``(A) the number of accidents and a description of such accidents of air carriers attributable to each air carrier that provides interstate or foreign air transportation; and ``(B) for the preceding year, the names of makers of aircraft that have been involved in an accident.
Availability of information.--The Secretary shall make the report under paragraph (1) available to-- ``(A) travel agencies and consultants for distribution to persons served by those agencies and consultants; and ``(B) any other person or entity upon request.
Victims' Rights Program.-- ``(1) In general.--The National Transportation Safety Board shall establish and administer a program for victims and survivors of aircraft accidents in air commerce.
Under that program, the National Transportation Safety Board shall ensure that such victims and survivors receive, to the extent allowable by law, immediate and unrestricted access to information that is made available from-- ``(A) the air carrier involved in an accident in air commerce; ``(B) the Federal Government; and ``(C) State governments and political subdivisions thereof.
National security information.--Nothing in paragraph (1) may be construed to authorize the release of information that the President determines to be classified in the national security interest of the United States.
Coordination of Victim Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--The National Transportation Safety Board, in cooperation with officials of appropriate Federal agencies and the American Red Cross, shall establish a program to ensure the coordination of the disclosure of information under subsection (e) and assistance provided to victims of an accident in air commerce.
Establishment of toll-free telephone line.-- ``(A) In general.--The National Transportation Safety Board, in cooperation with officials of the appropriate Federal agencies and the American Red Cross, shall establish a toll-free telephone line to facilitate the provision of information under paragraph (3).
Action by the national transportation safety board.--The National Transportation Safety Board shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure-- ``(i) the publication of the telephone number of the telephone line established under subparagraph (A) in newspapers of general circulation; and ``(ii) the provision of such number on national television news programs.
Information provided by telephone line.--The telephone line established under paragraph (2) shall provide the following information concerning an accident in air commerce: ``(A) The identifier name and number of the aircraft involved in the accident.
The names of known victims of the accident.
The status of the investigation.
A list of appropriate Federal agencies and contacts.
The facilities at which victims of the accident may be identified.
Civil Penalties.-- ``(1) In general.--Any air carrier that fails to provide information in accordance with this section shall be liable for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $100,000 per violation.
Travel agencies and other persons not covered.-- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a travel agency or other person that does not provide interstate or foreign air transportation.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The chapter analysis for chapter 447 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``44724.
Air traveler safety program.