This Act may be cited as the ``Sacramento River National Recreation Area Act of 2006''.
In this Act: (1) Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan for the Recreation Area prepared under section 4(b).
Recreation area.--The term ``Recreation Area'' means the Sacramento River National Recreation Area.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of California.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SACRAMENTO RIVER NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.
In General.--To conserve, protect, and enhance the riparian and associated areas described in subsection (b) (including the outstanding ecological, geological, scenic, recreational, cultural, and historic resources, the fish and wildlife values, and other resources of the areas), there is established the Sacramento River National Recreation Area in the State, to be managed by the Redding Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management.
Boundaries.--The Recreation Area shall consist of the public land in Tehama County and Shasta County, California, comprising approximately 17,000 acres adjacent to the Sacramento River, lower Battle Creek, and lower Paynes Creek, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Sacramento River National Recreation Area'' and dated May 2002.
Map.-- (1) In general.--As soon as practicable, but not later than 3 years, after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a map and legal description of the Recreation Area to-- (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate; and (B) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Effect.--The map and legal description submitted under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct any clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal description.
Availability.--Copies of the map submitted under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for public inspection in-- (A) the Office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management; and (B) the appropriate office of the Bureau of Land Management in California.
In General.--The Secretary shall manage the Recreation Area in a manner that conserves, protects, and enhances the resources and values of the Recreation Area (including the resources described in section 3(a)), in accordance with-- (1) this Act; (2) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (3) any other applicable law.
Recreation Area Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a comprehensive plan for the long-range protection and management of the Recreation Area to-- (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate; and (B) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Contents of plan.--The management plan-- (A) shall describe the appropriate uses and management of the Recreation Area in accordance with this Act; (B) may incorporate any appropriate decisions, as determined by the Secretary, that are contained in any management or activity plan for the area completed before the date of enactment of this Act; (C) may incorporate appropriate wildlife habitat management plans or other plans prepared for the land within or adjacent to the Recreation Area before the date of enactment of this Act; (D) shall be prepared in consultation with-- (i) appropriate Federal, State, and local agencies (including Tehama County and Shasta County, California); (ii) adjacent landowners; and (iii) other stakeholders; and (E) may use information developed under any studies of land within or adjacent to the Recreation Area carried out before the date of enactment of this Act.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal land within the Recreation Area is withdrawn from-- (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and (3) disposition under all laws relating to mineral and geothermal leasing.
Hunting and Fishing.--The Secretary shall allow hunting and fishing within the Recreation Area in accordance with any applicable Federal and State laws (including regulations).
Motorized Vehicles.--The use of motorized vehicles on public land in the Recreation Area shall be limited to established roadways.
Motorized Boats.-- (1) In general.--Nothing in this Act restricts the use of motorized boats on the Sacramento River.
Regulation.--Tehama County and Shasta County, California, and the California Department of Boating and Waterways shall retain authority to regulate motorized boating for the purpose of ensuring public safety and environmental protection.
Grazing.--The Secretary may permit the grazing of livestock to continue on any public land in the Recreation Area in which grazing is permitted on the date of enactment of this Act-- (1) subject to any regulations, policies, and practices that the Secretary determines to be necessary; and (2) consistent with-- (A) this Act; (B) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (C) any regulations promulgated by the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
Acquisition of Property.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may acquire, by donation, transfer, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange, any land or interests in land within the boundaries of the Recreation Area depicted on the map prepared under section 3(c).
Consent.--No land or interest in land may be acquired under paragraph (1) without the consent of the owner of the land.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.