SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Volunteer Protection Act of 1997''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
No preemption of State tort law.
Limitation on liability for volunteers.
Certification requirement and adjustment of Social Services Block Grant Program allotments.
Findings.--The Congress finds and declares that-- (1) the willingness of volunteers to offer their services is deterred by potential personal liability for simple mistakes made in the course of volunteer service; (2) as a result, many nonprofit public and private organizations and governmental entities, including voluntary associations, social service agencies, educational institutions, local governments, foundations, and other civic programs, have been adversely affected through the withdrawal of volunteers from boards of directors and service in other capacities; (3) the contribution of these programs to their communities is thereby diminished, resulting in fewer and higher cost programs than would be obtainable if volunteers were participating; and (4) because Federal funds are expended on useful and cost- effective social service programs which depend heavily on volunteer participation, protection of voluntarism through clarification and limitation of the personal liability risks assumed by the volunteer in connection with such participation is an appropriate subject for Federal encouragement of State reform.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to promote the interests of social service program beneficiaries and taxpayers and to sustain the availability of programs and nonprofit organizations and governmental entities which depend on volunteer contributions by encouraging reasonable reform of State laws to provide protection from personal financial liability to volunteers serving with nonprofit organizations and governmental entities for actions undertaken in good faith on behalf of such organizations.
NO PREEMPTION OF STATE TORT LAW.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to preempt the laws of any State governing tort liability actions.
LIMITATION ON LIABILITY FOR VOLUNTEERS.
Liability Protection for Volunteers.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (d), any volunteer of a nonprofit organization or governmental entity shall incur no personal financial liability for any tort claim alleging damage or injury from any act or omission of the volunteer on behalf of the organization or entity if-- (1) such volunteer was acting in good faith and within the scope of such volunteer's official functions and duties with the organization or entity; and (2) such damage or injury was not caused by willful and wanton misconduct by such volunteer.
Concerning Responsibility of Volunteers With Respect to Organizations.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any civil action brought by any nonprofit organization or any governmental entity against any volunteer of such organization or entity.
No Effect on Liability of Organization.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the liability of any nonprofit organization or governmental entity with respect to injury caused to any person.
Exceptions to Volunteer Liability Protection.--A State may impose one or more of the following conditions on and exceptions to the granting of liability protection to any volunteer of an organization or entity required by subsection (a): (1) The organization or entity must adhere to risk management procedures, including mandatory training of volunteers, as defined by the Secretary of Health and Human Services by regulation.
The organization or entity shall be liable for the acts or omissions of its volunteers to the same extent as an employer is liable, under the laws of that State, for the acts or omissions of its employees.
The protection from liability does not apply-- (A) if the volunteer was operating a motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or other vehicle for which the State involved requires the operator or vehicle owner to maintain insurance; (B) in the case of a suit brought by an appropriate officer of a State or local government to enforce a Federal, State, or local law; and (C) to the extent the claim would be covered under any insurance policy.
The protection from liability shall apply only if the organization or entity provides a financially secure source of recovery for individuals who suffer injury as a result of actions taken by a volunteer on behalf of the organization or entity.
A financially secure source of recovery may be an insurance policy within specified limits, comparable coverage from a risk pooling mechanism, equivalent assets, or alternative arrangements that satisfy the State that the entity will be able to pay for losses up to a specified amount.
Separate standards for different types of liability exposure may be specified.
CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT AND ADJUSTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM ALLOTMENTS.
Certification and Block Grant Allotments.--In the case of any State which certifies, not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, to the Secretary of Health and Human Services that it has enacted, adopted, or otherwise has in effect State law which substantially complies with section 4(a), the Secretary shall increase by 1 percent the fiscal year allotment which would otherwise be made to such State to carry out the Social Services Block Grant Program under title XX of the Social Security Act.
Continuation of Increase.--Any increase made under subsection (a) in an allotment to a State shall remain in effect only if the State makes a certification to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, not later than the end of each 1-year period occurring successively after the end of the 2-year period described in subsection (a), that it has in effect State law which substantially complies with section 4(a).
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``volunteer'' means an individual performing services for a nonprofit organization or a governmental entity who does not receive-- (A) compensation (including reimbursement or allowance for expenses), or (B) any other thing of value in lieu of compensation, in excess of $300, and such term includes a volunteer serving as a director, officer, trustee, or direct service volunteer; (2) the term ``nonprofit organization'' means any organization described in section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such Code; (3) the term ``damage or injury'' includes physical, nonphysical, economic, and noneconomic damage; and (4) the term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, any other territory or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision of any such State, territory, or possession.