This Act may be cited as the ``School Bus Safety Act''.
As used in this Act-- (1) The term ``bus'' means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, designed for carrying more than 10 persons.
The term ``school bus'' means a bus that is used for purposes that include carrying pupils to and from public or private school or school-related events on a regular basis, but does not include a transit bus or a school-chartered bus.
The term ``school-chartered bus'' means a bus that is operated under a short-term contract with State or school authorities who have acquired exclusive use of the bus at a fixed charge in order to provide transportation for a group of pupils to a special school-related event.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
PROFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR SCHOOL BUS DRIVERS.
Requirement.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prescribe proficiency standards for school bus drivers who are required to possess a commercial driver's license to operate a school bus.
Exemption for Certain States.--In prescribing proficiency standards under subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide that a State may, in lieu of utilizing such proficiency standards, utilize proficiency standards established by the State before the date of the prescription of efficiency standards under subsection (a) if the Secretary determines that the standards of the State establish proficiency requirements as rigorous as the proficiency requirements established under the standards prescribed under subsection (a).
Demonstration of Proficiency.--Upon the prescription of standards under subsection (a), each school bus driver referred to in subsection (a) shall demonstrate (at such interval as the Secretary shall prescribe) to the employer of the driver, the school district, the State licensing agency, or other person or agency responsible for regulating school bus drivers the proficiency of such driver in operating a school bus in accordance with the proficiency standards prescribed under subsection (a) or the proficiency standards established by the State concerned, as the case may be.
CRIMINAL HISTORY INVESTIGATIONS OF SCHOOL BUS DRIVERS.
Requirement for Investigations.--(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a local educational agency may not employ a person as a driver of a school bus of or on behalf of the agency until the agency conducts a background check under procedures that meet the guidelines set forth in section 3(b) of the National Child Protection Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-209; 107 United States Statutes at Large 2491; 42 United States Code 5119a(b)).
Subject to paragraph (3), the prohibition set forth in paragraph (1) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Interim Requirement.--Prior to the establishment of the procedures referred to in subsection (a)(1), or a State's participation in the procedures referred to in subsection (a)(1), local educational agencies shall request the Criminal Justice Information Services Division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct a fingerprint based check through its criminal history files, and the Division shall comply with such a request.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given such term in section 1471(12) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 2891(12)).
DEVELOPMENT OF INTELLIGENT VEHICLE-HIGHWAY SYSTEMS FOR SCHOOL BUS SAFETY.
Section 6055(d) of the Intelligent Vehicle-Highway Systems Act of 1991 (23 United States Code 307 note) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) ensure that one or more operational tests advance the use and reduce the cost of intelligent vehicle-highway system technologies (including hazard warning systems or sensors) that alert school bus drivers of pedestrians or vehicles in, or approaching, the path of the school bus.''.
SEAT BELTS IN SCHOOL BUSES.
Requirement for Installation.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prescribe regulations that require that driver seat belts and passenger seat belts (including lap safety belts or other child safety devices meeting applicable Federal safety standards) be installed for each seating position in any newly manufactured school bus.
Promotion of Seat Belt Usage.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with appropriate safety organizations and parent-teacher organizations, shall conduct a program to promote and encourage the use of seat belts in school buses.
Elements of program.--In conducting the program required under this subsection, the Secretary shall-- (A) encourage State and local governments to enact and implement laws requiring mandatory usage of seat belts in school buses; (B) develop and disseminate educational materials on the importance of using seat belts to passengers and drivers of school buses; and (C) recognize in an appropriate manner school districts that achieve a high level of seat belt usage by passengers and drivers of school buses.
TRAFFIC ENGINEERING ACTIVITIES TO IMPROVE SCHOOL BUS SAFETY.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall ensure that each State receiving aid to conduct highway safety programs under section 402(c) of title 23, United States Code, shall utilize a portion (as determined by the Secretary) of such aid for the purpose of conducting traffic engineering activities in order to improve the safe operation of school buses.
The Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, ensure that the total amount utilized by such States for such purpose in any fiscal year shall not be less than $1,000,000.
DETERMINATION OF PRACTICABILITY AND FEASIBILITY OF CERTAIN SAFETY AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS FOR SCHOOL BUSES.
Commencement of Rulemaking Process.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall begin a rulemaking process to determine the feasibility and practicability of the following: (1) A requirement for a decrease in the flammability of the materials used in the construction of the interiors of school buses.
A requirement that individuals, school districts, or companies that sell in the secondary market school buses that may be used in interstate commerce inform purchasers of such buses that such buses may not meet current National Highway Transportation Safety Administration standards or Federal Highway Administration standards with respect to such buses.
The establishment of construction and design standards for wheelchairs used in the transportation of students in school buses.
Final Rule.--Not later than 2 years after such date, the Secretary shall promulgate a final rule providing for any requirement or standard referred to in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (a) that the Secretary determines to be feasible and practicable.
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON SCHOOL BUS SAFETY.
Dissemination of Information.--In carrying out research on highway safety under section 403 of title 23, United States Code, the Secretary, in consultation with the American Automobile Association, State educational agencies, and highway safety organizations, shall-- (1) improve the training materials on school bus safety; and (2) improve the distribution and availability of such materials to schools for use by the student safety patrols of such schools and to appropriate law enforcement agencies.
Funds.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, of the funds available to the Secretary for research on highway safety and traffic conditions under such section 403 in each of fiscal years 1995 through 2000, $100,000 shall be available in each such fiscal year for the purposes of carrying out this section.
STUDY AND REPORT ON SCHOOL BUS SAFETY.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a study to determine the following: (A) The extent to which public transit vehicles are engaged in school bus operations.
The point at which a public transit vehicle is sufficiently engaged in such operations as to be considered a school bus for purposes of regulation under Federal law.
The differences between school bus operations carried out directly by schools or school districts and school bus operations carried out by schools or school districts by contract.
Areas.--The study shall address the differences between the services and operations referred to in paragraph (1)(C) in terms of-- (A) crash injury data; (B) driver and carrier requirements; (C) passenger transportation requirements; (D) bus construction and design standards; (E) Federal and State operating assistance (per passenger/per mile/per hour); (F) total operating costs; (G) Federal and State capital assistance (per passenger/per mile/per hour); (H) total capital costs; and (I) such other factors as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Report.--(1) Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the committees referred to in paragraph (2) a report on the results of the study carried out under subsection (a).
The committees referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: (A) The Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
The Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.
The Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
The Committee on Public Works and Transportation of the House of Representatives.
The Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives.
The Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
ESTABLISHMENT OF MINIMUM REPORTING CRITERIA FOR HIGHWAY SAFETY PROGRAM ON TRAFFIC-RELATED DEATHS AND INJURIES.
The Secretary of Transportation shall-- (1) not later than December 31, 1994, issue a notice of proposed rulemaking with respect to the minimum reporting criteria required under the tenth sentence of section 402(a) of title 23, United States Code; and (2) not later than December 31, 1995, and after an opportunity for public comment, issue a final rule establishing such criteria.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.