This Act may be cited as the ``Character Learning and Student Success Act of 2001'' (CLASS Act of 2001).
GRANT TO DEVELOP INITIATIVES AND DISSEMINATE INFORMATION ABOUT CHARACTER EDUCATION.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The commitment of schools to the academic achievement of students should be partnered with an effort to address and improve the character of students.
Improving the character of students includes ensuring that students understand, care about, and act upon ethical values and virtues.
Improving the character of students promotes a more compassionate and responsible society.
Character education is an initiative in schools that attends to the social, emotional, and ethical development of students and is a means of teaching, modeling, and practicing positive ethical character traits as part of the regular school curriculum and culture.
Effective character education increases the self-esteem of students and decreases the risk that students will become isolated or do harm to others.
Schools that integrate character education into existing curriculum and daily activities foster the development of core ethical values and virtues in students, and provide for students a model of a community that is comprised of mature and responsible individuals.
An increasing number of States and local educational agencies are promoting the implementation of character education initiatives.
Successful character education requires that States, local educational agencies, schools, and teachers have access to effective methodologies, high-quality initiatives, professional development opportunities, criteria for assessing initiatives, and cost-effective opportunities to network nationally with each other, especially through electronic means.
As States and local educational agencies continue to coordinate the implementation of character education in schools, a central and comprehensive source of information regarding the activities of States and local educational agencies becomes increasingly necessary.
Information about the effectiveness of Federal, State, and local educational agency initiatives, the impact of those initiatives, and the advancement of character education in schools is essential to successfully educating students about character.
Grant Authorization.--The Secretary is authorized to make a single 5-year grant to the eligible organization that, in the judgment of the Secretary, best demonstrates-- (1) an expertise on the national level in providing to schools comprehensive and objective information regarding character education policies, organizations, initiatives, curricula, methods, research, and assessment; (2) a membership that is representative of the various individuals and groups who provide character education initiatives, resources, and curricula to schools; and (3) a history of, and commitment to, promoting and advocating quality character education initiatives.
Grant Requirements.-- (1) Initiative development.--The recipient of the grant under subsection (b) (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``grantee'') shall use the grant funds to develop initiatives that-- (A) present methods of addressing core ethical values in a comprehensive manner in schools; (B) emphasize student motivation and behavior; (C) assist in the development of schools as caring communities; (D) give students the opportunity to put character lessons into practice; (E) provide for the inclusion of families and communities in character education; (F) emphasize leadership, service, and teamwork as dimensions of character education; and (G) evaluate the effectiveness of character education, including the effect of character education initiatives on disciplinary referrals and on teacher expectations.
Information dissemination.--The grantee shall use the grant funds to collect and make available, in electronic form and through other means, information concerning-- (A) quality character education initiatives and methods; (B) models of professional development in character education; (C) methods of assessing and evaluating the effectiveness of character education initiatives; (D) the integration of character education into educational content, performance standards, and educational reform efforts; and (E) any topic that would be helpful to character educators in implementing character education initiatives.
Provision of services.--The grantee shall use the grant funds to provide-- (A) a searchable database that contains background and contact information on the leading character education groups, curricula, books, initiatives, and videos; (B) a checklist of criteria for schools to assess the appropriateness of particular character education curricula to the needs of such schools; (C) an index of websites regarding character education; and (D) telephone assistance and a toll-free access number.
Report.--The grantee shall submit to the Secretary an annual report that-- (1) describes the progress of the grantee in carrying out the requirements described in subsection (c), including a listing of-- (A) the number of requests for information received by the grantee in the course of carrying out such requirements; (B) who made such requests; and (C) the types of information requested; (2) identifies unmet and future information needs in the field of character education; and (3) provides a detailed account of the use of the grant funds provided under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $750,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
GRANT TO CONDUCT CHARACTER EDUCATION RESEARCH.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) States and local educational agencies have benefitted from Federal funding to support the implementation of character education initiatives in the schools in such States, but have been subject to minimal reporting requirements regarding the impact of such initiatives.
The number of schools currently implementing character education initiatives is undetermined, and the scope and success of such initiatives are unknown.
The continuing needs of schools that have begun character education initiatives have not been identified.
The resources required by schools that have not yet been able to start character education initiatives are unknown.
Efforts should be made to determine the extent to which schools are undertaking character education, the effectiveness of such efforts, and the extent to which Federal funds are being used to sponsor effective character education initiatives.
Grant Authorization.--The Secretary is authorized to make a single 5-year grant to the eligible organization that, in the judgment of the Secretary, best demonstrates-- (1) expertise in evaluation and research; (2) a conceptual understanding of the various approaches used in character education; (3) experience in developing character education initiatives in schools; (4) expertise in understanding and identifying quality character education initiatives; (5) an established record of research and practice in the field of character education; (6) an established record of publishing research findings; and (7) a partnership or connection with an institution of higher education.
Grant Requirements.--The recipient of the grant under subsection (b) (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``grantee'') shall-- (1) determine the extent to which schools are undertaking character education initiatives; (2) identify and classify the various character education approaches being undertaken in schools; (3) investigate the extent to which Federal and State funds have facilitated the implementation of character education initiatives; and (4) assess the effectiveness of character education initiatives, including evaluating the reported outcomes of character education initiatives.
Report.--The grantee shall submit to the Secretary an annual report, titled ``The State of Character Education in the Nation's Schools'', that-- (1) specifies the progress of its research in the areas identified in subsection (c); (2) provides a detailed description of the results of its research; (3) discusses unmet and future information needs in the field of character education; and (4) provides a detailed account of the use of the grant funds provided under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $700,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
In this Act: (1) Eligible organization.--The term ``eligible organization'' means an organization (or a group of organizations, if the group meets the requirement of subparagraph (C) and each organization comprising the group meets the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B)) that-- (A) is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; (B) is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code; and (C) has submitted a grant application to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given such term under section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
School.--The term ``school'' means any elementary school (as defined by section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801)) and any secondary school (as defined by such section).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.