This Act may be cited as the ``Family Health Care Accessibility Act of 2007''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Community Health Centers (CHCs) are nonprofit, community supported health care facilities providing primary and preventive health care services to over 15,000,000 low- income, underinsured, and uninsured families.
Nearly 70 percent of CHC patients have family incomes at or below poverty ($15,000 annual income for a family of three).
In addition, nearly 40 percent of CHC patients are uninsured.
For many patients, CHCs are the only source of health care services available.
While the number of uninsured patients at CHCs is rapidly growing--from around 3,900,000 in 1998 to over 5,900,000 today--the number of physicians available to treat these patients is decreasing.
There is a critical shortage of physicians available at CHCs to meet the health care needs of the uninsured and underinsured.
The Journal of the American Medical Association reports a 13-percent vacancy rate for family physicians, a 9- percent vacancy rate for internists, a 20-percent vacancy rate for OB-GYNs and a 22-percent vacancy rate for psychiatrists.
Physicians hired by CHCs are covered by the Federal Tort Claims Act for medical liability costs.
However, physicians who wish to volunteer at CHCs are not covered by the Federal Tort Claims Act.
CHCs have limited resources to meet the current and future needs of the uninsured and underinsured.
Physicians are willing to volunteer at CHCs, however, they are dissuaded from doing so because of the cost of medical liability insurance.
Extending Federal Tort Claims Act coverage to volunteer physicians would result in more patients being served at a lower cost at CHCs.
HEALTH CENTERS UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT; LIABILITY PROTECTIONS FOR VOLUNTEER PRACTITIONERS.
In General.--Section 224 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 233) is amended-- (1) in subsection (g)(1)(A)-- (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``or employee'' and inserting ``employee, or (subject to subsection (k)(4)) volunteer practitioner''; and (B) in the second sentence, by inserting ``and subsection (k)(4)'' after ``subject to paragraph (5)''; and (2) in each of subsections (g), (i), (j), (k), (l), and (m)-- (A) by striking the term ``employee, or contractor'' each place such term appears and inserting ``employee, volunteer practitioner, or contractor''; (B) by striking the term ``employee, and contractor'' each place such term appears and inserting ``employee, volunteer practitioner, and contractor''; (C) by striking the term ``employee, or any contractor'' each place such term appears and inserting ``employee, volunteer practitioner, or contractor''; and (D) by striking the term ``employees, or contractors'' each place such term appears and inserting ``employees, volunteer practitioners, or contractors''.
Applicability; Definition.--Section 224(k) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 233(k)) is amended by adding at the end the following paragraph: ``(4)(A) Subsections (g) through (m) apply with respect to volunteer practitioners beginning with the first fiscal year for which an appropriations Act provides that amounts in the fund under paragraph (2) are available with respect to such practitioners.
For purposes of subsections (g) through (m), the term `volunteer practitioner' means a practitioner who, with respect to an entity described in subsection (g)(4), meets the following conditions: ``(i) The practitioner is a licensed physician or a licensed clinical psychologist.
At the request of such entity, the practitioner provides services to patients of the entity, at a site at which the entity operates or at a site designated by the entity.
The weekly number of hours of services provided to the patients by the practitioner is not a factor with respect to meeting conditions under this subparagraph.
The practitioner does not for the provision of such services receive any compensation from such patients, from the entity, or from third-party payors (including reimbursement under any insurance policy or health plan, or under any Federal or State health benefits program).