This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Commission to Study Employment and Economic Insecurity in the American Workforce Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Presidential Commission to Study Employment and Economic Insecurity in the American Workforce (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall-- (1) examine the issues of economic and psychological insecurity of members of the workforce in the United States caused by employment dislocation; (2) examine the relationship between psychological stress caused by employment insecurity and economic insecurity, and increased violence by employees and former employees in the workplace; (3) examine the economic and psychological effects of the decreasing number of well-paid jobs on members of the workforce in the United States; and (4) recommend potential solutions, including recommendations for legislation and administrative action, to alleviate the problems of economic and psychological insecurity of members of the workforce in the United States.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 17 members (in this Act referred to as the ``members'') who shall be appointed as follows: (1) 9 individuals appointed by the President.
2 individuals appointed by the Majority Leader of the House of Representatives.
2 individuals appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
2 individuals appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
2 individuals appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Qualifications.-- (1) In general.--Members shall be experts in the subjects of labor and employment.
Political affiliation.--Political affiliation shall not be a determining factor in the appointment of members.
Deadline for Appointment.--Every original member shall be appointed to the Commission within 3 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Basic Pay.--Members shall not be paid by reason of their service as members.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--9 members shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the Commission, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The members shall elect 1 member to act as the Chairperson of the Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Chairperson'').
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Staff.--The Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of Commission personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the department or agency to assist the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate to carry out this Act.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
Powers of Members and Agents.--The Commission may delegate to a member or agency any authority of the Commission under this subsection or subsection (e) or (h).
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of the department or agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties.
Immunity.--The Commission is an agency of the United States for purposes of part V of title 18, United States Code (relating to immunity of witnesses).
Subpoena Power.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may issue a subpoena to require the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relating to any matter described in section 3.
Failure to obey an order or subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey an order or subpoena of the Commission that is issued in connection with a Commission hearing, the Commission may apply to the United States district court in the judicial district in which the hearing is held for an order requiring the person to comply with the subpoena or order.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government or private agencies or persons for supplies or services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
The Commission shall transmit a report to the President and the Congress not later than 1 year after the date that all original members have been appointed to the Commission.
The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting the report required by section 7.
Any spending authority (as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 401(c)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974) authorized by this Act shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriations Acts.