LEVY PERMITTED ONLY AFTER APPROVAL OF PRIVATE, VOLUNTEER PANEL OF ATTORNEYS, CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS, AND ENROLLED AGENTS.
In General.--Section 6331 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to levy and distraint) is amended by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j) and by inserting after subsection (h) the following new subsection: ``(i) Requirement of Approval by Private Panel Before Levy.-- ``(1) In general.--Levy may be made under subsection (a) upon the salary or wages or other property of any person with respect to any unpaid tax only after such levy is approved by the levy review panel for the internal revenue district in which such levy is to be made.
Scope of review.--A levy review panel shall approve a levy unless a majority of the members of the panel determine that-- ``(A) other means of collecting the unpaid tax (including installment agreements under section 6159) are more appropriate than the levy, or ``(B) the Internal Revenue Service has not complied with the requirements of this title or the regulations thereunder relating to levies.
Levy review panel.-- ``(A) In general.--Each levy review panel shall consist of 3 individuals-- ``(i) each of whom is an attorney with an expertise in Federal taxation, a certified public accountant, or an enrolled agent, ``(ii) at least one of whom is such an attorney, and ``(iii) at least one of whom is a certified public accountant.
Appointment of members.-- ``(i) In general.--The members of the levy review panel for an internal revenue district for any period shall be jointly selected by the Internal Revenue Service district director for such district and the appropriate appointing authority from among a pool of attorneys, certified public accountants, and enrolled agents who have been selected jointly by such director and the appropriate appointing authorities.
Appropriate appointing authority.-- For purposes of clause (i), the appropriate appointing authority is-- ``(I) in the case of attorneys, the head of the State bar association for the State in which the panel will sit, ``(II) in the case of certified public accountants, the President and Executive Director (jointly) of the Society of Certified Public Accountants for such State, and ``(III) in the case of enrolled agents, the President of the affiliate of the National Association of Enrolled Agents for such State.
Panel for each district.--A levy review panel shall be appointed for each internal revenue district.
Meetings.--The levy review panel for any internal revenue district shall meet at such times as are specified by the Internal Revenue Service district director for such district.
Members to serve without compensation.-- Members of levy review panels shall serve without compensation and shall not be reimbursed for any expense associated with service on any levy review panel.
Protection against conflicts of interest.--Members of any levy review panel shall be treated as special government employees (as defined in section 202 of title 18, United States Code).
The preceding sentence shall not apply for purposes of section 207 of such title.
Claims.-- ``(A) In general.--Members of a levy review panel shall have no personal liability under Federal law with respect to any claim arising out of or resulting from an act or omission by such member within the scope of service as a member.
The preceding sentence shall not be construed to limit personal liability for criminal acts or omissions, willful or malicious conduct, acts or omissions for private gain, or any other act or omission outside the scope of the service of such member on the levy review panel.
Effect on other law.--This paragraph shall not be construed-- ``(i) to affect any other immunities and protections that may be available to such member under applicable law with respect to service on a levy review panel, ``(ii) to affect any other right or remedy against the United States under applicable law, or ``(iii) to limit or alter in any way the immunities that are available under applicable law for Federal officers and employees.
Jeopardy.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a levy if the Secretary has made a finding under the last sentence of subsection (a) that the collection of tax is in jeopardy.
Protection of return information.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit the disclosure of returns or return information (as defined in section 6103).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to levies issued after the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.