This Act may be cited as the ``Financial Aid for Skill Enhancement Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Approximately 3,500,000 students (18 percent of all undergraduate students) attend institutions on a less than half-time basis.
Currently, students who are not in a degree-seeking program, or attend school less than half-time, are not eligible for federal financial aid.
Individuals in the 21st century workforce will be expected to enhance their skills on a regular basis in order to keep up with constantly changing technology.
Time and cost are the most frequently reported barriers to participation in work-related courses.
Access to financial aid must be more widely available to people who have family or work responsibilities, or both.
Employers will require that workers in the 21st century economy have training beyond high school.
Job security and success in the 21st century economy will be dependent on workers access to lifelong learning skills.
Approximately 20 percent of United States workers are landing jobs with employers that offer job security, training, and opportunities for lifelong learning.
Approximately 40 percent of American workers are not receiving education after high school.
These workers may not be able to compete for the best jobs in the 21st century economy.
As America is forced to compete increasingly in a global marketplace, employers must have the best trained workforce in the world.
Employers must have the domestic capacity to fill the jobs of the 21st century economy.
Part D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by inserting after section 460 (20 United States Code 1087j) the following new section: ``SEC.
DIRECT LOANS FOR LESS-THAN-HALF-TIME STUDENTS.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to establish a direct loan program at qualifying public institutions to provide loans to less-than-half-time students to cover the costs of programs providing instruction to enable those students to acquire or improve job skills.
Program Authority.--From the funds appropriated under subsection (g), the Secretary shall provide funds to qualifying public institutions, or consortia thereof, that have entered into agreements with the Secretary under subsection (c), or to alternative originators designated by the Secretary, to make loans to eligible part-time students at those institutions in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Participation Agreements.-- ``(1) Eligibility of institutions; consortia.--The Secretary shall enter into a participation agreement under this subsection with any qualifying public institution, or consortia thereof, that submits to the Secretary a request for participation and a demonstration of its status as a qualifying public institution.
Subject to such requirements as the Secretary may prescribe, two or more qualifying public institutions may apply to the Secretary as consortia to enter into agreements with the Secretary to originate loans under this section for students in attendance at such institutions.
Alternative originators.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, establish qualifications for an organization to enter into an agreement with the Secretary as an alternative originator.
Terms of agreements.--An agreement under this section shall-- ``(A) provide for the establishment and maintenance of a direct student loan program at the institution under which the institution will-- ``(i) identify eligible part-time students who seek student financial assistance at such institution; ``(ii) determine the amount of eligible education expenses of such students; ``(iii) provide a statement that certifies the eligibility of any student to receive a loan under this section that is not in excess of such eligible educational expenses; ``(iv) provide timely and accurate information-- ``(I) concerning the status of student borrowers while such students are in attendance at the institution and concerning any new information of which the institution becomes aware for such students after such borrowers leave the institution, to the Secretary for the servicing and collecting of loans made under this part; and ``(II) if the institution does not have an agreement with the Secretary under this subsection, concerning student eligibility and eligible educational expenses to the Secretary as needed for the alternative origination of loans to eligible part- time students; ``(B) provide assurances that the institution will comply with requirements established by the Secretary relating to student loan information with respect to loans made under this section; ``(C) provide that the institution accepts responsibility and financial liability stemming from its failure to perform its functions pursuant to the agreement; ``(D) provide that the institution will not charge any fees of any kind, however described, to student borrowers for origination activities or the provision of any information necessary for a student to receive a loan under this section, or any benefits associated with such loan; ``(E) provide that the institution or consortium will originate loans to eligible part-time students in accordance with this section, and that such origination may include the acceptance of applications by means of the Internet or other electronic means; ``(F) provide that the note or evidence of obligation on the loan shall be the property of the Secretary; and ``(G) include such other provisions as the Secretary determines are necessary to protect the interests of the United States and to promote the purposes of this section, except that the Secretary shall not require any institution to perform any needs analysis of any applicant for a loan under this section.
Withdrawal and termination procedures.--The Secretary shall establish procedures by which institutions or consortia may withdraw or be terminated from the program under this section.
Terms and Conditions of Loans.-- ``(1) In general.--A note or other evidence of a loan under this section shall-- ``(A) require the borrower to repay the loan, together with interest thereon, in installments beginning not less than one month after the conclusion of the period of enrollment for which the loan was made and ending not later than one year thereafter, except that the borrower shall be entitled to accelerate, without penalty, repayment on the borrower's loans under this section; ``(B) obligate the borrower to pay interest on the outstanding balance of the loan at a rate prescribed by the Secretary taking into account the purposes of this section; ``(C) require the borrower to participate in exit counseling under section 485(b); and ``(D) contain such additional terms and conditions as the Secretary may require to protect the interests of the United States and to promote the purposes of this section.
Deferment.--A borrower of a loan under this section who meets the requirements of section 455(f)(2) shall be eligible for a deferment, during which periodic installments of principal need not be paid, and interest shall accrue and be capitalized or paid by the borrower.
Simple application.--The common financial reporting form required in section 483(a)(1) shall not be required for an application for a loan under this section.
The Secretary shall prescribe by regulation a simple form for determining eligibility for and the amount of loans under this section.
Loan disbursement.--Proceeds of loans to students under this part shall be applied to the student's account for tuition and fees.
The Secretary shall establish periods for the payments of such proceeds in a manner consistent with payment of Federal Pell Grants under subpart 1 of part A of this title.
Fiscal Control and Fund Accountability.--Section 454(k) shall apply to funds provided under this section.
Contracts for Origination, Servicing, and Data Systems.--The Secretary may enter into contracts for-- ``(1) the alternative origination of loans to eligible part-time students attending qualifying public institutions with agreements to participate in the program under this part, if such institutions do not have agreements with the Secretary under subsection (c); and ``(2) the servicing and collection of loans made under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to provide funds for loans under this section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
Definitions.--As used in this section: ``(1) Qualifying public institutions.--The term `qualifying public institution' means an institution that-- ``(A) is an eligible institution under section 435(a); and ``(B) is a public institution that provides an educational program for which the institution awards a bachelor's degree or provides not less than a 2-year program that is acceptable for full credit toward such a degree.
Eligible part-time student.--The term `eligible part- time student' means a student that is an eligible student as determined under section 484, except that-- ``(A) the student does not meet the requirements of section 484(a)(1), but is enrolled or accepted for enrollment in a program of instruction the expenses for which are eligible education expenses; ``(B) the student is not required to meet the requirements of section 484(a)(2), but the Secretary may by regulation prescribe limitations to prevent abuse; ``(C) the institution may require students to establish credit worthiness a condition of obtaining a loan under this section; ``(D) a student who has obtained a loan or loans to cover eligible education expenses for 4 courses of instruction shall not be an eligible part-time student until such loan or loans are repaid.
Eligible education expenses.--The term `eligible education expenses' means the tuition and fees, and the cost of any books, required with respect to any course of instruction at a qualifying public institution to acquire or improve job skills of an individual.''.
EMPLOYER PAYMENTS ON DIRECT LOANS FOR LESS-THAN-HALF-TIME STUDENTS EXCLUDABLE FROM GROSS INCOME.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 127(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to employer-provided educational assistance programs) is amended by striking ``and equipment)'' and inserting ``and equipment, and payments on loans made under section 468A of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (relating to direct loans for less-than-half-time students))''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to payments made after the date of the enactment of this Act.