This Act may be cited as the ``Teachers in the Classroom Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Enrollment in elementary and secondary schools is at the highest level ever recorded in this country, and the Department of Education recently announced that 52,200,000 students are expected to attend school in 1998, an increase of more than a million students over 1997.
Increases in elementary and secondary student enrollment will continue in record numbers each year for the next decade with more than 3,000,000 additional students expected; secondary school attendance alone is expected to increase by more than 13 percent.
This unprecedented increase in student enrollment will affect high poverty urban and rural areas, and States experiencing rapid population growth.
Just to keep pace with the growing number of enrolled elementary and secondary school students, schools will need to hire 150,000 additional teachers during the next decade.
Data and research, including information from the State of Tennessee's Student/Teacher Achievement Ratio project (Project STAR), the largest and longest lasting experiment ever conducted to examine the effects of small class sizes on student learning and development, suggest that students in the early grades learn more in smaller classes, continue to have an edge over the rest of their peers years after they return to normal-sized classrooms and show that every time a student is added to a classroom, learning is diminished for the rest of the class.
It is vital that we adequately educate and prepare America's children for the next century and our competitive global economy.
Helping improve the learning environment for each and every student is an important goal, hiring new teachers is an important objective, and Congress needs to fund positions for teachers without adding to the Federal bureaucracy, deficit, or debt.
Congress needs to provide resources to keep pace with growing enrollment and, if possible, help to reduce classroom sizes.
In General.--The Secretary of Education is authorized to award grants to Governors to enable Governors to provide funds to local educational agencies to hire elementary and secondary teachers or qualified instructional personnel as authorized under State law to reduce overcrowded classes.
State Eligibility.-- (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this Act, a Governor of a State shall submit an application to the Secretary.
Disapproval.--To the extent that appropriations are made available in a fiscal year to carry out this Act, the Secretary shall not disapprove an application from a Governor.
Local Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant from the Governor, a local educational agency shall-- (1) establish a trust fund for all payments received under this Act; (2) provide assurances that funds received under this Act will be deposited in such trust fund account; (3) provide assurances that funds received under this Act will be used only to hire new teachers or qualified personnel not later than 2 years after receipt of such funds; (4) provide assurances that the agency will use accounting and auditing practices stipulated by the Governor and allow the State access to any and all records regarding funds received and used under this Act; (5) provide assurances that the agency will achieve a net gain in the number of teachers or qualified instructional personnel in a classroom setting; (6) review annually the performance of personnel hired pursuant to this Act to ensure that the agency has hired qualified personnel; (7) obligate personnel hired pursuant to this Act for a period of employment not to exceed one year; (8) repay to the State not later than 27 months after receipt of funds from the State any amounts not expended after 24 months of such receipt; (9) use funds received under this Act only to supplement the amount of funds that would, in the absence of such Federal funds, be made available from non-Federal sources for the education of students participating in programs assisted under this Act, and not to supplant such funds; and (10) apply to the Governor each year in which the agency wishes to receive funding under this Act.
In General.--From the amount appropriated for this Act under section 8 for any fiscal year, each State is eligible to receive an amount that bears the same ratio to the amount so appropriated as the average number of children aged 5 through 17, inclusive, in the State as reported to the Secretary in the three most recent calendar years for which such data is available bears to the number of such children in all States during the same period.
Reallocation.--The Secretary shall reallocate any amounts allocated under subsection (a) that are not used by a State for the purposes of this section to other States in proportion to the distribution of other funds under this section.
Withholding for Noncompliance.--A Governor, 60 days after written notice to a local educational agency for substantial noncompliance with the provisions of section 3(c), may withhold payments to a local educational agency.
Maintenance of Effort.--After the first fiscal year that a local educational agency receives funds under this Act, such agency may continue to receive funds for any fiscal year only if the Governor finds that the local educational agency has increased the number of teachers or qualified personnel in the classroom.
State Administration.-- (1) In general.--A Governor who receives a grant under this Act shall select one or more local educational agencies in the State to participate in a program under this Act based on the determination of the Governor regarding the need to alleviate overcrowded classes in schools served by such an agency.
Evaluation and report.--A Governor who receives a grant under this Act shall evaluate and audit the funds used for any program established by a local educational agency under this Act and shall report such findings on an annual basis to the Secretary of Education.
Administrative costs.--A Governor may use not more than 2 percent of the funds received under this Act to pay administrative costs.
Innovative teaching programs.--A Governor may use not more than 10 percent of the funds received under this Act to establish a program within the State to improve instructional quality by providing incentives to encourage innovative teacher training programs, establish alternate certification and licensure procedures, or to hire nontraditional personnel.
Secretary Reporting.--The Secretary of Education, after consultation with the Governors, shall report to the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate not later than March 1 of each year and shall include in this report, an evaluation of the effectiveness of programs assisted under this Act and recommendations regarding the continuity of this program.
Nothing in this Act may be construed to provide tenure to personnel hired pursuant to this Act.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``local educational agency'' means a board of education or other authority constituted within a State for administrative control or direction of or to perform a service function for elementary and secondary schools; (2) the term ``State'' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia; and (3) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Department of Education.
There are authorized to carry out this Act-- (1) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 1999; (2) $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2000; (3) $1,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; (4) $2,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; and (5) $2,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.