This Act may be cited as the ``Safer Truck Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Heavy trucks carrying up to 20 metric tons of cargo on the National Highway System are not equipped with modern safety features presently found on cars.
These features include disc brakes, crash absorbent bumpers and body panels, sway bars, roll bars, and underride beams.
Under current law, truckers who choose to equip their vehicles with such safety features risk fines and other penalties for violating Federal weight and width restrictions even when the amount of cargo carried is not more than the amount customarily carried on trucks lacking such safety features.
Trucking is the deadliest industry in the United States.
One in every 7 Americans killed on the job is a trucker (approximately 800 of the 5900 workplace deaths in 2001).
704 truckers were killed in truck crashes alone in 2001, along with 4,378 motorists and pedestrians--more than 5,000 preventable deaths.
Of the 130,000 people injured by commercial trucks in 2001, 29,000 were truckers.
Over 150,000 people, including more than 25,000 truckers, have been killed in preventable large- truck crashes since the end of the Vietnam War along with more than 3,000,000 injured.
Many of these deaths can be prevented in the future by exempting safety features from truck weight and width restrictions and regulating only the weight of truck cargo rather than the overall weight of the truck.
New intermodal technologies have emerged that promise to replace dangerous and inefficient long-haul trucks with safer, more efficient short-haul trucks that will utilize road, sea, rail, and inland waterways transportation to substantially reduce the Nation's dependence on foreign oil and lower the cost of food and other goods--especially for State run welfare programs.
Under current law, States are required to impose unreasonable burdens on such intermodal trucks, such as requiring special permits and escort vehicles which are not required for larger, more dangerous trucks, or risk the cut off of Federal highway funds.
While some modification to roads and bridges may be necessary to accommodate safer short-haul intermodal trucks, the cost is insignificant compared to the savings that will accrue from reducing the excessive wear and tear on the National Highway System caused by obsolete long- haul trucks and their associated high rate of death and injury.
Section 127 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Exception.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), a State may allow a single unit truck or bus without a trailer to carry up to 20 metric tons or 44,080 pounds of cargo, packaging, and load securement materials regardless of the overall weight of the vehicle, its axle weights, or the weight of its safety and energy conservation devices if the cargo is evenly distributed in a compartment or combined compartments at least 40 feet long, the overall height of the vehicle and cargo does not exceed the width of the wheelbase, the axles are positioned at the extreme ends of the vehicle, the gross weight and certified empty weight of the vehicle (including detachable cargo compartments) are marked conspicuously on the front of the vehicle in contrasting 3-inch or taller letters and numbers.
Calculation of gross weight.--For purposes of this subsection, the gross weight shall be calculated by adding 20 metric tons or 44,080 pounds to the empty weight.''.
Section 31113(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Exclusion of Safety and Energy Conservation Devices.-- ``(1) Energy conservation devices.--Width calculated under this section does not include an energy conservation device the Secretary decides is necessary for safe and efficient operation of a commercial motor vehicle.
Safety devices.-- ``(A) In general.--A safety device that reduces the possibility of death and injury shall not be included in the calculation of width for purposes of this section if such device fits entirely within the legal travel lanes of all roads upon which the vehicle operates.
Safety device defined.--In this subsection, the term `safety device' includes mirrors, grabhandles, steps, rearview video cameras, crash absorbent bumpers and body panels, batteries for regenerative braking, wheels, tires, structural members, and drivetrain components positioned to enhance vehicle stability.