SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as The ``Structured Settlement Protection Act''.
IMPOSITION OF EXCISE TAX ON PERSONS WHO ACQUIRE STRUCTURED SETTLEMENT PAYMENTS IN FACTORING TRANSACTIONS.
In General.--Subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 55--STRUCTURED SETTLEMENT FACTORING TRANSACTIONS ``Sec.
Structured settlement factoring transactions.
STRUCTURED SETTLEMENT FACTORING TRANSACTIONS.
Imposition of Tax.--There is hereby imposed on any person who acquires directly of indirectly structured settlement payment rights in a structured settlement factoring transaction a tax equal to 50 percent of the factoring discount as determined under subsection (c)(4) with respect to such factoring transaction.
Exception for Court-Approved Hardship.--The tax under subsection (a) shall not apply in the case of a structured settlement factoring transaction in which the transfer of structured settlement payment rights is-- ``(1) otherwise permissible under applicable law, and ``(2) undertaken pursuant to the order of the relevant court or administrative authority finding that the extraordinary, unanticipated, and imminent needs of the structured settlement recipient or his or her spouse or dependents render such a transfer appropriate.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Structured settlement.--The term `structured settlement' means an arrangement-- ``(A) established by-- ``(i) suit or agreement for the periodic payment of damages excludable from the gross income of the recipient under section 104(a)(2), or ``(ii) agreement for the periodic payment of compensation under any workers' compensation act that is excludable from the gross income of the recipient under section 104(a)(1), and ``(B) where the periodic payments are-- ``(i) of the character described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 130(c)(2), and ``(ii) payable by a person who is a party to the suit or agreement or to the workers' compensation claim or by a person who has assumed the liability for such periodic payments under a qualified assignment in accordance with section 130.
Structured settlement payment rights.--The term `structured settlement payment rights' means rights to receive payments under a structured settlement.
Structured settlement factoring transaction.--The term `structured settlement factoring transaction' means a transfer of structured settlement payment rights (including portions of structured settlement payments) made for consideration by means of sale, assignment, pledge, or other form of encumbrance or alienation for consideration.
Factoring discount.--The term `factoring discount' means amount equal to the excess of (i) the aggregate undiscounted amount of structured settlement payments being acquired in the structured settlement factoring transaction, over (ii) the total amount actually paid by the acquirer to the person from whom such structured settlement payments are acquired.
Relevant court or administrative authority.--The term `relevant court or administrative authority' means-- ``(A) the court (or where applicable, the administrative authority) which had jurisdiction over the underlying action or proceeding that was resolved by means of the structured settlement, or ``(B) in the event that no action or proceeding was brought, a court (or where applicable, the administrative authority) which-- ``(i) would have had jurisdiction over the claim that is the subject of the structured settlement, or ``(ii) has jurisdiction by reason of the residence of the structured settlement recipient.
Coordination With Other Provisions.-- ``(1) In general.--In any case where the applicable requirements of sections 72, 130, and 461(h) were satisfied at the time the structured settlement was entered into, the subsequent occurrence of a structured settlement factoring transaction shall not affect the application of the provisions of such sections to the parties to the structured settlement (including an assignee under a qualified assignment under section 130) in any taxable year.
Regulations.--The Secretary is authorized to prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to clarify the treatment in the event of a structured settlement factoring transaction of amounts received by the structured settlement recipient.''
Information Reporting.--Subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS REGARDING STRUCTURED SETTLEMENT FACTORING TRANSACTIONS.
In General.--In the case of a transfer of structured settlement payment rights in a structured settlement factoring transaction-- ``(1) described in section 5891(b) and of which the person making the structured settlement payments has actual notice and knowledge, such person shall make such return and furnish such written statement to the acquirer of the structured settlement payment rights as would be applicable under the provisions of section 6041 (except as provided in subsection (c) of this section), or ``(2) subject to tax under section 5891(a) and of which the person making the structured settlement payments has actual notice and knowledge, such person shall make such return and furnish such written statement to the acquirer of the structured settlement payment rights at such time, and in such manner and form, as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.
Coordination With Other Provisions.--The provisions of this section shall apply in lieu of any other provisions of this part to establish the reporting obligations of the person making the structured settlement payments in the event of a structured settlement factoring transaction.
The provisions of section 3405 regarding withholding shall not apply to the person making the structured settlement payments in the event of a structured settlement factoring transaction.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `acquirer of the structured settlement payment rights' shall include any person described in section 7701(a)(1).''
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of chapters for subtitle E of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Chapter 55.
Structured settlement factoring transactions.''
The table of sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Reporting requirements regarding structured settlement factoring transactions.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to structured settlement factoring transactions (as defined in section 5891(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) occurring after the date of enactment of this Act.