Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Farm-To-Cafeteria Projects Act of 2003''.
GRANTS TO SUPPORT FARM-TO-CAFETERIA PROJECTS.
Section 12 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C.1760) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(q) Grants to Support Farm-To-Cafeteria Projects.-- ``(1) In general.--To improve access to local foods in schools and institutions receiving funds under this Act and the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1771 et sequentes) (other than section 17 of that Act (42 United States Code 1786)), the Secretary shall provide competitive grants to nonprofit entities and educational institutions to establish and carry out farm-to- cafeteria projects under paragraph 2.
Project requirements.--Farm-to-cafeteria projects eligible to receive assistance under this subsection shall be projects designed to-- ``(A) procure local foods from small and medium- sized farms for the provision of foods for school meals; ``(B) support nutrition education activities or curriculum planning that incorporates the participation of school children in farm and agriculture education projects; and ``(C) develop a sustained commitment to farm-to- cafeteria projects in the community by linking schools, agricultural producers, parents, and other community stakeholders.
Technical assistance and related information.-- ``(A) Technical assistance.--In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary may provide technical assistance regarding farm-to-cafeteria projects, processes, and development to an entity seeking the assistance.
Sharing of information.--The Secretary may provide for the sharing of information concerning farm- to-cafeteria projects and issues among and between government, private for-profit and nonprofit groups, and the public through publications, conferences, and other appropriate means.
Grants.-- ``(A) In general.--From amounts made available to carry out this subsection, the Secretary shall make grants to assist private non-profit entities and educational institutions to establish and carry out farm-to-cafeteria projects.
Maximum amount.--The maximum amount of a grant provided to an entity under this subsection shall be $100,000.
Matching funds requirements.-- ``(i) In general.--The Federal share of the cost of establishing or carrying out a farm-to- cafeteria project that receives assistance under this subsection may not exceed 75 percent of the cost of the project during the term of the grant, as determined by the Secretary.
Form.--In providing the non-Federal share of the cost of carrying out a farm-to- cafeteria project, the grantee shall provide the share through a payment in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including facilities, equipment, or services.
Source.--An entity may provide the non-Federal share through State or local government, or through private sources.
Administration.-- ``(i) Single grant.--A farm-to-cafeteria project may be supported by only a single grant under this subsection.
Term.--The term of a grant made under this subsection may not exceed 3 years.
Evaluation.--Not later than January 30, 2008, the Secretary shall-- ``(A) provide for the evaluation of the projects funded under this subsection; and ``(B) submit to the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate a report on the results of the evaluation.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009 to carry out this subsection, to remain available until expended.