This Act may be cited as the ``Joint Antitrust Consultative Commission Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Antitrust laws are an important legal tool for opening markets to international competition and defusing trade tension.
All nations should make it a priority to enact and vigorously enforce strong competition laws to benefit consumers, encourage international competition and foster growth in jobs, productivity, and investment.
Japanese antimonopoly law is similar to United States antitrust law, partly as a result of its formulation during America's post-World War II occupation of Japan.
However, there are observable differences in the respective antitrust enforcement environments of Japan and the United States.
In Japan-- (A) the lenient interpretation and enforcement of the antimonopoly law is insufficient to prevent business practices which result in significant barriers to foreign entry into the Japanese market; (B) private antitrust lawsuits are very difficult to file and virtually impossible to win in Japan because of strict requirements stipulating proof of damages; (C) due to political and bureaucratic pressures, criminal prosecution of antitrust violations rarely occurs in Japan; (D) many cartels are exempted and legal under the antimonopoly law in Japan.
The large number of exempted and legal cartels contributes to an environment in which illegal cartels become less subject to criticism and scrutiny; and (E) the Japan Fair Trade Commission's capacity to enforce antimonopoly law is limited by the small size of its staff and the status of the Commission in the hierarchy of Japanese bureaucracies.
In the United States-- (A) corporations may be apprehensive about participating in certain business activities such as joint ventures or exclusive distributorship arrangements due to uncertainties concerning the enforcement of antitrust law; and (B) the cost of antitrust litigation, including the risk of treble damages, may have a negative impact on United States corporate competitiveness.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to encourage a review of the antitrust policies of Japan and the United States in the context of a changing global economy and to foster ways of improving competition in both countries; (2) to encourage the Japan Fair Trade Commission and the United States Department of Justice and United States Federal Trade Commission toward more comparable levels of enforcement activity; (3) to ensure that the Japan Fair Trade Commission increasingly enforces the antimonopoly law based upon antitrust principles of protecting competition; (4) to encourage Japan to end unfair business practices that result in market foreclosure to foreign competition; (5) to increase awareness of criminal antitrust enforcement as a means of addressing anticompetitive business behavior in Japan; (6) to encourage the government of Japan to increase the investigative power of the Japan Fair Trade Commission; and (7) to encourage the government of Japan to reduce the number of cartels exempted from the antimonopoly law.
In this Act-- ``antimonopoly law'' means codes enforced by the Japan Fair Trade Commission to promote fair and free competition by prohibiting private monopolization, unreasonable restraint of trade, and unfair business practices.
``antitrust policy'' means the general principles by which government is guided in maintaining competition in commercial activities.
``antitrust law'' means the body of statutes, court decisions, and other law designed to ensure the existence of competition in commercial activities.
Antitrust law in the United States protects trade and commerce from unlawful restraints such as price fixing, exclusive dealings, and monopolies.
``Commission'' means the United States-Japan Joint Antitrust Consultative Commission established by section 5.
JOINT ANTITRUST CONSULTATIVE COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established the ``United States-Japan Joint Antitrust Consultative Commission''.
American Delegation.-- (1) Membership.--The American delegation to the Commission shall be composed of the following members: (A) Members of Congress: (i) The chairman of the Committee on Finance of the Senate, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking minority member of the Committee on Finance of the Senate, or the ranking minority member's designee.
The chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking minority member of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, or the ranking minority member's designee.
The chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking minority member of the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate, or the ranking minority member's designee.
The chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking minority member of Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives, or the ranking minority member's designee.
The chairman of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking minority member of the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation of the Senate, or the ranking minority member's designee.
The chairman of the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, or the ranking minority member's designee.
Executive officers: (i) The Attorney General, or the Attorney General's designee.
The chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, or the chairman's designee.
The Secretary of State, or the Secretary's designee.
The Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary's designee.
The Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary's designee.
The United States Trade Representative, or the Trade Representative's designee.
Lead representative.--(A) The Attorney General, or the Attorney General's designee, shall be the American delegation's lead representative.
The lead representative shall-- (i) contact the Japanese lead representative to-- (I) set an agenda for the Commission's meetings; and (II) set mutually convenient annual meeting dates; (ii) supervise the establishment, procedures, and structure of the Commission with the Japanese lead representative, except such procedures shall allow representatives of industries discussed at such meetings an opportunity to present their views; (iii) assemble and maintain the reports, records, and other papers of the Commission for use by the American delegation and the public; and (iv) institute the comprehensive review required by section 8.
Japanese Delegation.-- (1) Contingency on commencement of activities.--The commencement of activities under this Act by the American delegation to the Commission is contingent on the creation by the appropriate Japanese officials of a Japanese delegation with representation from an appropriate range of institutions and interests that participate in antitrust activities in Japan, as determined by the lead representative of the American delegation.
Membership.--It is the sense of Congress that the Japanese delegation should have the same number of members as the American delegation and be composed of representatives of public, private, and other organizations involved in antitrust activities in Japan.
It is the sense of the Congress that such a delegation should at a minimum include the following members: (A) Members of the Diet: (i) The chairman of the Budget Committee of the House of Representatives, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking member of the main opposition party of the Budget Committee of the House of Representatives, or the ranking member's designee.
The Budget Committee chairman of the House of Councillors, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking member of the main opposition party of the Budget Committee of the House of Councillors, or the ranking member's designee.
The chairman of the Commerce Committee of the House of Representatives, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking member of the main opposition party of the Commerce Committee of the House of Representatives, or the ranking member's designee.
The chairman of the Commerce Committee of the House of Councillors, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking member of the main opposition party of the Commerce Committee of the House of Councillors, or the ranking member's designee.
The chairman of the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking member of the main opposition party of the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives, or the ranking member's designee.
The chairman of the Judiciary Committee of the House of Councillors, or the chairman's designee.
The ranking member of the main opposition party of the Judiciary Committee of the House of Councillors, or the ranking member's designee.
Executive officers: (i) The chairman of the Japan Fair Trade Commission, or the chairman's designee, and 1 additional commissioner of the chairman's choice, or that commissioner's designee.
The Minister of Finance, or the Minister's designee.
The Minister of International Trade and Industry, or the Minister's designee.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs, or the Minister's designee.
The Minister of Justice, or the Minister's designee.
Lead representative.--It is the sense of Congress that the Prime Minister, or the Prime Minister's designee, should appoint 1 of the members of the Japanese delegation as a lead representative to contact the United States lead representative to-- (A) set an agenda for the Commission's meetings; (B) set mutually convenient annual meeting dates; and (C) perform such other duties as may be assigned to the lead representative.
Meetings.--The Commission shall convene annually, with the first meeting to take place in Washington, D.C., in 1994 and the site of the meeting to alternate thereafter between the United States and Japan.
Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Commission shall not be considered to be an advisory committee under the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
The Commission shall-- (1) discuss and make recommendations on long-term structural differences in antitrust policy and short-term antitrust disputes; and (2) serve as an open forum to promote more coherent enforcement of antitrust law in Japan and the United States.
The recommendations and findings of the Commission, reflecting the major views expressed during the deliberations of the Commission, shall be completed and made public through issuance of a report in English by the agency from which the lead representative of the American delegation is selected, not more than 90 days after the Commission holds its annual meeting.
It is the sense of Congress that the Japanese delegation should issue a Japanese language version of the report at the same time as the English language report is issued.
The lead representative of the American delegation shall institute a comprehensive review of the activities and responsibilities of the Commission not later than 180 days after the second annual meeting of the Commission to determine-- (1) whether the Commission is carrying out its purpose; (2) whether consistent with the purposes of this Act, responsibilities assigned to the Commission should be revised; and (3) whether the existence of the Commission should be continued.
Members of the American delegation to the Commission shall not be paid compensation for services performed on the Commission.
The expenses of departments and agencies of the executive branch and of members and committees of the Senate and of the House of Representatives in carrying out this Act, including travel expenses and expenses relating to preparation of the report under section 7, shall be paid out of general funds that are available and not specifically appropriated for other purposes.