This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Pension Accessibility Act of 1999''.
REDUCED PBGC PREMIUM FOR NEW PLANS OF SMALL EMPLOYERS.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 4006(a)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1306(a)(3)(A)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by inserting ``other than a new single- employer plan (as defined in subparagraph (F)) maintained by a small employer (as so defined),'' after ``single-employer plan,'', (2) in clause (iii), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, and'', and (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iv) in the case of a new single-employer plan (as defined in subparagraph (F)) maintained by a small employer (as so defined) for the plan year, $5 for each individual who is a participant in such plan during the plan year.''.
Definition of New Single-Employer Plan.--Section 4006(a)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1306(a)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(F)(i) For purposes of this paragraph, a single-employer plan maintained by a contributing sponsor shall be treated as a new single- employer plan for each of its first 5 plan years if, during the 36- month period ending on the date of the adoption of such plan, the sponsor or any member of such sponsor's controlled group (or any predecessor of either) had not established or maintained a plan to which this title applies with respect to which benefits were accrued for substantially the same employees as are in the new single-employer plan.
(I) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `small employer' means an employer which on the first day of any plan year has, in aggregation with all members of the controlled group of such employer, 100 or fewer employees.
In the case of a plan maintained by two or more contributing sponsors that are not part of the same controlled group, the employees of all contributing sponsors and controlled groups of such sponsors shall be aggregated for purposes of determining whether any contributing sponsor is a small employer.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to plans established after December 31, 2000.
REDUCTION OF ADDITIONAL PBGC PREMIUM FOR NEW AND SMALL PLANS.
New Plans.--Subparagraph (E) of section 4006(a)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1306(a)(3)(E)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(v) In the case of a new defined benefit plan, the amount determined under clause (ii) for any plan year shall be an amount equal to the product of the amount determined under clause (ii) and the applicable percentage.
For purposes of this clause, the term `applicable percentage' means-- ``(I) 0 percent, for the first plan year.
20 percent, for the second plan year.
40 percent, for the third plan year.
60 percent, for the fourth plan year.
80 percent, for the fifth plan year.
For purposes of this clause, a defined benefit plan (as defined in section 3(35)) maintained by a contributing sponsor shall be treated as a new defined benefit plan for its first 5 plan years if, during the 36-month period ending on the date of the adoption of the plan, the sponsor and each member of any controlled group including the sponsor (or any predecessor of either) did not establish or maintain a plan to which this title applies with respect to which benefits were accrued for substantially the same employees as are in the new plan.''.
Small Plans.--Paragraph (3) of section 4006(a) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1306(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``The'' in subparagraph (E)(i) and inserting ``Except as provided in subparagraph (G), the'', and (2) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraph: ``(G)(i) In the case of an employer who has 25 or fewer employees on the first day of the plan year, the additional premium determined under subparagraph (E) for each participant shall not exceed $5 multiplied by the number of participants in the plan as of the close of the preceding plan year.
For purposes of clause (i), whether an employer has 25 or fewer employees on the first day of the plan year is determined taking into consideration all of the employees of all members of the contributing sponsor's controlled group.
In the case of a plan maintained by two or more contributing sponsors, the employees of all contributing sponsors and their controlled groups shall be aggregated for purposes of determining whether 25-or-fewer-employees limitation has been satisfied.''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Subsection (a).--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to plans established after December 31, 2000.
Subsection (b).--The amendments made by subsection (b) shall apply to plan years beginning after December 31, 2000.