EMERGENCY PLANNING AND COMMUNITY RIGHT-TO-KNOW.
Section 304 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 1104) is amended as follows: (1) By striking ``immediately'' after ``operator of the facility shall'' in subsection (a)(1) and inserting ``, within 1 hour of having knowledge that such release had occurred,''.
By striking ``immediately'' after ``operator of the facility shall'' in subsection (a)(2) and inserting ``, within 1 hour of having knowledge that such release had occurred,''.
By inserting in subsection (a)(3) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), ``, within 1 hour of having knowledge that such release had occurred,'' after ``the owner or operator shall''.
By amending subsection (b)(1) to read as follows: ``(1) Recipients of notice.--Notice required under subsection (a) shall be given, within 1 hour of having knowledge that the release had occurred, by the owner or operator of a facility (by such means as telephone, radio, or in person) to-- ``(A) the community emergency coordinator for the local emergency planning committees, if established pursuant to section 301(c) of this title, for any area likely to be affected by the release and to the State emergency planning commission of any State likely to be affected by the release; or ``(B) a State agency authorized by State law to receive such notification.
If an authorized State agency is notified by an owner or operator of the facility, the State agency shall provide notice to the State emergency response commission within 2 hours of receiving notification.
Notice may be given later than 1 hour after knowledge of a leak or spill if the owner or operator of the facility, acting in good faith, is unable to provide notification because of unusual, extenuating circumstances, including remote location, power outages, incapacity of owner or operator, and disruption of telephone service.
With respect to transportation of a substance subject to the requirements of this section, or storage incident to such transportation, the notice requirements of this section with respect to a release shall be satisfied by dialing 911 or, in the absence of a 911 emergency telephone number, calling the operator.''.
COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSE, COMPENSATION, AND LIABILITY ACT OF 1980.
Section 103 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9603) is amended as follows: (1) By striking ``Any person in charge of a vessel'' in subsection (a) and all that follows through the end of the subsection and inserting the following: ``Any person in charge of a vessel or an offshore or an onshore facility shall, within 1 hour of having knowledge of any release (other than a federally permitted release) of a hazardous substance from such vessel or facility in quantities equal to or greater than those determined pursuant to section 9602 of this title, notify-- ``(1) the National Response Center established under the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes); ``(2) the State emergency response commission established under the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (42 United States Code 11001 et sequentes); or ``(3) a State agency authorized by State law to receive notification of such release.
If the National Response Center is notified directly, the Center shall convey the notification within 2 hours to all appropriate Government agencies, including the Governor of any affected State.
If the State emergency response commission receives notification of such release from a State agency or from the person in charge of a vessel or an offshore or an onshore facility, the commission shall convey notification within 2 hours to the National Response Center.
If an authorized State agency receives notification of such release from a person in charge of a vessel or an offshore or an onshore facility, the State agency shall convey notification within 2 hours to the National Response Center and the State emergency response commission.
Notice may be given later than 1 hour after knowledge of a leak or spill if the person, acting in good faith, is unable to provide notification because of unusual, extenuating circumstances, including location, power outages, incapacity of person having knowledge, and disruption of telephone service.''.
In subsection (b), by striking ``immediately the appropriate agency'' and all that follows through ``knowledge of such release'' and inserting ``, within 1 hour of having knowledge that such release had occurred, the National Response Center, the State emergency response commission, or the appropriate State agency as designated by State law''.