This Act may be cited as the ``Colonel Charles Young Home National Historical Site Study Act''.
STUDY AND REPORT ON THE COLONEL CHARLES YOUNG HOME AND ASSOCIATED LOCATIONS AND ENTITIES.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Secretary of the Army, shall conduct a study of the study area, as defined in section 4(2), to assess its national significance and the suitability and feasibility of including it as a unit of the National Park System.
Requirements of study.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall-- (A) comply with section 8(c) of the National Park System General Authorities Act (16 United States Code 1a-5(c)); (B) consult with interested Federal, State, tribal, and local officials, representatives of civic organizations, and members of the public; (C) consider in the evaluation conducted pursuant to section 8(c)(3)(B) of such Act (16 United States Code 1a- 5(c)(3)(B)), in consultation with the Secretary of the Army, an affiliation of the study area with the National Museum of the United States Army, the Buffalo Soldiers National Museum, or other entities associated with Colonel Charles Young, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, in order to focus on the life of Colonel Charles Young and the African-American military experience; (D) investigate the historical relationship of the Colonel Charles Young Home with the Underground Railroad by methods including-- (i) consideration of available historical documentation; and (ii) completion of architectural and archeological investigations of the Colonel Charles Young Home; and (E) consider research in existence on the date of the enactment of this Act, as well as original research conducted as a part of the study authorized by this subsection, on the historical significance and feasibility of preserving and interpreting the study area.
Report.--Notwithstanding section 8(c)(1) of the National Park System General Authorities Act (16 United States Code 1a-5(c)(1)), within 2 complete fiscal years after the date on which funds are made available to carry out the study required by subsection (a) of this section, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that describes the findings of the study and the conclusions and recommendations of the Secretary relating to-- (1) the inclusion of the study area as a unit of the National Park System; and (2) if the Secretary concludes that the study area meets the criteria for inclusion, the affiliation of the new unit of the National Park System with the entities referred to in subsection (a)(2)(C).
INCLUSION OF THE COLONEL CHARLES YOUNG HOME AND ASSOCIATED LOCATIONS AS A UNIT OF THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM AND AFFILIATION OF ASSOCIATED ENTITIES WITH SUCH UNIT.
Inclusion.--If the Secretary concludes in the report required by section 2(b) that the study area meets the criteria for inclusion as a unit of the National Park System-- (1) the study area shall be included as a unit of the National Park System; and (2) not later than 30 days after such inclusion, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a notice that the study area has been included as a unit of the National Park System.
Affiliation.--If the study area is included as a unit of the National Park System under subsection (a) and the Secretary recommends in the report required by section 2(b) an affiliation of such unit with the entities referred to in section 2(a)(2)(C), the Secretary may take the action necessary to implement such an affiliation.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Secretary.--Unless otherwise indicated, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Study area.--The term ``study area'' means the following: (A) The colonel charles young home.--The Colonel Charles Young Home, a National Historic Landmark located in Xenia, Ohio.
The united states cavalry museum.--The United States Cavalry Museum located at Fort Riley, Kansas.
The frontier army museum.--The Frontier Army Museum located at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.
The fort huachuca historical museum.--The Fort Huachuca Historical Museum located at Fort Huachuca, Arizona.
The presidio army museum.--The Presidio Army Museum located in San Francisco, California.
Other associated locations.--Any other location associated with Colonel Charles Young, as determined by the Secretary.