This Act may be cited as the ``Ensuring the Effective Use of United States Aid to Pakistan Act''.
PROHIBITION ON PROVISION OF NON-SECURITY ASSISTANCE TO PAKISTAN.
Prohibition.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, assistance may not be provided to Pakistan under any provision of law described in subsection (b).
Provisions of Law.--The provisions of law referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (1) Sections 103, 105, 106, and sections 251 through 255, and chapter 10 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (``Development Assistance'').
Chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act (``Economic Support Fund'').
Chapters 1 and 10 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 for global health activities (``Global Health and Child Survival'').
The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 for the promotion of democracy globally (``Democracy Fund'').
Section 491 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (``International Disaster Assistance'').
Any provision of law that authorizes the Secretary of State to provide a contribution to the International Committee of the Red Cross, assistance to refugees, including contributions to the International Organization for Migration and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and other activities to meet refugee and migration needs (``Migration and Refugee Assistance'').
Section 2(c) of the Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962 (``United States Refugee and Migration Assistance Fund'').
Title I of the Food for Peace Act (7 United States Code 1701 et seq.)
(relating to sales of agricultural commodities for economic assistance and food security) and title II of the Food for Peace Act (7 United States Code 1721 et sequentes) (relating to grants to provide agricultural commodities under emergency and private assistance programs).
Section 416(b) of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 United States Code 1431(b)) (relating to furnishing agricultural commodities for carrying out programs of assistance in developing countries and friendly countries).
Title I of the Enhanced Partnership with Pakistan Act of 2009 (relating to democratic, economic, and development assistance for Pakistan).
Any other related or similar provision of law, including any provision of law authorizing contributions to international organizations.
Applicability.--The prohibition on assistance to Pakistan under section 2(c) of the Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962, as described in subsection (b)(7) of this section, shall apply notwithstanding section 2(f) of the Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962.
REQUIREMENTS FOR PROVISION OF SECURITY ASSISTANCE TO PAKISTAN.
Requirements.--Assistance may be provided to Pakistan under any provision of law other than the provisions of law described in section 2(b) only during a period for which a certification described in subsection (b) or a recertification described in subsection (c) is in effect.
Certification.--A certification referred to in subsection (a) is a certification transmitted by the President to Congress that contains a determination of the President that the Government of Pakistan-- (1) is cooperating with the United States in efforts against Al Qaeda, the Taliban, and associated terrorist groups, including prevention of such groups from carrying out cross- border attacks on neighboring countries; (2) does not impede United States counterterrorism efforts; and (3) will use the assistance solely for the purpose of border security, counter-terrorism, and law enforcement activities directed against Al Qaeda, the Taliban, and associated terrorist groups.
Recertifications.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the President transmits to Congress an initial certification under subsection (b), and every 6 months thereafter-- (1) the President shall transmit to Congress a recertification that the conditions described in subsection (b) are continuing to be met; or (2) if the President is unable to make such a recertification, the President shall transmit to Congress a report that contains the reasons therefor.
Rule of Construction.--The conditions described in subsection (b) are in addition to the conditions contained in any provision of law other than the provisions of law described in section 2(b) for the provision of assistance to Pakistan.
In General.--This Act takes effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Applicability.-- (1) Section 2.--Section 2 applies with respect to amounts allocated for assistance to Pakistan under the provisions of law described in section 2(b) on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Section 3.--Section 3 applies with respect to amounts allocated for assistance to Pakistan under any provision of law other than the provisions of law described in section 2(b) for each fiscal year beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.