This Act may be cited as the ``International Arbitration Enforcement Act of 1999''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Arbitration is an efficient and flexible dispute resolution mechanism of great benefit to United States persons doing business internationally.
In some countries, particularly those with undeveloped or inconsistent judicial systems, international arbitration may be the only fair and reliable dispute resolution mechanism available to United States persons.
The usefulness of international arbitration depends in large measure on the commitment of foreign states to enforce foreign arbitral awards pursuant to their accession to, and observance of, the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.
United States persons are often without remedies when foreign states violate the Convention by refusing to enforce foreign arbitral awards or by otherwise impairing the ability to collect the awards by improperly delaying their enforcement.
It is in the interest of the United States to maintain the reliability of international arbitration, to promote the observance of the Convention, and to protect United States persons from economic injury resulting from violations of the Convention by foreign states.
Similarly, it would be unjust to permit a foreign state to be shielded from liability in the United States for the damages suffered by a United States person abroad resulting from a violation of the Convention by the foreign state.
It is therefore in the national interest to create a judicial remedy in favor of United States persons injured as a result of a violation of the Convention by a foreign state and to facilitate the execution of any judgment entered in such an action.
The purpose of this Act is to create a civil remedy against foreign states whose violation of the Convention injures United States persons by prohibiting the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards entered in favor of such United States persons or by impairing the ability of such United States persons to collect such awards.
As used in this Act-- (1) Convention.--The term ``Convention'' means the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York on June 10, 1958.
United states person.--The term ``United States person'' means-- (A) any United States citizen or alien admitted for permanent residence into the United States; or (B) any corporation, trust, partnership, or other judicial entity established pursuant to the laws of the United States or its several States and territories.
Foreign arbitral award.--The term ``foreign arbitral award'' means any arbitral award to which the Convention applies.
LIABILITY FOR VIOLATION OF THE CONVENTION.
Civil Remedy.--(1) Any foreign state that is certified by the President under subsection (b) to have injured a United States person through the state's violation of the Convention with respect to a foreign arbitral award shall be liable to the United States person for money damages consisting of-- (A) the amount of the foreign arbitral award, plus any interest provided for by the award; and (B) the attorney's fees and costs incurred by the United States person in bringing an action under this Act with respect to such certification.
Actions may be brought under paragraph (1) with respect to arbitral awards entered before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Presidential Certification.--The President may certify an injury to a United States person through a violation of the Convention if-- (1)(A) a foreign state has failed to enforce a foreign arbitral award entered in favor of that United States person in violation of the state's obligations under the Convention; or (B) a foreign state has impeded, in violation of its obligations under the Convention, the enforcement of a foreign arbitral award entered in favor of that United States person such that the ability of the United States person to collect the award may reasonably be presumed to have been impaired or reduced; and (2) the United States person has exhausted all judicial and administrative remedies in the foreign state in which the arbitral award is sought to be enforced, or the further pursuit of such remedies would reasonably be considered to be futile.
Effect of Presidential Certification.--A Presidential certification that a United States person has been injured by a foreign state's violation of the Convention shall, in any action brought under this Act, establish an evidentiary presumption that-- (1) the foreign state certified to have violated the Convention has done so; and (2) the damages suffered by the United States person are equivalent to the amount of the award plus interest, if any.
Jurisdiction.--(1) Chapter 85 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1331 the following new section: ``Sec.
Civil actions involving violations of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards ``The district courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in controversy, of any action brought under section 5 of the International Arbitration Enforcement Act of 1999.''.
The table of sections for chapter 85 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1331 the following: ``1331a.
Civil actions involving violations of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.''.
Waiver of Sovereign Immunity.--Section 1605 of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (6); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(8) in which the action is brought with respect to violations of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards under section 5 of the International Arbitration Enforcement Act of 1999.''.
No Immunity From Attachment or Execution.--(1) Section 1610(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``, or''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(8) the judgment or attachment relates to a claim for which the foreign state is not immune under section 1605(a)(8), regardless of whether the property is or was involved in or related to the act giving rise to or upon which the claim is based.''.
Section 1610(b) of such title is amended-- (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, or''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) the judgment or attachment relates to a claim for which the foreign state is not immune under section 1605(a)(8), regardless of whether the property is or was involved in or related to the act giving rise to or upon which the claim is based.''.
Limitations Period.--An action under this Act may be brought within one year after the President makes the certification under subsection (b) on which the action is based.