This Act may be cited as the ``Seniors Health Choice Preservation Act of 2000''.
APPLICATION OF BUDGET NEUTRALITY PRINCIPLE TO THE NEW MEDICARE+CHOICE RISK ADJUSTMENT METHODOLOGY.
In General.--Section 1853(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-23(a)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Implementation in a budget neutral manner.-- The methodology under this paragraph shall be designed and implemented in a manner so that it does not result in any material change in the aggregate level of expenditures under this title compared to the level that would have occurred if such methodology had not been implemented (and if the previous risk adjustment methodology used in 1998 had continued to be implemented).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) takes effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and applies to payments for months beginning on or after January 2001.
CHANGES TO HEALTH-STATUS RISK ADJUSTMENT.
Implementation of Health-status Risk Adjustment Through Negotiated Rulemaking.--Section 1853(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-23(c)) is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Implementation of health-status risk adjustment through negotiated rulemaking.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish, using a negotiated rulemaking process under subchapter III of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, and on an expedited basis, health-status related risk adjustors described in paragraph (3).
Appointment of committee.--In appointing negotiated rulemaking committee under section 565(a) of such title, the Secretary shall include representatives of Medicare+Choice organizations, providers, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, the Academy of Actuaries, the Department of Health and Human Services, and representatives of organizations with expertise in data privacy issues.
Factors to consider.--The health status risk adjustment methodology shall be based on the health status of Medicare+Choice enrollees.
In evaluating alternative approaches, the committee and the Secretary shall weigh the costs of implementing risk adjustment methods against their benefits in terms of predictive power.
Deadlines.-- ``(i) Committee appointment.--The Secretary shall provide for the appointment of the negotiated rulemaking committee under subparagraph (B) by not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this paragraph.
Reporting deadline.--The committee shall submit its recommendations to the Secretary by not later than December 31, 2001.
Superseding other provisions.--Regulations promulgated by the Secretary pursuant to recommendations of the committee shall supersede the regulations implemented under paragraph (3).''.
Limiting Phase-in of Current Health-Status Risk Adjustment Methodology.--Section 1853(a)(3)(C)(ii)(II) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395w-23(a)(3)(C)(ii)(II)), as amended by section 511(a) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Balanced Budget Refinement Act of 1999 (113 United States Statutes at Large 1501A-380), as enacted into law by section 1000(a)(6) of Public Law 106-113, is amended by striking ``not more than 20 percent of such capitation rate in 2002'' and inserting ``not more than 10 percentage points more than the percent of \1/12\ of the annual Medicare+Choice capitation rate that it applied to in the previous year, except as may be provided for under paragraph (4)''.
Elimination of Requirement To Report Encounter Data.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall immediately discontinue all activity related to requiring Medicare+Choice organizations, under part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act, to submit encounter data for sites other than hospital inpatient departments, before final regulations are promulgated implementing the health-status risk adjustment methodology developed under the amendment made by subsection (a).
ADDITIONAL FLOOR FOR ANNUAL INCREASE IN MEDICARE+CHOICE CAPITATION RATES.
Section 1853(c)(3)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w- 23(c)(3)(C)) is amended-- (1) in clause (ii), by inserting ``(before 2002)'' after ``For a subsequent year''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iii) For 2002 and each subsequent year, the greater of (I) 102 percent of the annual Medicare+Choice capitation rate under this paragraph for the area for the previous year, or (II) such rate for the previous year increased by the national per capita Medicare+Choice growth percentage, described in paragraph (6)(A) for the succeeding year.''.
PAYMENT OF ADDITIONAL DRUG INFLATION DIFFERENTIAL FOR MEDICARE+CHOICE PLANS OFFERING QUALIFIED PRESCRIPTION DRUG COVERAGE.
In General.--Section 1853 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-23) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1)(A), by striking ``and (i)'' and inserting ``(i), and (j)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Payment of Additional Drug Inflation Differential for Medicare+Choice Plans Offering Qualified Prescription Drug Coverage.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of a Medicare+Choice plan that offers qualified prescription drug coverage (as defined in paragraph (2))) in a year and that meets the conditions described in paragraph (3), the annual Medicare+Choice capitation rate otherwise applied under this section shall be increased by the percentage specified in paragraph (4).
Qualified prescription drug coverage defined.--In this subsection, the term `qualified prescription drug coverage' means coverage for outpatient prescription drugs under which-- ``(A) there is no deductible applicable; and ``(B) there is either no limitation to the amount of benefits available in a year or any such limitation is not less than $1,500.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing a Medicare+Choice plan offering qualified prescription drug coverage from imposing a copayment or other cost-sharing, other than a deductible.
Conditions.--The conditions described in this paragraph with respect to a Medicare+Choice plan for months in a year are as follows: ``(A) No separate premium.--There is no separate premium established for qualified prescription drug coverage under the plan.
Limit on premiums.--The adjusted community rate proposal shall include a certification that the percentage increase in the cost of drug benefits does not exceed 150 percent of the Secretary's estimate of the percentage specified in paragraph (4), adjusted to fairly reflect changes in the benefits provided.
Differential percentage.--The percentage specified in this paragraph for a Medicare+Choice plan for months in a year is equal to the product of the following: ``(A) Drug inflation differential.--The number of percentage points by which-- ``(i) the annual rate of inflation for prescription drug coverage under Medicare+Choice plans (as estimated by the Secretary for the year), exceeds ``(ii) the percentage increase in the annual Medicare+Choice capitation rate applicable to the plan under subsection (a) (not taking into account this subsection) for the year involved.
Proportion of total value represented by drug coverage.--The ratio of-- ``(i) the average per capita actuarial value of the qualified prescription drug coverage under the plan for the year; to ``(ii) the actuarial value of all benefits under the plan for the year.
In no case shall the percentage under this paragraph be less than 0.
Treatment.--The percentage increase in payment effected under this subsection shall be taken into account in applying section 1854(f) (relating to additional benefits) and such payment increase is subject to adjustment for risk factors under subsection (a) in the same manner as the payment described in such subsection.
Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as requiring a Medicare+Choice plan to provide qualified or other prescription drug coverage.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) apply to payment for months beginning with January 2002.