This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Commemoration Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) The United States is indebted to those who served this nation in times of war.
The United States must meet its obligations to veterans.
The Congress has the responsibility to fulfill those obligations to veterans.
The Congress recognizes the unique service that the Disabled American Veterans' transportation program provides to veterans.
The Congress would like to offer the opportunity for all persons to voluntarily participate in raising funds for the transportation of veterans to and from veterans' hospitals.
The Congress understands the importance of Executive Order Numbered 5398, signed by President Herbert Hoover on July 21, 1930, which created the Veterans Administration at a time when there were 54 hospitals, 4,700,000 living veterans, and 31,600 employees.
It is appropriate to authorize coins commemorating the service of veterans of the Armed Forces of the United States and provide for the use of the proceeds of surcharges imposed on the sale of the coins to fund the transportation of veterans to and from hospitals administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
$1 Silver Coins.-- (1) Designations.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins to commemorate veterans of the United States Armed Services.
Size, weight, and composition.--Each coin issued under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary may obtain silver for minting coins under this Act from any available source, including stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of each coin minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the service of veterans of the Armed Forces of the United States.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2005''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Disabled American Veterans and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning January 1, 2005.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this Act after December 31, 2005.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in section 8(a) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
In General.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $10.
Distribution.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary, in accordance with section 5134(f)(1) of title 31, United States Code, to the Disabled American Veterans for the purpose of funding the transportation of veterans to and from hospitals administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Audits.--The Disabled American Veterans shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code.