This Act may be cited as the ``Consular Review Act of 1993''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A BOARD OF VISA APPEALS.
In General.--The Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by inserting after section 224 the following new section: ``SEC.
BOARD OF VISA APPEALS.
Establishment.--The Secretary of State shall establish within the Department of State a Board of Visa Appeals.
The Board shall be composed of 5 members who shall be appointed by the Secretary.
No more than 2 members of the Board may be consular officers.
The Secretary shall designate a member who shall be chairperson of the Board.
Authority and Functions.--The Board shall have authority to review any discretionary decision of a consular officer with respect to an alien concerning the denial, revocation, or cancellation of an immigrant visa and of a nonimmigrant visa or petition and the denial of an application for waiver of one or more grounds of excludability under section 212.
The review of the Board shall be made upon the record for decision of the consular officer, including all documents, notes, and memoranda filed with the consular officer, supplemented by affidavits and other writings if offered by the consular officer or alien.
Upon a conclusive showing that the decision of the consular official is contrary to the preponderance of the evidence, the Board shall have authority to overrule, or remand for further consideration, the decision of such consular officer.
Procedure.--Proceedings before the Board shall be in accordance with such regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and sections 556 and 557 of title 5, United States Code, as the Secretary of State shall prescribe.
Such regulations shall include requirements that provide that-- ``(1) at the time of any decision of a consular officer under subsection (b), an alien, attorney of record, and any interested party defined in subsection (d) shall be given notice of the availability of the review process and the necessary steps to request such review, ``(2) a written record of the proceedings and decision of the consular officer (in accordance with sections 556 and 557) shall be available to the Board, and on payment of lawfully prescribed costs, shall be made available to the alien, ``(3) upon receipt of request for review under this section, the Board shall, within 30 days, notify the consular officer with respect to whose decision review is sought, and, upon receipt of such notice, such officer shall promptly (but in no event more than 30 days after such receipt) forward to the Board the record of proceeding as described in subsection (b), ``(4) the appellant shall be given notice, reasonable under all the circumstances of the time and place at which the Board proceedings will be held, ``(5) the appellant may be represented (at no expense to the Government) by such counsel, authorized to practice in such proceedings, as the appellant shall choose, and ``(6) a request for review under this section must be made in writing to the Board within 60 days after receipt of notice of the denial, revocation or cancellation.
Interested Parties.--The Board shall review each decision described in subsection (b) upon request of the alien or any of the following interested parties: ``(1) The petitioner or beneficiary of an immigrant visa petition approved under section 203(a), 203(b)(1), 203(b)(4), 203(b)(5), 203(c), or the petitioner of an immigrant visa petition approved under sections 203(b)(2) and 203(b)(3).
The petitioner of a nonimmigrant visa petition.
The postsecondary educational institution approved for the attendance of nonimmigrant students under section 101(a)(15)(F)(i) or 101(a)(15)(M)(i) which has provided notice of the acceptance of the alien in its program.
A recognized international agency or organization approved as a program sponsor under section 101(a)(15)(J) which has provided notice of the acceptance of the alien in its program.
A treaty investor or trader individual or organization in the United States that, under section 101(a)(15)(E), has made an offer of employment to an alien to perform executive or supervisory management functions.
Limitation.--A review may not be requested under this section more than once in any 24 month period.
Construction.--This section may not be construed to restrict any right to further administrative or judicial review established under any other provision of law.
Fees.--The Secretary of State shall charge, and collect, an appropriate fee associated with a request to the Board for a review.
Such fee shall be sufficient to cover the cost of the administration of this section.''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Proposed regulations with respect to the amendment made by subsection (a) shall be promulgated not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Members of the Board of Visa Appeals under section 225 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (as inserted by subsection (a)) shall be appointed not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Section 222(f) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1202(f)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``except that'' and all that follows up to the period, and (B) by adding: ``An interested party under section 225(d) or court shall be permitted to inspect the record of proceeding as described in subsections (c)(2) and (c)(3) of section 225,''.
Section 104(a)(1) of such Act (8 United States Code 1104(a)(1)) is amended by striking the ``except'' and inserting ``including'', (3) The table of contents of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 224 the following new item: ``Sec.
Board of Visa Appeals.