This Act may be cited as the ``Communications Competitiveness and Infrastructure Modernization Act of 1993''.
CABLE SERVICE PROVIDED BY TELEPHONE COMPANIES.
General Requirement.-- Section 613(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 533(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1) Subject to the requirements of part V and other provisions of this title, any common carrier subject in whole or in part to title II of this Act may provide video programming directly to subscribers in its telephone service area either through its own facilities or through an affiliate owned by, operated by, controlled by, or under common control with the common carrier.
Subject to the requirements of part V and other provisions of this title, any common carrier subject in whole or in part to title II of this Act may provide channels of communications or pole line conduit space, or other rental arrangements, to any entity which is directly or indirectly owned by, operated by, controlled by, or under common control with such common carrier, if such facilities or arrangements are to be used for, or in connection with, the provision of video programming directly to subscribers in the telephone service area to the common carrier.''.
Provisions for Regulation of Cable Service Provided by Telephone Companies.--Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 521 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``Part V--Cable Service Provided by Telephone Companies ``SEC.
``For purposes of this part-- ``(1) the term `affiliated video programming' means any video programming which is (A) owned or controlled by, or under common control with, a common carrier, and (B) provided by the common carrier or an affiliate directly to subscribers in its telephone service area; ``(2) the term `control' means-- ``(A) an ownership interest in which an entity has the right to vote more than 50 percent of the outstanding common stock or other ownership interest; or ``(B) actual working control, if no single entity directly or indirectly has the right to vote more than 50 percent of the outstanding common stock or other ownership interest; ``(3) the term `basic video dial tone platform' has the same meaning as established by order of the Commission entitled `Telephone Company-Cable Television Cross-Ownership Rules, Sections 63.54-63.58', CC Docket No.
87-266, adopted July 16, 1992; and ``(4) the term `rural area' means a geographic area that does not include either-- ``(A) any incorporated or unincorporated place of 10,000 inhabitants or more, or any part thereof; or ``(B) any territory, incorporated or unincorporated, included in an urbanized area.
SEPARATE VIDEO PROGRAMMING AFFILIATE.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a common carrier shall not provide video programming directly to subscribers in its telephone service area unless such video programming is provided through a video programming affiliate that is separate from such carrier.
Books and Marketing.--A video programming affiliate of a common carrier shall-- ``(1) maintain books, records, and accounts separate from such carrier which identify all transactions with such carrier; ``(2) carry out directly (or through any nonaffiliate or any other affiliate of such carrier) its own marketing and sales, except that institutional advertising carried out by such carrier shall be permitted so long as each party bears its pro rata share of the costs; and ``(3) not own real or personal property in common with such carrier.
Business Transactions With Carrier Subject to Regulation.-- Any contract, agreement, arrangement, joint venture, partnership, or other manner of conducting business, between a common carrier and its video programming affiliate, providing for-- ``(1) the sale, exchange, or leasing of property between such affiliate and such carrier; ``(2) the loan of money or other extension of credit between such affiliate and such carrier or between such affiliate and a third party directly or indirectly guaranteed by such carrier; ``(3) the furnishing of goods between such affiliate and such carrier; or ``(4) the transfer to or use by such affiliate for its benefit of any assets of such carrier, shall be pursuant to regulation prescribed by the Commission, shall be on a fully compensatory and auditable basis, shall be without cost to the telephone service ratepayers of the carrier, and shall be in compliance with rules established by the Commission which will be sufficient to enable the Commission to assess the compliance of any transaction.
Waiver.--The Commission may waive any of the requirements of this section upon the showing of good cause, by a common carrier, video programming affiliate, or any other person, if the Commission determines that the public interest, convenience, and necessity will be served by the waiver.
The Commission shall act to approve or disapprove a waiver application within 120 days after the date it is filed.
ESTABLISHMENT OF BASIC VIDEO DIAL TONE PLATFORM.
``Any common carrier which provides video programming directly to subscribers through a video programming affiliate in its telephone service area shall establish a basic video dial tone platform.
The Commission, together with the States, shall establish regulations to prohibit a carrier from discriminating in favor of its video programming affiliate in providing access to such platform or with regard to rates, terms, and conditions for access to such platform.
PROVISION OF AFFILIATED VIDEO PROGRAMMING.
Limitation.--A common carrier which provides affiliated video programming directly to subscribers in its telephone service area through its video programming affiliate shall make available such capacity as is requested by unaffiliated video program providers upon reasonable notice, except that the common carrier shall not be required to provide more than 75 percent of the equipped capacity of its basic video dial tone platform to unaffiliated video program providers.
Evaluation by Commission.--The Commission shall, not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this part, evaluate the effect of subsection (a) on the video programming marketplace and, on the basis of that evaluation, make recommendations to Congress concerning appropriate modifications, if any, to subsection (a).
Broadcast Signal Carriage Excluded.--The carriage of local broadcast signals pursuant to section 614 shall not constitute the provision of affiliated video programming for purposes of subsection (a).
Waiver.--The Commission may waive or otherwise modify the applicability of subsection (a) if it determines that video programming is not available for transport by a common carrier to subscribers in its telephone service area.
The Commission shall act to approve or disapprove a waiver application within a reasonable period of time.
Termination.--Subsection (a) shall cease to be effective five years after the date of enactment of this part.
``A common carrier shall not engage in any practice that-- ``(1) results in the inclusion in rates for telephone exchange service of any operating expenses, costs, depreciation charges, capital investments, or other expenses associated with the provision of video programming by the common carrier or its video programming affiliate; and ``(2) is prohibited by the Commission or a State.
General Prohibition.--No common carrier which provides telephone service, nor any entity owned by or under common ownership or control with such carrier, may purchase or otherwise obtain control over any cable system which is located within its telephone service area and is owned by an unaffiliated person.
Exceptions.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), a common carrier shall not be prevented from-- ``(1) obtaining a noncontrolling interest in such a cable system through a joint venture or other means; or ``(2) acquiring the use of that part of the transmission facilities of such a cable system extending from the last multi-user terminal to the premises of the end user if such use is reasonably limited in scope and duration.
Waiver.-- ``(1) The Commission may waive the restrictions in subsection (a) of this section only upon a showing by a carrier that-- ``(A) the facilities of the cable system will be substantially upgraded through the deployment of modern technology, including fiber optics; ``(B) the capacity of the cable system and types of services offered will be expanded; ``(C) the purchase or acquisition of control will otherwise be in the public interest; and ``(D) the local franchising authority approves of such waiver.
The Commission shall act to approve or disapprove a waiver application within 180 days after the date it is filed.
``If the Commission finds, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, including the oral examination and cross-examination of witnesses, that any common carrier has knowingly and willfully violated any provision of this part, the Commission shall assess such fines and penalties as it deems appropriate pursuant to title V of this Act.
Joint Board Required.--The Commission shall, within 30 days after the date of enactment of this part, convene a Federal-State Joint Board under the provisions of section 410(c) for the purpose of establishing the practices, classifications, and regulations as may be necessary to ensure proper jurisdictional separation and allocation of the costs of providing broadband services, including affiliated video programming.
The Board shall issue its recommendations to the Commission within 270 days after the date of enactment of this part.
Commission Regulations Required.--The Commission, with respect to interstate switched access service, and the States, with respect to telephone exchange service and intrastate interexchange service, shall, within one year after the date of the enactment of this part, establish such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement section 655.
No Effect on Carrier Regulation Authority.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or supersede the authority of any State or the Commission with respect to the allocation of costs associated with intrastate or interstate communication services.
``The provisions of sections 652, 653, 654, and 656 shall not apply to video programming provided in a rural area by a common carrier that provides telephone exchange service in the same area.