This Act may be referred to as the ``Liberian Refugee Immigration Fairness Act of 1999''.
Adjustment of Status.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Eligibility.--The Attorney General shall adjust the status of an alien described in subsection (b) to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, if the alien-- (i) applies for adjustment before April 1, 2001; and (ii) is otherwise eligible to receive an immigrant visa and is otherwise admissible to the United States for permanent residence, except that, in determining such admissibility, the grounds for inadmissibility specified in paragraphs (4), (5), (6)(A), and (7)(A) of section 212(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act shall not apply.
Ineligible aliens.--An alien shall not be eligible for adjustment of status under this section if the Attorney General finds that the alien has been convicted of-- (i) any aggravated felony (as defined in section 101(a)(43) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)(43)); or (ii) two or more crimes involving moral turpitude.
Relationship of application to certain orders.--An alien present in the United States who has been ordered excluded, deported, removed, or ordered to depart voluntarily from the United States under any provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act may, notwithstanding such order, apply for adjustment of status under paragraph (1), if otherwise qualified under that paragraph.
Such an alien may not be required, as a condition on submitting or granting such application, to file a separate motion to reopen, reconsider, or vacate such order.
If the Attorney General grants the application, the Attorney General shall cancel the order.
If the Attorney General makes a final decision to deny the application, the order shall be effective and enforceable to the same extent as if the application had not been made.
Aliens Eligible for Adjustment of Status.-- (1) In general.--The benefits provided by subsection (a) shall apply to any alien-- (A) who is-- (i) a national of Liberia; and (ii) has been continuously present in the United States from January 1, 1999, through the date of application under subsection (a); or (B) who is the spouse, child, or unmarried son or daughter of an alien described in subparagraph (A).
Determination of continuous physical presence.--For purposes of establishing the period of continuous physical presence referred to in paragraph (1), an alien shall not be considered to have failed to maintain continuous physical presence by reasons of an absence, or absences, from the United States for any period or periods amounting in the aggregate to not more than 180 days.
Stay of Removal.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General shall provide by regulation for an alien who is subject to a final order of deportation or removal or exclusion to seek a stay of such order based on the filing of an application under subsection (a).
During certain proceedings.--Notwithstanding any provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act, the Attorney General shall not order an alien to be removed from the United States if the alien is in exclusion, deportation, or removal proceedings under any provision of such Act and has applied for adjustment of status under subsection (a), except where the Attorney General has made a final determination to deny the application.
Work authorization.--The Attorney General may authorize an alien who has applied for adjustment of status under subsection (a) to engage in employment in the United States during the pendency of such application and may provide the alien with an ``employment authorized'' endorsement or other appropriate document signifying authorization of employment, except that, if such application is pending for a period exceeding 180 days and has not been denied, the Attorney General shall authorize such employment.
Record of Permanent Residence.--Upon approval of an alien's application for adjustment of status under subsection (a), the Attorney General shall establish a record of the alien's admission for permanent record as of the date of the alien's arrival in the United States.
Availability of Administrative Review.--The Attorney General shall provide to applicants for adjustment of status under subsection (a) the same right to, and procedures for, administrative review as are provided to-- (1) applicants for adjustment of status under section 245 of the Immigration and Nationality Act; or (2) aliens subject to removal proceedings under section 240 of such Act.
Limitation on Judicial Review.--A determination by the Attorney General as to whether the status of any alien should be adjusted under this section is final and shall not be subject to review by any court.
No Offset in Number of Visas Available.--Whenever an alien is granted the status of having been lawfully admitted for permanent residence pursuant to this section, the Secretary of State shall not be required to reduce the number of immigrant visas authorized to be issued under any provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Application of Immigration and Nationality Act Provisions.-- Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, the definitions contained in the Immigration and Nationality Act shall apply in the administration of this section.
Nothing contained in the Act shall be held to repeal, amend, alter, modify, effect, or restrict the powers, duties, function, or authority of the Attorney General in the administration and enforcement of such Act or any other law relating to immigration, nationality, or naturalization.
The fact that an alien may be eligible to be granted the status of having been lawfully admitted for permanent residence under this section shall not preclude the alien from seeking such status under any other provision of law for which the alien may be eligible.