SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Welfare Improvement Act of 1997''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
No additional cash assistance for children born to families receiving assistance.
Prohibition of recruitment activities.
Mandatory termination of assistance.
Work participation rate requirement.
Limitation on payments to States.
NO ADDITIONAL CASH ASSISTANCE FOR CHILDREN BORN TO FAMILIES RECEIVING ASSISTANCE.
Section 408(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 608(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(12) No additional cash assistance for children born to families receiving assistance.-- ``(A) General rule.--A State to which a grant is made under section 403 shall not use any part of the grant to provide cash benefits for a minor child who is born to-- ``(i) a recipient of assistance under the program operated under this part; or ``(ii) a person who received such assistance at any time during the 10-month period ending with the birth of the child.
Exception for children born into families with no other children.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to a minor child who is born into a family that does not include any other children.
Exception for vouchers.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to vouchers which are provided in lieu of cash benefits and which may be used only to pay for particular goods and services specified by the State as suitable for the care of the child involved.
Exception for rape or incest.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to a child who is born as a result of rape or incest.
State election to opt out.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to a State if State law specifically exempts the State program funded under this part from the application of subparagraph (A).
Substitution of family caps in effect under waivers.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to a State-- ``(i) if, as of the date of the enactment of this part, there is in effect a waiver approved by the Secretary under section 1115 which permits the State to deny aid under the State plan approved under part A of this title (as in effect without regard to the amendments made by title I of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-193, 110 United States Statutes at Large 2110) to a family by reason of the birth of a child to a family member otherwise eligible for such aid; and ``(ii) for so long as the State continues to implement such policy under the State program funded under this part, under rules prescribed by the State.''.
PROHIBITION OF RECRUITMENT ACTIVITIES.
Section 1631 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1383) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``prohibition of recruitment activities ``(p) Nothing in this title shall be construed to authorize recruitment activities under this title, including with respect to any outreach programs or demonstration projects.''.
MANDATORY TERMINATION OF ASSISTANCE.
Section 407(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 607(e)(1)), is amended to read as follows: ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), if an individual in a family receiving assistance under the State program funded under this part refuses to engage in work required in accordance with this section, the State shall-- ``(A) in the case of the first or second refusal-- ``(i) reduce the amount of assistance otherwise payable to the family pro rata (or more, at the option of the State) with respect to any period during a month in which the individual so refuses; or ``(ii) terminate such assistance, subject to such good cause and other exceptions as the State may establish; and ``(B) in the case of the third refusal, terminate the assistance.''.
WORK PARTICIPATION RATE REQUIREMENT.
The table in section 407(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 607(a)(1)), is amended, in the item relating to fiscal year 2002 or thereafter, by striking ``50'' and inserting ``75''.
LIMITATION ON PAYMENTS TO STATES.
Part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 601 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
LIMITATION ON PAYMENTS TO STATES.
``Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, no funds may be paid to a State under this part unless the State-- ``(1) establishes and maintains a reasonable program for randomly testing an individual in a family receiving assistance under the State program funded under this part for the use of controlled substances; and ``(2) terminates assistance under the State program funded under this part for any individual who tests positive for the use of controlled substances.''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act take effect as if included in the enactment of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-193, 110 United States Statutes at Large 2105).