This Act may be cited as the ``Blue Ribbon Commission to Eliminate Duplicative and Noncompetitive Federal Regulations Act''.
There is established a commission known as the Blue Ribbon Commission to Eliminate Duplicative and Noncompetitive Federal Regulations (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) conduct a survey of the private sector to determine which Federal regulations are duplicative or impede competition; (2) conduct in-depth reviews of regulations promulgated by the executive agencies; (3)(A) review existing Government Accounting Office reports, Congressional Budget Office reports, Inspector General reports, and other existing governmental and nongovernmental recommendations for reducing duplicative or noncompetitive Federal regulations; and (B) based on the review conducted pursuant to subparagraph (A), periodically submit to the President and the Congress a report on those recommendations, with estimated savings, that the Commission determines are most significant, and include in the report a determination of whether such recommendations can be implemented by Executive order or whether it requires legislative action; and (4) submit to the President and the Congress recommendations for streamlining Federal regulations and reducing costs and unnecessary paperwork that result from such regulations for both the Federal Government and the private sector.
Particular Areas to Be Examined.--In fulfilling the duties required by (a), the Commission shall identify and address-- (1) opportunities for increased efficiency and reduced costs in regulations promulgated by the Federal Government that can be realized by executive action or legislation without jeopardizing safety or environmental quality; (2) specific reforms of the regulatory process that would yield savings, increase accountability and efficiency, and enhance public confidence in the regulatory process; and (3) specific areas in the Federal Government where potential savings would justify further study.
Number and Appointment.--The membership of the Commission shall be as follows: (1) Thirteen members shall be appointed by the President from among individuals who are not officers or employees of a Federal, State, of local government and who are especially qualified to serve on the Commission by virtue of their education, training or experience.
The majority leader and minority leader of the Senate and the Speaker and minority leader of the House of Representatives may submit recommendations to the President concerning appointments to the Commission.
Not more than seven members of the Commission shall be of the same political party.
Continuation of Membership.--If a member of the Commission becomes an officer or employee of a Federal, State, or local government, such individual may continue as a member of the Commission for not longer than the thirty-day period beginning on the date such individual becomes such an officer or employee.
Appointment of Original Members.--Appointments shall be made within thirty days of enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled within thirty days in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsidence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members of the Commission from among the members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the Chairperson of the Commission.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director appointed by the Chairperson of the Commission and paid at a rate determined by the Commission.
Staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the Director of the Commission may appoint such personnel as the Director considers appropriate.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of the Federal agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Contractual Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies or services without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Periodic Reports.--Pursuant to section 3(a)(3), the Commission shall issue periodic reports to the President and the Congress.
Final Report.--Not later than two years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a final report setting forth the findings and conclusions of the Commission and specific recommendations for legislative and administrative actions that the Commission determines to be appropriate.
The Commission shall be funded, staffed and equipped, to the extent practicable and permitted by law, by the private sector without cost to the Federal Government.
To accomplish this objective, it is expected that the Secretary of Commerce will engage in a joint project with a nonprofit organization, pursuant to the first section of Public Law 91- 412 (15 United States Code 1525) for the purpose of aiding the Commission in exercising its power and performing its duties under this Act.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the Commission shall terminate not later than the expiration of the thirty- day period beginning on the date on which the Commission submits its final report under section 7(b).
Extension of Life of Commission.--The President may extend the life of the Commission for a six month period beginning on the date on which the Commission terminates under subsection (a), and for successive six month periods thereafter.