This Act may be cited as the ``Property Owners Access to Justice Act of 1997''.
JURISDICTION IN CIVIL RIGHTS CASES.
Section 1343 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Whenever a district court exercises jurisdiction under subsection (a), it shall not abstain from exercising or relinquish its jurisdiction to a State court in an action where no claim of a violation of a State law, right, or privilege is alleged.
Where the district court has jurisdiction over an action under subsection (a) that cannot be decided without resolution of a significant but unsettled question of State law, the district court may certify the question of State law to the highest appellate court of that State.
After the State appellate court resolves the question certified to it, the district court shall proceed with resolving the merits.
The district court shall not certify a question of State law under this subsection unless the question of State law-- ``(1) will significantly affect the merits of the injured party's Federal claim; and ``(2) is so unclear and obviously susceptible to a limiting construction as to render premature a decision on the merits of the constitutional or legal issue in the case.
(1) Any claim or action brought under section 1979 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 United States Code 1983) to redress the deprivation of a property right or privilege secured by the Constitution shall be ripe for adjudication by the district courts upon a final decision rendered by any person acting under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or territory of the United States, that causes actual and concrete injury to the party seeking redress.
For purposes of this subsection, a final decision exists if-- ``(A) any person acting under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or territory of the United States, makes a definitive decision regarding the extent of permissible uses on the property that has been allegedly infringed or taken, without regard to any uses that may be permitted elsewhere; and ``(B) the applicable statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage provides for a right of appeal or waiver from such decision, and the party seeking redress has applied for, but has been denied, one such appeal or waiver.
The party seeking redress shall not be required to apply for an appeal or waiver described in subparagraph (B) if the prospects of success are reasonably unlikely and intervention by the district court is warranted to decide the merits.
For purposes of this subsection, a final decision shall not require the party seeking redress to exhaust judicial remedies provided by any State or territory of the United States.''.
UNITED STATES AS DEFENDANT.
Section 1346 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h)(1) Any claim brought under subsection (a) that is founded upon a property right or privilege secured by the Constitution, but was allegedly infringed or taken by the United States, shall be ripe for adjudication upon a final decision rendered by the United States, that causes actual and concrete injury to the party seeking redress.
For purposes of this subsection, a final decision exists if-- ``(A) the United States makes a definitive decision regarding the extent of permissible uses on the property that has been allegedly infringed or taken, without regard to any uses that may be permitted elsewhere; and ``(B) an applicable law of the United States provides for a right of appeal or waiver from such decision, and the party seeking redress has applied for, but has been denied, one such appeal or waiver.
The party seeking redress shall not be required to apply for an appeal or waiver described in subparagraph (B), if the prospects of success are reasonably unlikely and intervention by the district court or the United States Court of Federal Claims is warranted to decide the merits.''.
JURISDICTION OF COURT OF FEDERAL CLAIMS.
Section 1491(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Any claim brought under this subsection founded upon a property right or privilege secured by the Constitution, but allegedly infringed or taken by the United States, shall be ripe for adjudication upon a final decision rendered by the United States, that causes actual and concrete injury to the party seeking redress.
For purposes of this paragraph, a final decision exists if-- ``(A) the United States makes a definitive decision regarding the extent of permissible uses on the property that has been allegedly infringed or taken, without regard to any uses that may be permitted elsewhere; and ``(B) an applicable law of the United States provides for a right of appeal or waiver from such final decision, and the party seeking redress has applied for, but has been denied, one such appeal or waiver.
The party seeking redress shall not be required to apply for an appeal or waiver described in subparagraph (B) if the prospects of success are reasonably unlikely and intervention by the United States Court of Federal Claims is warranted to decide the merits.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply to actions commenced on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.