This Act may be cited as the ``Timber Management Improvement Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Under the timber management policy of nondeclining even flow, articulated in section 13(a) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974, the allowable sale quantity for a national forest is a function of total timber growth, which depends on available timberland area and the rate of timber growth.
Protecting the northern spotted owl and other factors will lead to reductions in the Federal land available for timber harvesting, leading to declines in harvests and to undesirable declines in timber industry employment.
Increases in timber management investments on Federal and other lands not protected as spotted owl habitat could offset some of the declines in allowable sale quantities resulting from spotted owl protection.
No separate studies of timber management investment opportunities on Federal timberlands have been conducted for more than a decade.
The fund established by section 3 of the Act of June 9, 1930 (16 United States Code 576b; commonly referred to as the ``K-V fund''), was originally established to assure adequate funding for timber management investments for the national forests, but since 1976, substantial and increasing portions of this fund have been used for wildlife habitat improvement, watershed improvement, and other nontimber resource projects.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) identify and examine timber management investment opportunities on Federal timberlands in the States of California, Oregon, and Washington; (2) expand financial assistance programs for timber investments on non-Federal timberlands in the States of California, Oregon, and Washington; and (3) assure that amounts from the fund established by section 3 of the Act of June 9, 1930, are available for timber management investments on Federal timberlands, consistent with the original intent of that Act.
TIMBER MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT STUDY.
Yields and Costs Report.--The Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Forest Service, and the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Land Management, shall each prepare a report displaying the yields and costs, both financial and environmental, of timber management investment opportunities for lands under their respective jurisdictions in the States of California, Oregon, and Washington.
Timber management investment opportunities considered shall include-- (1) reforestation, including site preparation, direct seeding, planting, and interplanting; and (2) timber stand improvement, including release (manual, chemical, and mechanical), fertilization, pruning, precommercial thinning, and commercial thinning.
Land and Forest Class.--The report prepared under subsection (a) shall present the yield and cost information for each of the following: (1) Timber site productivity class.
Current forest condition class, including old-growth, second-growth, sawtimber, poletimber, saplings, seedlings, and nonstock.
Land suitability allocation for timber production under the appropriate forest plan.
Lands Classified As Unsuitable For Timber Production.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the report required by this section-- (1) the reasons why lands in Forest Service Regions 5 and 6 are classified as not suitable for timber production pursuant to the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning of 1974, distinguishing among timber site productivity classes and current forest conditions; and (2) the specific identity of those lands deemed to be unsuitable for timber production solely due to difficulties in meeting the reforestation requirements of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974, and a description of those difficulties.
Exchange and Consolidation of Lands.--In addition to other matters required to be included in the study under this section, the study shall address opportunities for land exchanges with private landowners to consolidate Federal landholdings in the States of California, Oregon, and Washington to enhance reforestation and timber stand improvement.
Advisory Boards.--In order to assure a comprehensive and unbiased report on the costs and yields of timber management investment opportunities, the Secretary of Agriculture on a forest-by-forest basis in Forest Service Regions 5 and 6, and the Secretary of the Interior on a district-by-district basis for the Bureau of Land Management districts subject to this Act, shall establish and consult with advisory boards before releasing a draft of the report required by subsection (a) to the public.
The advisory boards shall be comprised of individuals who, in the appropriate Secretary's judgment, represent a diversity of views.
The appropriate Secretaries shall provide the advisory boards with the opportunity to review and comment on the practices and investments being examined under subsection (a) and on the draft of the report before its release to the public.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to advisory boards established under this subsection.
Consultation With Private and Other Public Timberland Owners.-- (1) In preparing the report required under subsection (a), the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall consult with private and other public timberland owners in the general vicinity of the forest or district, as appropriate, to-- (A) identify possible timber management investments and practices, and (B) identify potential costs and yields of those investments and practices.
The report shall include information gathered under this subsection in a manner which protects the proprietary nature of corporate cost information and the cost and yield estimates of the Secretaries.
Date of Submission.--The report required by this section shall be submitted to the Congress within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Section 4 of the Cooperative Forest Assistance Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 2103) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(l) Of the amounts appropriated to carry out this section, not less than $1,500,000 shall be made available for assistance under this section in each of the States of California, Oregon, and Washington for planning, reforestation, and timber stand improvement practices to further second growth management of timber resources to offset the expected decline in timber harvests from Federal lands as a result of listing the northern spotted owl as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Such assistance shall be concentrated in those counties containing Federal lands designated as habitat conservation areas for the purposes of the protection and recovery of the northern spotted owl.''.
Reforestation of BLM Lands.--Section 3 of the Act of June 9, 1930 (16 United States Code 576b) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Subsection (a) shall apply with respect to the lands administered by the Secretary of the Interior through the Bureau of Land Management in the same manner as such subsection applies with respect to national forest lands.''.
Reforestation Under the K-V Act.--Section 3(a) of the Act of June 9, 1930 (16 United States Code 576b), as amended by subsection (a) of this Act, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or'' before ``(3)''; and (2) by striking ``timber, or (4)'' and all that follows through ``Provided,'' and inserting ``timber: Provided,''.