This Act may be cited as the ``Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians Act of 1994''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians are descendants and political successors to the Indians that signed the treaty between the United States and the Ottawa and Chippewa nations of Indians at Washington, D.C. on March 28, 1836, and the treaty between the United States and the Ottawa and Chippewa Indians of Michigan at Detroit on July 31, 1855.
The Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians, the Sault Ste.
Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians, and the Bay Mills Band of Chippewa Indians, whose members are also descendants of the Indians that signed the treaties referred to in paragraph (1), have been recognized by the Federal Government as distinct Indian tribes.
The Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians consists of over 600 eligible members who continue to reside close to their ancestral homeland as recognized in the reservations of lands under the treaties referred to in paragraph (1) in the area that is currently known as Cheboygan County, Michigan.
The Band continues to exist and carry out political and social activities with a viable tribal government.
The Band, along with other Michigan Odawa and Ottawa groups, including the tribes described in paragraph (2), formed the Northern Michigan Ottawa Association in 1948.
The Northern Michigan Ottawa Association subsequently submitted a successful land claim with the Indian Claims Commission.
During the period between 1948 and 1975, the Band carried out many governmental functions through the Northern Michigan Ottawa Association, and at the same time retained control over local decisions.
In 1975, the Northern Michigan Ottawa Association submitted a petition under the Act of June 18, 1934 (commonly referred to as the ``Indian Reorganization Act'') (48 United States Statutes at Large 984 et sequentes, chapter 576; 25 United States Code 461 et sequentes), to form a government on behalf of the Band.
In spite of the eligibility of the Band to form a government under such Act, the Bureau of Indian Affairs failed to act on such petition.
From 1836 to the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Government, the government of the State of Michigan, and political subdivisions of the State have had continuous dealings with the recognized political leaders of the Band.
As used in this Act: (1) Band.--The term ``Band'' means the Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians.
Member.--The term ``member'' means any individual enrolled in the Band pursuant to section 7.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Federal Recognition.--Congress hereby reaffirms the Federal recognition of the Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians.
Applicability of Federal Laws.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each provision of Federal law (including any regulation) of general application to Indians or Indian nations, tribes, or bands, including the Act of June 18, 1934 (commonly referred to as the ``Indian Reorganization Act'') (48 United States Statutes at Large 984 et sequentes, chapter 576; 25 United States Code 461 et sequentes), that is inconsistent with any specific provision of this Act shall not apply to the Band or any of its members.
Federal Services and Benefits.-- (1) In general.--The Band and its members shall be eligible for all services and benefits provided by the Federal Government to Indians because of their status as federally recognized Indians.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, such services and benefits shall be provided after the date of the enactment of this Act to the Band and its members without regard to-- (A) whether or not there is an Indian reservation for the Band; or (B) whether or not a member resides on or near an Indian reservation.
Service areas.--(A) For purposes of the delivery of Federal services to the enrolled members of the Band, the area of the State of Michigan within a 70-mile radius of the boundaries of the reservation for the Burt Lake Band, as set forth in the seventh paragraph of Article I of the treaty between the United States and the Ottawa and Chippewa Indians of Michigan (done at Detroit on July 31, 1855) shall be deemed to be within or near a reservation.
If an Indian reservation is established for the Band after the date of enactment of this Act, subparagraph (A) shall continue to apply on and after the date of the establishment of the reservation.
Unless prohibited by Federal law, the services and benefits referred to in paragraph (1) may be provided to members outside the service area described in subparagraph (A).
In General.--To the extent consistent with the reaffirmation of the recognition of the Band under section 4(a), all rights and privileges of the Band and its members that have been abrogated or diminished before the date of the enactment of this Act are hereby reaffirmed.
Existing Rights of Tribe.--Nothing in this Act may be construed to diminish any right or privilege of the Band or its members that existed before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, nothing in this Act may be construed as altering or affecting any legal or equitable claim the Band may have to enforce any right or privilege reserved by or granted to the Band that was wrongfully denied to the Band or taken from the Band before the date of enactment of this Act.
The tribal lands of the Band shall consist of all real property held by, or in trust for, the Band.
The Secretary shall acquire real property for the Band.
Any property acquired by the Secretary pursuant to this section shall be held in trust by the United States for the benefit of the Band and shall become part of the reservation of the Band.
In General.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Band shall submit to the Secretary a membership roll consisting of all individuals currently enrolled for membership in the Band at the time of the submission of the membership roll.
Qualifications.--The Band shall, in consultation with the Secretary, determine, pursuant to applicable laws (including ordinances) of the Band, the qualifications for including an individual on the membership roll.
Publication of Notice.--The Secretary shall publish notice of receipt of the membership roll in the Federal Register as soon as practicable after receiving the membership roll pursuant to subsection (a).
Maintenance of Roll.--The Band shall maintain the membership roll of the Band prepared pursuant to this section in such manner as to ensure that the membership roll is current.
CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNING BODY.
Constitution.-- (1) Adoption.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall conduct, by secret ballot, elections for the purpose of adopting a new constitution for the Band.
The elections shall be held according to the procedures applicable to elections under section 16 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (commonly referred to as the ``Indian Reorganization Act'') (48 United States Statutes at Large 987, chapter 576; 25 United States Code 476).
Interim governing documents.--Until such time as a new constitution is adopted under paragraph (1), the governing documents in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be the interim governing documents for the Band.
Officials.-- (1) Elections.--Not later than 180 days after the Band adopts a constitution and bylaws pursuant to subsection (a), the Band shall conduct elections by secret ballot for the purpose of electing officials for the Band as provided in the governing constitution of the Band.
The elections shall be conducted according to the procedures described in the governing constitution and bylaws of the Band.
Interim governments.--Until such time as the Band elects new officials pursuant to paragraph (1), the governing bodies of the Band shall include each governing body of the Band in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, or any succeeding governing body selected under the election procedures specified in the applicable interim governing documents of the Band.