This Act may be cited as the ``Newborns' and Mothers' Health Protection Act of 1996''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the length of post-delivery inpatient care should be based on the unique characteristics of each mother and her newborn child, taking into consideration the health of the mother, the health and stability of the infant, the ability and confidence of the mother to care for her infant, the adequacy of support systems at home, and the access of the mother and infant to appropriate follow-up health care; and (2) the timing of the discharge of a mother and her newborn child from the hospital should be made by the attending provider in consultation with the mother.
NEWBORNS' AND MOTHERS' HEALTH PROTECTION.
In General.--The Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subtitle K--Newborns' and Mothers' Health Protection ``CHAPTER 100--NEWBORNS' AND MOTHERS' HEALTH PROTECTION ``Sec.
Imposition of tax for failure to meet newborns' and mothers' health protection requirements.
Required coverage for minimum inpatient stay following birth.
IMPOSITION OF TAX FOR FAILURE TO MEET NEWBORNS' AND MOTHERS' HEALTH PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS.
Health Insurance Coverage.-- ``(1) In general.--There is hereby imposed a tax on an insurer or health maintenance organization that offers health insurance coverage which the Secretary of Health and Human Services certifies to the Secretary fails to meet an applicable requirement specified in section 9802 at any time during a calendar year.
Amount of tax.--The amount of tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be equal to 25 percent of the premiums received under such coverage during the calendar year.
Premium.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `premium' means the gross amount of premiums and other consideration (including advance premiums, deposits, fees, and assessments) arising from health insurance coverage issued by an insurer or health maintenance organization, adjusted for any return or additional premiums paid as a result of endorsements, cancellations, audits, or retrospective rating.
Exemption if state regulation.--No tax shall be imposed under paragraph (1) for a failure of an insurer or organization to meet a requirement if the insurer or organization is regulated by a State, unless the Secretary of Health and Human Services has determined that such State has not provided for enforcement of State laws which govern the same matters as are governed by such requirement and which assure substantial compliance by insurers or organizations with such a requirement.
Group Health Plans.-- ``(1) In general.--There is hereby imposed a tax on a plan sponsor (as defined in section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) of a group health plan which the Secretary of Labor certifies to the Secretary fails to meet an applicable requirement of section 9802 at any time during a calendar year.
Amount of tax.--The amount of tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be equal to 25 percent of the group health plan coverage expenditures for such calendar year under such plan.
Group health plan coverage expenditures.--For purposes of this subsection, the group health plan coverage expenditures of any self-insured group health plan for any calendar year are the aggregate expenditures for such year for health benefits provided under such plan to the extent that health benefits are provided other than through health insurance coverage.
Waiver.--If the Secretary of Health and Human Services finds, with respect to an insurer or health maintenance organization, or the Secretary of Labor finds, with respect to a group health plan, that a failure of such insurer, organization, or plan is due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect and certifies such fact to the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of the Treasury may waive part or all of the tax imposed by this section to the extent that the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the Secretary of Labor (as the case may be) finds that payment of such tax would be excessive relative to the failure involved.
REQUIRED MINIMUM CHILDBIRTH BENEFITS.
Minimum Childbirth Benefits.--If an insurer or health maintenance organization provides health insurance coverage that includes any benefits for inpatient care for childbirth for a mother or newborn child or if a group health plan includes any such benefits, the insurer, organization, or plan shall meet the following requirements: ``(1) Minimum length of stay for inpatient care benefits.-- The coverage or plan shall provide benefits for inpatient care for childbirth for a minimum length of stay of 48 hours following a vaginal delivery and a minimum length of stay of 96 hours following a caesarean section.
Coverage of post-delivery follow-up care.--If an attending provider, in consultation with the mother, decides to discharge a covered mother or newborn child from an inpatient setting before the expiration of the minimum length of stay period described in paragraph (1), the coverage or plan shall include benefits for timely post-delivery care by a registered nurse, physician, nurse practitioner, nurse midwife or physician assistant experienced in maternal and child health in the home, a provider's office, a hospital, a federally qualified health center, a federally qualified rural health clinic, a State health department maternity clinic, or another setting (such as a birthing center or an intermediate care facility) determined appropriate under regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Notice.--The insurer, organization, or plan shall provide notice to each enrollee eligible for childbirth benefits under this subsection regarding the requirements of this section.
Prohibitions.--In implementing the requirements of subsection (a), an insurer, organization, or plan may not-- ``(1) require or condition the provision of benefits under subsection (a) on any authorization or approval of an attending or other provider; ``(2) deny enrollment, renewal, or continued coverage to a mother and her newborn child who are otherwise eligible to be so covered based on compliance with this section; ``(3) provide monetary incentives to mothers to encourage such mothers to request less than the minimum coverage required under subsection (a); ``(4) provide incentives (monetary or otherwise) to an attending provider to induce such provider to provide treatment in a manner inconsistent with this section; or ``(5) penalize or otherwise reduce or limit the reimbursement of an attending provider because such provider provided treatment in accordance with this section.
Additional Terms and Conditions.-- ``(1) Attending provider.--As used in this section, the term `attending provider' means, with respect to a mother and her newborn child, an obstetrician-gynecologist, pediatrician, family physician, or other physician, or any other health care provider (such as a nurse midwife or nurse practitioner), who, acting in accordance with applicable State law, is primarily responsible for the care of the mother and child.
Timely care defined.--As used in subsection (a)(2), the term `timely post-delivery care' means health care that is provided-- ``(A) following the discharge of a mother and her newborn child from the inpatient setting following childbirth; and ``(B) in a manner that meets the health care needs of the mother and her newborn child, that provides for the appropriate monitoring of the conditions of the mother and child, and that occurs within the 72-hour period immediately following discharge.
Regulations regarding appropriate post-care delivery settings.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, with respect to regulations promulgated under subsection (a)(2) concerning appropriate post-delivery care settings-- ``(A) shall ensure that, to the extent practicable, such regulations are consistent with State licensing and practice laws, ``(B) shall consider telemedicine and other innovative means to provide follow-up care, and ``(C) shall consider both urban and rural settings.
Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that a mother-- ``(A) give birth in a hospital; or ``(B) stay in the hospital for a fixed period of time following the birth of her child.
Requirements.--The notice required under subsection (a)(3) shall be in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Such regulations shall provide that the notice shall be in writing, shall be conspicuous and prominently positioned, and shall be required to be provided as follows: ``(A) Health insurance coverage.--By an insurer or health maintenance organization-- ``(i) to enrollees described in subsection (a) who are enrolled on the effective date of this chapter within 120 days after such effective date and annually thereafter, and ``(ii) to other enrollees at the time of enrollment and annually thereafter.
Group health plans.--By a group health plan-- ``(i) to enrollees described in subsection (a) who are enrolled on the effective date of this chapter within 120 days after such effective date, and ``(ii) for plan years beginning on or after such effective date, as part of its summary plan description.
Group Health Plan Defined.--For purposes of this chapter-- ``(1) In general.--The term `group health plan' means an employee welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) to the extent that the plan provides medical care directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise, and includes a group health plan within the meaning of section 5000(b)(1).
Exclusion of plans with limited coverage.--An employee welfare benefit plan shall be treated as a group health plan under this chapter only with respect to medical care which is provided under the plan and which does not consist of coverage excluded from the definition of health insurance coverage under subsection (b)(1)(B).
Exclusion of church plans.--The requirements of this chapter insofar as they apply to group health plans shall not apply to church plans (as defined in section 3(33) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974).
Treatment of governmental plans.--If the plan sponsor of a governmental plan (as such terms are defined in section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) which is a group health plan to which the provisions of this chapter otherwise apply makes an election under this paragraph for any specified period (in such form and manner as the Secretary of Health and Human Services may by regulations prescribe), then the requirements of this chapter insofar as they apply to group health plans shall not apply to such governmental plans for such period.
Definitions Relating to Health Insurance Coverage.--As used in this chapter-- ``(1) Health insurance coverage.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term `health insurance coverage' means benefits consisting of medical care (provided directly, through insurance or reimbursement, or otherwise) under any hospital or medical service policy or certificate, hospital or medical service plan contract, or health maintenance organization group contract offered by an insurer or a health maintenance organization.
Exception.--Such term does not include coverage under any separate policy, certificate, or contract only for one or more of any of the following: ``(i) Coverage only for accident, or disability income insurance, or any combination thereof.
Medicare supplemental health insurance (as defined under section 1882(g)(1) of the Social Security Act).
Coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance.
Liability insurance, including general liability insurance and automobile liability insurance.
Workers compensation or similar insurance.
Automobile medical payment insurance.
Coverage for a specified disease or illness.
Hospital or fixed indemnity insurance.
Short-term limited duration insurance.
Credit-only, dental-only, or vision- only insurance.
A health insurance policy providing benefits only for long-term care, nursing home care, home health care, community-based care, or any combination thereof.
Health maintenance organization.--The term `health maintenance organization' means-- ``(A) a federally qualified health maintenance organization (as defined in section 1301(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300e(a))), ``(B) an organization recognized under State law as a health maintenance organization, or ``(C) a similar organization regulated under State law for solvency in the same manner and to the same extent as such a health maintenance organization, if the organization is subject to State law which regulates insurance (within the meaning of section 514(b)(2) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974).
Insurer.--The term `insurer' means an insurance company, insurance service, or insurance organization which is licensed to engage in the business of insurance in a State and which is subject to State law which regulates insurance (within the meaning of section 514(b)(2)(A) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974).
Other Definitions.--As used in this chapter-- ``(1) Medical care.--The term `medical care' means-- ``(A) amounts paid for, or items or services in the form of, the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, or amounts paid for, or items or services provided for, the purpose of affecting any structure or function of the body, ``(B) amounts paid for, or services in the form of, transportation primarily for and essential to medical care referred to in subparagraph (A), and ``(C) amounts paid for insurance covering medical care referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
State.--The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
Nonpreemption.-- ``(1) In general.--The provisions of this chapter shall not preempt those provisions of State law that provide protections that are not less than the protections provided under this chapter, including any-- ``(A) requirement that health insurance coverage provide for maternity and pediatric care that is in accordance with guidelines established by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Academy of Pediatrics, and ``(B) leaving decisions regarding the appropriate length of inpatient care for a mother and her newborn child entirely to the attending provider in consultation with the mother.
No override of erisa preemption.--Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or modify the provisions of section 514 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1144).
Regulations.--Regulations promulgated by the Secretary to carry out this chapter shall be promulgated in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply-- (1) to health insurance coverage for contract years beginning on or after January 1, 1997; and (2) to group health plans as of the first day of the first plan year beginning on or after January 1, 1997.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents for the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding after the item relating to subtitle J the following new item: ``Subtitle K. Newborns' and Mothers' Health Protection.''