SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Guadalupe-Hidalgo Treaty Land Claims Act of 1997''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Establishment and membership of Commission.
Examination of land claims.
Community Land Grant Study Center.
Miscellaneous powers of Commission.
Definitions.--For purposes of this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Guadalupe-Hidalgo Treaty Land Claims Commission established under section 3.
Treaty of guadalupe-hidalgo.--The term ``Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo'' means the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, Limits, and Settlement (Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo), between the United States and the Republic of Mexico, signed February 2, 1848 (TS 207; 9 Bevans 791).
Eligible descendant.--The term ``eligible descendant'' means a descendant of a person who-- (A) was a Mexican citizen before the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo; (B) was a member of a community land grant; and (C) became a United States citizen within ten years after the effective date of the Treaty of Guadalupe- Hidalgo, May 30, 1848, pursuant to the terms of the Treaty.
Community land grant.--The term ``community land grant'' means a village, town, settlement, or pueblo consisting of land held in common (accompanied by lesser private allotments) by ten or more families under a grant from the King of Spain (or his representative) before the effective date of the Treaty of Cordova, August 24, 1821, or from the authorities of the Republic of Mexico before May 30, 1848, in what became the State of New Mexico, regardless of the original character of the grant.
Reconstituted.--The term ``reconstituted'', with regard to a valid community land grant, means restoration to full status as a municipality with rights properly belonging to a municipality under State law, including the nontaxability of municipal property (common lands) and the right of local self- government.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) New Mexico has a unique history regarding the acquisition of ownership of land as a result of the substantial number of Spanish and Mexican land grants that were an integral part of the colonization and growth of New Mexico before the United States acquired the area in the Treaty of Guadalupe- Hidalgo.
Various provisions of the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo have not yet been fully implemented in the spirit of Article VI, section 2, of the Constitution of the United States.
Serious questions regarding the prior ownership of lands in the State of New Mexico, particularly certain public lands, still exist.
Congressionally established land claim commissions have been used in the past to successfully examine disputed land possession questions.
ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP OF COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``Guadalupe-Hidalgo Treaty Land Claims Commission''.
Number and Appointment of Members.--The Commission shall be composed of three members appointed by the President by and with the advise and consent of the Senate.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--Members shall each be entitled to receive the daily equivalent of level V of the Executive Schedule for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
EXAMINATION OF LAND CLAIMS.
Submission of Land Claims Petitions.--Any 10 (or more) eligible descendants who are also descendants of the same community land grant may file with the Commission a petition on behalf of themselves and all other descendants of that community land grant seeking a determination of the validity of the land claim that is the basis for the petition.
Deadline for Submission.--To be considered by the Commission, a petition under subsection (a) must be received by the Commission not later than four years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Elements of Petition.--A petition under subsection (a) shall be made under oath and shall contain the following: (1) The names and addresses of the eligible descendants who are petitioners.
The fact that the land involved in the petition was a community land grant at the time of the effective date of the Guadalupe-Hidalgo Treaty.
The extent of the community land grant, to the best of the knowledge of the petitioners, accompanied with a survey or, if a survey is not feasible to them, a sketch map thereof.
The fact that the petitioners reside, or intend to settle upon, the community land grant.
All facts known to petitioners concerning the community land grant, together with copies of all papers in regard thereto available to petitioners.
Petition Hearing.--The Commission shall hold a hearing upon each petition timely submitted under subsection (a), at which hearing all persons having an interest in the land involved in the petition shall have the right, upon notice, to appear as a party.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relating to any petition submitted under subsection (a).
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within the United States at any designated place of hearing within the United States.
Failure to obey a subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), the Commission may apply to a United States district court for an order requiring that person to appear before the Commission to give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the matter under investigation.
The application may be made within the judicial district where the hearing is conducted or where that person is found, resides, or transacts business.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as civil contempt.
Service of subpoenas.--The subpoenas of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Service of process.--All process of any court to which application is to be made under paragraph (2) may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
Decision.--On the basis of the facts contained in a petition submitted under subsection (a), and the hearing held with regard to the petition, the Commission shall determine the validity of the community land grant described in the petition.
The decision shall include a recommendation of the Commission regarding whether the community land grant should be reconstituted and its lands restored.
COMMUNITY LAND GRANT STUDY CENTER.
To assist the Commission in the performance of its activities under section 4, the Commission shall establish a Community Land Grant Study Center at the Onate Center in Alcalde, New Mexico.
MISCELLANEOUS POWERS OF COMMISSION.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
For purposes of Federal income, estate, and gift taxes, property accepted under this subsection shall be considered as a gift, bequest, or devise to the United States.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Immunity.--The Commission is an agency of the United States for the purpose of part V of title 18, United States Code (relating to immunity of witnesses).
As soon as practicable after reaching its last decision under section 4, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a report containing each decision, including the recommendation of the Commission regarding whether certain community land grants should be reconstituted.
The Commission shall terminate on 180 days after submitting its final report under section 7.
There is authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 for the purpose of carrying out the activities of the Commission and to establish and operate the Community Land Grant Study Center.