This Act may be cited as the ``National Environmental Policy Act Administrative Reorganization Amendments of 1993''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT COMPLIANCE.
Sections 201, 202, and 204 of title II of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4331 et sequentes) are redesignated and amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
There is established in the Executive Office of the President the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance.
The Office may be referred to as the `Office of NEPA Compliance'.
The head of the Office shall be the Director of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance, who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The compensation of the Director shall be at the rate of compensation payable to the Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
The Director shall-- ``(1) promulgate regulations governing the implementation of this Act by all Federal agencies (including independent regulatory commissions) which include provisions for public review and comment on the detailed statements required by section 102(2)(C) and, as appropriate, on other documents prepared pursuant to this Act; ``(2) mediate interagency disputes, including recommending to the President, as appropriate, resolutions of referrals of interagency disagreements under section 203; ``(3) monitor Federal agency implementation of this Act and regulations issued under paragraph (1), including-- ``(A) reviewing and approving regulations issued by other Federal agencies to implement this Act; ``(B) determining which Federal agency is the lead agency for purposes of compliance with this Act in cases in which Federal agencies do not agree on which is the lead agency; ``(C) developing alternative procedures for complying with this Act in cases in which emergency circumstances make it necessary for a Federal agency to take an action with significant environmental impact; ``(D) developing alternative procedures for complying with this Act, in cases in which a change in a proposed Federal agency action or new information relating to the environmental impacts of such an action makes it necessary to supplement existing analysis under this Act; and ``(E) developing and publishing guidance to Federal agencies regarding implementation of title I and regulations promulgated under paragraph (1); and ``(4) perform such other functions related to environmental laws, policies, and programs as the President may specify.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect, alter, or limit the independence of independent regulatory commissions under the laws establishing such commissions.
The policies, practices, and interpretations under this Act and the Environmental Quality Improvement Act of 1970 and other laws applicable to, or adopted by, such commissions or the Council on Environmental Quality before the date of the enactment of the National Environmental Policy Act Administrative Reorganization Amendments of 1993 shall continue in effect to the extent they are consistent with such independence and carry out the purposes of such Acts.
(1) The Director, subject to paragraph (2), shall-- ``(A) review and appraise the various programs and activities of the Federal Government in light of the policy set forth in title I for the purpose of determining the extent to which such programs and activities are contributing to the achievement of such policy and make recommendations to the President with respect thereto; ``(B) coordinate or facilitate the development of recommendations to the President regarding national policies to foster and promote the improvement of environmental quality to meet the conservation, social, economic, health, and other requirements and goals of the Nation; and ``(C) coordinate or facilitate the development of such studies, reports thereon, and recommendations with respect to matters of policy and legislation, as the President may request.
The President may transfer to another official in the Executive Office of the President, by Executive order, any function of the Director under this subsection.
(1) The Director, subject to paragraph (2), shall-- ``(A) assist Federal agencies and departments in appraising the effectiveness of existing and proposed facilities, programs, policies, and activities of the Federal Government, and those specific major projects designated by the President which do not require individual project authorization by the Congress, which affect environmental quality; and ``(B) assist in coordinating among Federal departments and agencies those programs and activities which affect, protect, and improve environmental quality.
The President may transfer to another official in the Executive Office of the President or to the head of any Federal agency, by Executive order, any function of the Director under this subsection.
The Director shall keep the appropriate Committees of the Senate and the House of Representatives informed of the actions, regulations, policies, and practices of the Office in carrying out the functions and other requirements of the Director and the Office under this Act (other than functions of the Director transferred in accordance with subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2)).
Referrals of interagency disagreements by the head of any Federal agency concerning proposed major Federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment under section 102(2)(C) or concerning matters under section 309(b) of the Clean Air Act shall be made to the Office for mediation and, as appropriate, resolution by the President.''.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO NEPA.
Sections 203, 205, 207, and 208 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, are redesignated in order as sections 204, 205, 206, and 207, respectively; such sections are each amended by striking ``Council'' and inserting ``Office'' each place it appears; and section 206 of such Act, as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act, is repealed.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 1970.
The Environmental Quality Improvement Act of 1970 (42 United States Code 4372 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 202(c) by-- (A) striking ``The purposes'' and all that follows through ``(1) to'' and inserting ``the purpose of this title is to''; and (B) striking ``; and'' and all that follows through the end of the section and inserting a period; (2) in section 203, by striking subsections (a) through (d) and the designation for subsection (e); (3) by striking sections 204 and 205; (4) in section 206(a), by striking ``Office of Environmental Quality Management Fund'' and inserting ``Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance Management Fund''; (5) by redesignating section 206 as section 204; and (6) by adding at the end the following: ``definitions ``Sec.
In this title, each of the terms `Director' and `Office' has the meaning given that term in section 3 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.''.
ASSISTANCE FOR OFFICE OF NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT COMPLIANCE.
The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (as amended by section 3) is amended by inserting after section 207 the following: ``Sec.
To assist in the timely performance of the functions of the Office, the Director may utilize personnel or otherwise obtain assistance from other entities in the Executive Office of the President or other Federal agencies, by mutual consent with the heads of those entities or agencies, to assist the Director in performing the functions of the Office.''.
Section 209 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Director to carry out the functions of the Director under this or any other Act-- ``(1) $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1994; ``(2) $1,100,000 for fiscal year 1995; ``(3) $1,200,000 for fiscal year 1996; and ``(4) $1,400,000 for fiscal year 1997.
Amounts appropriated to, or available for the use of, the Office or the Director shall remain available until expended.''.
The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 is amended by inserting after section 2 (42 United States Code 4321) the following: ``Sec.
In this Act: ``(1) The term `Director' means the Director of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance appointed under section 201(b).
The term `Fund' means the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance Management Fund established by section 204 of the Environmental Quality Improvement Act of 1970.
The term `Office' means the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance established by section 201(a).''.
TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS TO SECRETARY OF THE ENVIRONMENT.
Transfers.--There are transferred to the Secretary of the Environment-- (1) the functions of the Council on Environmental Quality under paragraphs (2), (5), (6), and (7) of section 204 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) the functions of the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (as Director of the Office of Environmental Quality) under paragraphs (3), (4), (6), and (7) of section 203(d) of the Environmental Quality Improvement Act of 1970, as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Construction.--The functions transferred to the Secretary of the Environment by this section or pursuant to any executive order issued pursuant to amendments made by this Act shall not be construed by anyone to affect, alter, change, or amend any other law or regulation administered by the Secretary or his or her delegate.
Accountability.--The Secretary of the Environment shall be accountable to the appropriate committees of the Senate and House of Representatives for all functions described in subsection (b).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary such sums as may be necessary specifically to carry out the functions described in subsection (b) effectively and in a timely manner.
TERMINATION OF COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AND OFFICE OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY.
Termination.--The Council on Environmental Quality and the Office of Environmental Quality are terminated.
References.--Reference to the Council on Environmental Quality, the Office of Environmental Quality, or any officer or employee of that council or that office in any other Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, or delegation of authority, or in any document of or relating to the Council on Environmental Quality-- (1) with respect to functions that were vested in that council or office on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act and are vested in the Director of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance Office by section 202 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended by section 2 of this Act, is deemed to refer to the Director of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance or to such other official to whom such a function is transferred in accordance with section 202(c)(2) or (d)(2) of that Act, as appropriate; or (2) with regard to disputes, disagreements, and matters described in sections 202(a)(2) and 203 of that Act, as amended by section 2 of this Act, is deemed to refer to the Director of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance or to that office, as appropriate.
Savings Provisions.-- (1) Continuation of orders, etc.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, agreements, grants, contracts, privileges, and other administrative actions-- (A) which have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by the President, the Council on Environmental Quality, or the Office of Environmental Quality, in the performance of functions of the Council on Environmental Quality or the Office of Environmental Quality, or by a court of competent jurisdiction with respect to those functions, and (B) which are in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, or were final before that date of enactment and are to become effective on or after that date of enactment, shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Director of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance, any other authorized official, a court of competent jurisdiction, or operation of law.
Continuation of proceedings and applications.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect any proceedings pending before the Council on Environmental Quality on the date of the enactment of this Act, but such proceedings shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this Act had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceedings shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be considered to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this Act had not been enacted.
Suits not affected.--The provisions of this section shall not affect suits commenced before the date of the enactment of this Act, and in all such suits, proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Suits involving council or office.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against the Council on Environmental Quality or the Office of Environmental Quality, or by or against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer or employee of the Council or that Office, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act.
Rulemaking.--Any administrative action relating to the preparation or promulgation of a regulation by the Council on Environmental Quality shall be continued by the Director of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance or the President with the same effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Assets and interests.--The contracts, liabilities, records, property, and other assets and interests of the Council on Environmental Quality and the Office of Environmental Quality shall, on and after the date of the enactment of this Act, be considered to be the contracts, liabilities, records, property, and other assets and interests of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance.
Continuing Availability of Amounts.--Amounts available to the Council on Environmental Quality on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be available for use by the Director of the Office of National Environmental Policy Act Compliance.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et seq.)
is amended-- (1) in section 2 (42 United States Code 4321)-- (A) by inserting ``and'' after ``man;''; and (B) by striking ``Nation;'' and all that follows through the end of the section and inserting ``Nation.
''; (2) by striking ``Council on Environmental Quality'' each place that term appears and inserting ``Director''; (3) in section 102(2)(B) (42 United States Code 4332(2)(B)) by striking ``established by title II of this Act''; (4) in section 102(2)(G) (42 United States Code 4332(2)(G)) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon; (5) in section 102(2)(H) (42 United States Code 4332(2)(H)) by striking ``; and'' and inserting a period; (6) by striking section 102(2)(I) (42 United States Code 4332(2)(I)); (7) in section 205(1) (42 United States Code 4345(1)) by striking ``the Citizen's'' and all that follows through ``and with''; and (8) in section 205(2) (42 United States Code 4345(2)) by striking ``the Council's'' and inserting ``the Office's''.