This Act may be cited as the ``Keep the Colorado River Clean Act''.
TRANSFER OF OIL SHALE RESERVE.
Section 3405 of the Strom Thurmond National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1999 (10 United States Code 7420 note) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
TRANSFER OF OIL SHALE RESERVE NUM- BERED 2.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `NOSR-2' means Oil Shale Reserve Numbered 2, as identified on a map on file in the Office of the Secretary of the Interior.
The term `Tribe' means the Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation.
Conveyance.--The United States hereby conveys to the Tribe, subject to valid existing rights in effect on the day before the enactment of this section, all Federal lands within the exterior boundaries of NOSR-2 in fee simple, both surface and mineral rights, without retaining any management authority over the conveyed lands or tribal activities thereon, but reserving to the United States each of the following: ``(1) A 9 percent royalty interest in the value of any oil, gas, other hydrocarbons, and all other minerals produced, saved, and sold, from the conveyed lands, the payments to be made by the Tribe or its designee to the Secretary of Energy when produced, saved, or sold during the period minerals are being extracted.
That portion of the bed of Green River contained entirely within NOSR-2 as depicted on the map entitled `Boundary Map, ...........'', numbered ____, and dated ____.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Department of the Interior.
The lands, including surface and mineral rights, to the west of the Green River within NOSR-2, as depicted on the map referred to in paragraph (2).
A \1/4\ mile scenic easement on the east side of the Green River within NOSR-2.
Such easement shall not affect the right of the Tribe to obtain, use, and maintain access to, the river through the use of the existing road within the easement (as depicted on the map referred to in paragraph (2)).
The lands conveyed to the Tribe under this subsection shall not revert to the United States for management in trust status.
Withdrawals.--All existing withdrawals on NOSR-2 are hereby revoked.
Administration of Reserved Lands, Interests in Lands.--The Secretary of the Interior shall administer the lands and interests in lands reserved from conveyance in subsection (b)(2) and (3) of this section under the Federal Land Policy and Management Act and shall prepare and submit to Congress a land use plan for the management of these lands and interests in lands within three years after the enactment of this subsection.
There is authorized to the Secretary of the Interior such sums as may be necessary to carry out this subsection.
Royalty.-- ``(1) Payment of royalty.--The Tribe shall pay the royalty interest reserved from conveyance in subsection (b)(1) of this section free of all development, production, marketing, and operating expenses.
The United States shall bear and pay gross production taxes, pipeline taxes, and allocation taxes assessed against the gross production.
Reports.--The Tribe shall report annually to the Secretary of Energy and to Congress on its resource development and other activities concerning the property transferred.
Financial audit.--The Tribe shall submit every 5 years to a financial audit, conducted in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices, of its resource development activities concerning the property transferred, with the first audit taking place 5 years after the date of transfer and the results of each audit being included in the next annual report after completion of the audit.
River Management.--The Tribe shall manage, fully under Tribal jurisdiction and pursuant to ordinances adopted by the Tribe, its lands adjacent to, and within \1/4\ mile of, the Green River in a protected status and in a manner consistent with the provisions contained in a government-to-government agreement and in the memorandum of understanding entitled memorandum of understanding dated February 11, 2000, as agreed to by the Tribe and the Secretary of the Interior.
Such ordinances adopted by the Tribe shall not impair, limit, or otherwise restrict the management and use of other lands adjacent to the Green River that are not under or subject to the Tribe's jurisdiction or control.
The ordinances adopted by the Tribe and referenced in the government-to-government agreement may not be repealed or amended without the written approval of both the Tribe and the Secretary of the Interior.
Plant Species.--The Tribe shall protect, pursuant to ordinances adopted by the Tribe, any plant species listed by the Federal Government as endangered or threatened that is located on or found on the NOSR-2 lands conveyed to the Tribe in a manner consistent with the then current levels of legal protection, and this protection shall be performed fully under tribal jurisdiction and in accordance with a government-to-government agreement between the Tribe and the Secretary of the Interior.
Horses.--The Tribe shall manage the horses not owned by the Tribe or tribal members that are located or found on the NOSR-2 lands conveyed to the Tribe in a manner consistent with then current Federal protections granted such animals: Provided, That the management, control, and protection of such horses will be performed fully under tribal jurisdiction and in accordance with a government-to-government agreement between the Tribe and the Secretary of the Interior.
Remedial Action at Site Near Moab.--(1) Within one year after the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary of Energy shall prepare a plan to commence, within one year following preparation of the plan, remedial action, including groundwater restoration, at the uranium milling site near Moab, Utah, in accordance with section 102(a)(4) of the Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act of 1978 (42 United States Code 7912(a)), as amended by section 3 of this Act.
The Secretary shall limit the amounts expended in carrying out this remedical action to amounts specifically appropriated for the remedial action in an appropriations Act and other amounts available for that purpose under this subsection.
The Secretary of Energy shall retain the amounts received as royalties under subsection (e)(1) of 3405 of the Strom Thurmond National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1999 (10 United States Code 7420 note), and such amounts shall be available, without further appropriation to carry out the remedial action referred to in paragraph (1).
Upon completion of such remedial action, all such royalty amounts shall be deposited in the General Fund of the Treasury.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Energy to carry out the remedial action referred to in paragraph (1) such additional sums as may be necessary.
If the uranium milling site referred to in paragraph (1) is sold after the Secretary of Energy's remedial action referred to in paragraph (1) is completed, the seller shall transfer to the Secretary of Energy, for deposit into the miscellaneous receipts account of the Treasury, the portion of the sale price that the Secretary determines results from the enhancement of the value of the site attributable to the remedial action.
The Secretary's determination shall be based upon appraisals conducted at the completion of the remedial action.
The property shall be appraised at its fair market value as of the date of enactment of this action, based on available information, and its fair market value at the completion of the remedial action.
The difference between such appraisals shall be the enhancement of the value of the site resulting attributable to the remedial action.''.
Section 102(a) of the Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act of 1978 (42 United States Code 7912(a)) is amended by inserting the following new paragraph after paragraph (3): ``(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Moab uranium milling site (hereafter referred to as the `Moab Site') located approximately 3 miles northwest of Moab, Utah, and identified in the Final Environmental Impact Statement issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in March 1996, in conjunction with Source Material License No.
SUA 917, is designated as a processing site.
This title applies to the Moab Site in the same manner and to the same extent as to other processing sites designated under this subsection, except that-- ``(A) sections 103, 107(a), 112(a), and 115(a) of this title shall not apply; ``(B) a reference in this title to the date of the enactment of this Act shall be treated as a reference to the date of enactment of this paragraph; and ``(C) the Secretary, subject to appropriations and without regard to section 104(b) of this title, shall conduct remediation, including groundwater restoration and removal of residual radioactive material and other contaminated material from the Moab Site and from the floodplain of the Colorado River for permanent disposition and stabilization of residual radioactive material in a safe and environmentally sound manner at a site in the State of Utah.''.
Section 3406 of the Strom Thurmond National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1999 (10 United States Code 7420 note) is amended by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection: ``(f) Oil Shale Reserve No.
This section does not apply to the transfer of Oil Shale Reserve Numbered 2 under section 3405.