This Act may be cited as the ``Consumer Pay Telephone Protection Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Some payphone service providers have increased the charge for the use of a coin-operated pay telephone for a local call to 35 cents but have not put into place a system for providing change to users of such telephones for amounts deposited in such telephones in excess of such charge.
Payphone service providers should charge pay telephone users only for the actual time of use of pay telephones.
Most consumers, if given a choice, would prefer that any amount of such excess deposits that are not refunded to consumers be used for pay telephones for public health, safety, and welfare purposes rather than have such excess deposits accrue to the financial benefit of payphone service providers.
There are approximately 2,000,000 pay telephones in the United States, and payphone service providers accrue substantial revenue at the expense of Americans who do not have the exact amount of the charge for their use.
A decision of the Federal Communications Commission to deregulate the provision of payphone service was premature and did not address adequately the need for local competition that would benefit users of pay telephones.
The decision of the Commission does not promote the widespread deployment of affordable payphone service that would benefit the general public, nor does the decision promote the widespread deployment of public interest telephones.
The use of coin-operated pay telephones represents an increasing commercial activity that substantially affects interstate commerce.
Public interest telephones should be maintained in each State and should be provided to promote the public safety, health, and welfare.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is-- (1) to require payphone service providers-- (A) to provide cash change to pay telephone users who deposit amounts for local telephone calls in excess of the amounts charged for such calls; or (B) in the event that such providers do not provide such change, to transfer amounts equal to such change to appropriate State entities for public interest purposes related to telephone service; (2) to encourage such changes in pay telephone technology as are needed to assure that payphone service providers-- (A) do not overcharge pay telephone users who do not have the exact amount of the charge for local pay telephone calls; and (B) do not charge pay telephone users for any time in which pay telephones are not actually in use; and (3) to require the Federal Trade Commission to determine-- (A) whether dysfunctions exist in the market for payphone service including locational monopolies in which the size of the market concerned results in the availability of payphone service from a single provider; and (B) whether rates for coin-operated pay telephones for local telephone calls are market based.
PUBLIC INTEREST PAY TELEPHONES.
Section 276(b)(2) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 276(b)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Public interest pay telephones.-- ``(A) Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that-- ``(i) in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare, public interest pay telephones should be available and maintained in locations where there would not otherwise likely be a pay telephone; and ``(ii) such public interest pay telephones should be fairly and equitably supported.
Use of funds.--In accordance with such regulations as the Commission shall prescribe, each State agency that receives amounts under subsection (c)(2)(A) shall use such amounts to promote or otherwise support the installation, maintenance, and use of public interest pay telephones, including specially designed payphones for the disabled and the provision of payphone service in remote locations, nursing homes, emergency homeless shelters, hospitals, facilities that assist the disabled, schools, and other appropriate locations determined by the State agency concerned.''.
REQUIREMENT FOR CHANGE AT PAY TELEPHONES.
Requirement.--Section 276 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 276), as amended by section 3 of this Act, is further amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection (c): ``(c) Change at Pay Telephones.-- ``(1) Requirement.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a payphone service provider shall provide any individual using a pay telephone of such provider to make a telephone call described in subparagraph (B) an amount of cash change equal to the amount (if any) by which the amount deposited by the individual for the call exceeds the charge for the call.
Covered telephone calls.--Subparagraph (A) applies to any local telephone call the charge for which exceeds 10 cents.
Alternative use of excess collections.-- ``(A) Transfer.--In accordance with such regulations as the Commission shall prescribe, a payphone service provider may, in lieu of providing cash change under paragraph (1)-- ``(i) transfer any excess amounts collected by the provider at pay telephones to the State agency in the State in which the telephones are located that is responsible for the support of public interest pay telephones under subsection (b)(2); or ``(ii) if the State has no such agency by reason of a determination under subparagraph (B), transfer such excess amounts to the Commission for use under subparagraph (D).
State option.-- ``(i) State option.--The chief executive officer of each State may determine whether or not to permit the transfer of funds to an agency of such State under subparagraph (A).
Revocation.--The chief executive officer of a State may revoke any previous decision with respect to the State under this subparagraph.
Notice.--The chief executive officer of a State shall notify the Commission, in writing, of any determination or revocation of a determination under this subparagraph.
Use by states.-- ``(i) In general.--A State agency receiving amounts under subparagraph (A) shall utilize such amounts for purposes of promoting and supporting public interest pay telephones in the State under subsection (b)(2).
Additional use.--In the event that amounts received by a State agency under subparagraph (A) exceed the amounts determined by the agency to be required to properly promote and support public interest pay telephones in the State, the agency shall utilize the excess amounts for purposes relating to providing universal service or improving telephone service in the State under section 254.
Use by commission.-- ``(i) Deposit.--The Commission shall deposit any amounts received by the Commission under subparagraph (A) in an account in the Treasury established for that purpose.
Availability.--Under such regulations as the Commission shall prescribe, the Commission shall utilize amounts in the account under clause (i) to assist States that receive amounts under subparagraph (A) with additional assistance to promote and support public interest pay telephones under subsection (b)(2).
Notice to consumers.-- ``(i) In general.--In the event a payphone service provider decides to transfer excess amounts deposited at any given pay telephone under subparagraph (A) for purposes of supporting public interest pay telephones under subsection (b)(2), the provider shall post at such pay telephone a notice informing potential users of such pay telephone that any such excess amount shall not be returned as cash change or credit but shall be utilized for such purposes.
Additional notice.--Nothing in clause (i) shall be interpreted to limit a State from requiring additional notices with respect to the matters set forth in that clause.
Regulations.-- ``(A) Requirement.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment of the Consumer Pay Telephone Protection Act of 1998, the Commission shall prescribe the regulations required under this subsection.
Additional elements.--The regulations shall-- ``(i) provide for the monitoring of the compliance of payphone service providers with the provisions of this subsection; ``(ii) ensure that such providers do not pass any costs relating to such compliance to consumers; and ``(iii) ensure that the implementation of such provisions do not result in any reduction in payphone service, including the imposition of time limits on local telephone calls or other reductions or limitations in such service.
Effective date.--The regulations shall provide that the provisions of the regulations take effect not earlier than 6 months after the date of the final issuance of the regulations and not later than 12 months after that date.''.
Study of Alternative Technologies.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Communications Commission shall submit to Congress a report on the availability of technologies or systems that permit persons who do not have exact change to utilize pay telephones for local telephone calls without being overcharged for such calls.
Elements.--The report shall address the use of tokens, cash debit cards, systems for crediting the monthly telephone bills of individuals who use pay telephones, and such other technologies and systems as the Commission considers appropriate.
STUDY OF COMPETITIVENESS OF PAY TELEPHONE MARKET.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Federal Trade Commission shall, in consultation with the Federal Communications Commission, carry out a study of competition in the market for intrastate payphone service, including-- (A) whether or not locational monopolies in such service exist by reason of the size of particular markets for such service; (B) whether or not potential users of such service are effectively barred from choice in such service in particular markets by reason of difficulties in identifying a variety of payphone service providers in such markets; (C) whether or not rates for local pay telephone calls are market-based; and (D) whether or not there is evidence of monopoly pricing in such service.
Scope of comment.--In carrying out the study, the Federal Trade Commission shall seek comment from a variety of sources, including State and local public entities, consumers and consumer representatives, and payphone service providers and their representatives.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the study carried out under subsection (a).
The report shall include the findings of the Commission with respect to the matters set forth under paragraph (1) of that subsection.
Federal Communications Commission Action.--Notwithstanding any provision of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 151 et sequentes), the Federal Communications Commission may, as a result of the study under subsection (a), conduct a rule-making proceeding in order to accomplish any of the following: (1) To set limitations on rates for local pay telephone calls.
To permit the States to establish rates for such calls on a cost basis.
To set limitations on the commissions that payphone service providers may pay to persons who lease space to such providers for pay telephones.
To prohibit payphone service providers from entering into exclusive contracts with persons who lease space to such providers for pay telephones which contracts cover multiple locations.