This Act may be cited as the ``Aviation Security Enhancement Act of 2002''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The safety and security of the civil air transportation system is critical to the security and national defense of the United States.
A large percentage of the Nation's airports will have checked baggage explosive detection systems in place by the statutory deadline of December 31, 2002, but the remaining airports will be required to implement expensive interim systems requiring full replacement or relocation (or both) within a short period of time.
Implementation and replacement of the interim systems will cost millions of taxpayer dollars, will present serious problems in ensuring that a sufficient number of operators are hired and trained within the allotted time, and will require unprecedented demands on lobby space in airports.
The statutory deadline of December 31, 2002, which was originally believed to be adequate in providing a reasonable time frame for implementing an effective baggage screening system, may be insufficient and inefficient to accomplish the mission envisioned by Congress in approving the Aviation and Transportation Security Act.
In order to meet that critical mission, significant flexibility was included in that Act to allow the Under Secretary of Transportation for Security to continue using current screening practices until explosive detection systems can be installed.
A high level of security can be maintained in the interim using current practices while the longer-term systems are installed.
A measured approach to installations will provide the Transportation Security Administration with appropriate leeway to incrementally address individual airport requirements and potentially allow that agency to accommodate technology improvements and lessons learned.
Such installations should be accomplished without undue delays after the planning phase has been completed.
By providing optimal solutions, air passengers will be better protected.
Installation of Systems.--Section 44901(d) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Modification of airport terminal buildings to accommodate explosive detection systems.-- ``(A) Notification of airports.--Not later than October 1, 2002, the Under Secretary shall notify the owner or operator of each United States airport described in section 44903(c) of the number and type of explosive detection systems that will be required to be deployed at the airport in order to screen all checked baggage by explosive detection systems without imposing unreasonable delays on the passengers using the airport.
Assessments of airport terminal buildings.-- If the owner or operator of a United States airport described in section 44903(c) determines that the airport will not be able to make the modifications to the airport's terminal buildings that are necessary to accommodate the explosive detection systems required under subparagraph (A) in a cost-effective manner on or before December 31, 2002, the owner or operator shall provide notice of that determination to the Under Secretary not later than November 1, 2002.
Plans for making modifications to airport terminal buildings.-- ``(i) In general.--If the owner or operator of an airport provides notice to the Under Secretary under subparagraph (B), the Under Secretary, in consultation with the owner or operator, shall develop, not later than December 1, 2002, a plan for making necessary modifications to the airport's terminal buildings so as to deploy and fully utilize explosive detection systems to screen all checked baggage.
Deadline.--A plan developed under this subparagraph shall include a date for completing the plan.
All such plans shall be completed as expeditiously as practicable.
Transmission of plans to congress.--On the date of completion of a plan under this subparagraph, the Under Secretary shall transmit a copy of the plan to Congress.
For security purposes, information contained in the plan shall not be disclosed to the public.
Requirements for plans.--A plan developed and published under subparagraph (C), shall provide for, to the maximum extent practicable-- ``(i) the deployment of explosive detection systems in the baggage sorting area or other non-public area rather than the lobby of an airport terminal building; and ``(ii) the deployment of state of the art explosive detection systems that have high throughput, low false alarm rates, and high reliability without reducing detection rates.
Use of screening methods other than eds.-- Notwithstanding the deadline in paragraph (1)(A), after December 31, 2002, if explosive detection systems are not screening all checked baggage at a United States airport described in section 44903(c), such baggage shall be screened by the methods described in subsection (e) until such time as all checked baggage is screened by explosive detection systems at the airport.
Purchase of explosive detection systems.--Any explosive detection system required to be purchased under paragraph (2)(A) shall be purchased by the Under Secretary.
Explosive detection system defined.--In this subsection, the term `explosive detection system' means a device, or combination of devices, that can detect different types of explosives.''.
Alternative Explosive Detection Systems.-- (1) Demonstration projects.--The Under Secretary of Transportation for Security shall carry out demonstration projects for the installation and testing of alternative explosive detection systems at not less than 5 United States airports described in section 44903(c) of title 49, United States Code.
Applications.-- (A) Submission.--Not later than December 1, 2002, the owner or operator of an airport seeking to participate in the demonstration projects shall submit to the Under Secretary an application in the form and containing the information that the Under Secretary requires.
Selection of airports.--Not later than March 31, 2003, the Under Secretary shall select the airports at which the demonstration projects will be conducted from among the applications received.
Demonstration criteria.--In carrying out the demonstration projects, the Under Secretary shall evaluate alternative explosive detection systems based on the following criteria: (A) Probability of detection.
Probability of false alarm.
Detection of explosives, hazardous materials, and chemical weapons.
Manpower needed to operate the systems and clear baggage for travel.
Airport modifications.--An airport participating in the demonstration projects shall not be required to make any modification to the airport's terminal facilities to accommodate the deployment of explosive detection systems under 44901(d)(1)(A).
Continuation of approved inspections.--The Under Secretary shall require an airport participating in the demonstration projects to continue to deploy the inspection systems deployed at the airport as of January 19, 2002, but may not require the airport to deploy additional explosive detection equipment at the airport before December 31, 2003.
Purchase of alternative explosive detection systems.-- Any alternative explosive detection system purchased as part of a demonstration project under this subsection shall be purchased by the Under Secretary.
Report to congress.--Not later than December 31, 2003, the Under Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report describing the results of the demonstration projects, including an evaluation of the alternative explosive detection systems using the criteria specified in paragraph (3).
Correction of Reference.--Section 44901(e) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``(b)(1)(A)'' and inserting ``(d)(1)(A)''.