This Act may be cited as the ``Broadband Antitrust Restoration and Reform Act''.
AMENDMENT TO THE CLAYTON ACT.
The Clayton Act (15 United States Code 12 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
COMPETITION IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
Application Prerequisite To Providing High Speed Data Service or Internet Backbone Service; Attorney General Reinstatement of Pro- Competitive Regulations.-- ``(1) Requirement to file application with attorney general of the united states.--A Bell operating company or an affiliate of a Bell operating company may not provide any interLATA service in any of its in-region States under the authority of any amendment to section 271 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 271) enacted after June 13, 2001-- ``(A) unless it files with the Attorney General of the United States an application to provide such service; and ``(B) until the Attorney General-- ``(i) approves such application before the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date such application is filed; or ``(ii) fails to approve or to disapprove such application during such 90-day period.
Authority of attorney general.--The Attorney General of the United States-- ``(A) may issue rules to establish requirements applicable to the form and contents of applications filed under paragraph (1); ``(B) may make recommendations to an applicant regarding-- ``(i) withdrawal of an application filed under paragraph (1); or ``(ii) filing of an application under paragraph (1), with or without modifications, subsequent to the withdrawal of an application filed under such paragraph; and ``(C) may not approve an application filed in compliance with this subsection if the Attorney General determines that the applicant-- ``(i) has monopoly power in the local exchange market; and ``(ii) is using or is likely to use its monopoly power in order to engage in exclusionary or other anticompetitive conduct.
Withdrawal of application.--An application filed under paragraph (1) may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time before the Attorney General approves or disapproves such application, but may not be modified after being filed.
Reinstatement of regulation.--If the Attorney General, sua sponte, determines that the conditions specified in paragraph (2)(C) have been met with respect to a Bell operating company or an affiliate of a Bell operating company, then the Attorney General may reinstate, as to such company or such affiliate, any Federal regulation in effect as of June 13, 2001, which the Attorney General determines was designed to protect against exclusionary conduct or other abusive monopoly power.
Exclusion.--Nothing in this subsection shall apply to two-percent carriers.
Continuing Operation of the Antitrust Laws.--The rights, obligations, powers, and remedies provided under the antitrust laws are in addition to, and are-- ``(1) not preempted by; ``(2) not inconsistent with; and ``(3) not incompatible with; any of the rights, obligations, powers, and remedies provided under the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 151 et sequentes), under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-104; 110 United States Statutes at Large 56), or under any law amended by either such Act, regardless of the progress of competition in any market.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Affiliate.--The term `affiliate' means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, another person.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `own' means to own an equity interest (or equivalent thereof) of more than 10 percent.
Bell operating company.--The term `Bell operating company' has the meaning given such term in section 3 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 153).
In-region state.--The term `in-region State' has the meaning given to such term in section 271(i) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 271(i)).
InterLATA service.--The term `interLATA service' has the meaning given such term in section 3 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 153).
Two-percent carrier.--The term `two-percent carrier' means an incumbent local exchange carrier within the meaning of section 251(h) of the Communications Act (47 United States Code 254(h)) whose access lines, when aggregated with the access lines of any local exchange carrier that such incumbent local exchange carrier directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with, are fewer than two percent of the Nation's subscriber lines installed in the aggregate nationwide.