This Act may be cited as the ``Commission for American Mathematics Leadership Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Students in the United States should be the world leaders in mathematics achievement within the next decade.
The Third International Mathematics and Science Study (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``TIMSS''), the largest international study ever undertaken of how students perform in mathematics and science, demonstrated that the mathematics skills of students in the United States (including the top 10 percent of students in the United States) lag far behind the skills of students in many other nations, even though students in the United States spend more class time on mathematics and science and usually are assigned more homework.
Research indicates that the problems of mathematics and science education in the United States stem largely from the lack of a coherent and focused curriculum designed for high- level learning goals, the lack of assessment instruments aligned with such curricula, and the lack of a sufficient commitment by colleges and universities in the United States to high-quality teacher preparation and professional development programs.
Core problems exist with the courses of study and the teaching style on which many schools in the United States rely to instruct students in mathematics and science, as reflected in the conclusion of the National Science Foundation that schools in the United States teach math concepts in superficial, and ultimately ineffective, ways.
A developed framework for mathematics and science should be coherent, focused, and give balanced attention to basic skills, conceptual understanding, problem solving, reasoning, and communication skills, and appropriate uses of technology.
The failure of mathematics and science teaching methods in the United States requires a systemic retraining of, and an increased emphasis on the professional development of, teachers in the United States.
Teachers of mathematics and science should be well- trained professionals who combine sound knowledge of subject matter with the necessary skills and a good understanding of student learning and assessment.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a commission to be known as the ``Commission for American Mathematics Leadership'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members as follows: (1) Four members appointed by the President.
Four members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Four members appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, in consultation with the minority leader of the Senate.
The Commission shall, in coordination with the National Academy of Sciences-- (1) review the existing research base on mathematics education leadership, including the status of mathematics education in the United States relative to international competitors; (2) propose professional development priorities to assure that the teaching of mathematics at all educational levels in the United States is strengthened; and (3) formulate an implementation proposal, including specific recommendations which can be implemented by appropriate public and private agencies, for assuring world class achievement of the United States in mathematics education within a decade.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the President pro tempore of the Senate a report including the findings and recommendations of the Commission under section 4.
The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out its duties, hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as the Commission considers appropriate.
Chairman.--A chairman of the Commission shall be elected by the members of the Commission.
Quorum.--Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting meetings.
Pay of Members.--Members of the Commission shall not be paid by reason of their service as members.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, travel expenses (including per diem in lieu of subsistence) in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
The National Academy of Sciences shall provide the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Out of any amounts appropriated for the National Science Foundation, $750,000 shall be available for activities of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting the report required under section 5.