This Act may be cited as the ``National Voter Opportunity To Inform Congress Effectively on a Flat Tax and a Cap on Tax Increases Act of 1997 (National VOICE on a Flat Tax and Cap on Tax Increases Act of 1997)''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the right of citizens of the United States to vote is a fundamental right; (2) the right of citizens of the United States to have an effective voice in the decisionmaking processes of the Congress is grounded in the right to petition and is a fundamental part of American democracy, and Congress should provide an opportunity for citizens to express their views on important public issues; and (3) there is an increasing public sentiment and demand for less taxation and a simplified tax code.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to give the citizens of every State the opportunity to have a voice on whether or not Congress should adopt a flat income tax system and amend the Constitution to require a majority vote of the American people to raise taxes; and (2) to conduct a national nonbinding referendum on a flat tax on income and requiring a national vote on tax increases at the 1998 general election, thereby having an opportunity to study the feasibility of conducting national nonbinding referenda on other important issues in the future.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``nonbinding referendum'' means the placing on the general election ballot in every congressional district and delegate or resident commissioner district in 1998 the advisory questions defined below, the results of which shall be properly tabulated and certified as described herein, but which results shall not be legally binding on any person or institution; (2) the term ``advisory questions'' means the National Advisory Referendum on a flat tax on income and requiring a national vote on tax increases, the language of which is contained in section 4(b) of this Act; (3) the term ``general election'' means the election at which Federal officers are elected in 1998; and (4) the term ``State election agency'' means the official agency of each State and territory charged with the legal responsibility for conducting general elections within that jurisdiction.
PROCEDURES FOR NATIONAL VOTER OPPORTUNITY TO INFORM CONGRESS EFFECTIVELY ON A FLAT TAX AND REQUIRING A NATIONAL VOTE ON TAX INCREASES NONBINDING REFERENDUM.
In General.--This Act shall have the effect of placing on the 1998 general election ballot in every congressional district, and delegate and/or resident commissioner district, in the United States, the District of Columbia and the territories of the United States, the advisory questions under subsection (b).
Advisory Questions; Ballot Title and Language.--Not later than June 30, 1998, the Clerk of the United States House of Representatives and the Secretary of the United States Senate shall jointly certify to the appropriate State election agencies for inclusion on the 1998 general election ballot in each congressional district, the following ballot title and questions: ``national advisory referendum on a flat tax on income and requiring a national vote on tax increases ``Question #1: Should Congress adopt a simple flat tax rate on income?
``Question #2: Should Congress approve a constitutional amendment to require a majority vote of the American people to raise taxes?
Preparation of Ballots.-- (1) Procedures.--The procedures for printing and preparation of the ballots containing the advisory questions shall be the same as provided in each State and territory for conducting the elections of the Members of the United States House of Representatives and Senators, and Delegates or Resident Commissioners.
Advisory questions.--In each congressional and delegate district, every general election ballot shall include the advisory questions contained in subsection (b).
Should there be no general election scheduled to be held in any particular congressional or delegate district, a ballot shall nonetheless be prepared for the voters of said district to be able to participate in the nonbinding referendum in the same manner as all other districts where a general election is being held.
States shall be reimbursed at 4 cents per voter, or an estimated $5,000,000 for the costs incurred in placing the questions in subsection (b) on the ballots in November 1998.
Therefore, this bill authorizes $5,000,000 for these purposes.
All reimbursements to State election agencies for the costs of conducting the nonbinding referendum shall be made from the franking accounts of the Congress, with equal amounts drawn from the franking accounts of the House of Representatives and the Senate in proportion to the total funds appropriated to each House for franking, to reimburse the States for such expenses.
The Clerk of the United States House of Representatives and the Secretary of the United States Senate shall be responsible for ensuring the proper application for and reimbursement of said expenses.
Tabulation and Certification of Voting Results.--The State election agencies shall tabulate the results of the voting on the advisory questions in the same manner as is customary for tabulating the results of elections of the Members of the United States House of Representatives and Senators.
Said results shall be officially certified pursuant to the customary laws and procedures of each jurisdiction.
Transmission of Certified Results to the Congress, All Members, and Committees on the Judiciary.--The official, certified election results of each jurisdiction's nonbinding referenda on the advisory questions shall be certified by the State election agency to the Clerk of the United States House of Representatives and the Secretary of the United States Senate in the same manner and at the same time of the certification of election of Members of the House of Representatives and Senate at the 1998 general election, said results to be certified by county, congressional district and statewide totals.
The Clerk and the Secretary shall be responsible for transmitting to each Member of the respective House of Congress the results of the nonbinding referenda from all jurisdictions.
The results shall also be taken under advisement by the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate, with recommendations for response reported back to the full House and Senate within 6 months of the general election.
Comments Regarding Procedures for Future Nonbinding Referenda.--Within 90 days of the date of the general election, the State election agencies shall forward to the Clerk of the United States House of Representatives and the Secretary of the United States Senate their comments or suggestions regarding changes or improvements in procedures for conducting national nonbinding referenda in future general elections.
All such comments shall be referred to the respective committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and Senate.
This Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.