This Act may be cited as the ``Sandpoint Land and Facilities Conveyance Act of 2003''.
CONVEYANCE OF SANDPOINT FEDERAL BUILDING AND ADJACENT LAND, SANDPOINT, IDAHO.
Transfer of Administrative Jurisdiction.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of General Services shall transfer to the Secretary of Agriculture, without reimbursement, administrative jurisdiction over the Sandpoint Federal Building and approximately 3.17 acres of land in Sandpoint, Idaho, as depicted on the map entitled ``Sandpoint Federal Building,'' dated September 12, 2002.
Assumption and Repayment of Debt.--As of the date on which administrative jurisdiction of the property is transferred under subsection (a), the Secretary shall assume the obligation of the Administrator of General Services to repay to the Federal Finance Bank the debt incurred with respect to the transferred property.
The Secretary may repay the debt using-- (1) the proceeds of the conveyance of the property under this section; (2) amounts appropriated to the Forest Service for the rental, upkeep, and maintenance of facilities; and (3) any other unobligated appropriated amounts available to the Secretary.
Conveyance of Property.-- (1) Conveyance authorized.--The Secretary may convey, by quitclaim deed, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the property transferred to the Secretary under subsection (a).
The conveyance shall be made by sale or by exchange.
Map.--Until the date on which the property is conveyed under this section, the map referred to in subsection (a) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service and the Office of the Supervisor, Idaho Panhandle National Forest, Coeur d'Alene, Idaho.
Solicitations of offers.--The Secretary may solicit offers for the conveyance of the property under this section on such terms and conditions as the Secretary may prescribe.
The Secretary may reject any offer made under this section if the Secretary determines that the offer is not adequate or not in the public interest.
Consideration.-- (1) In general.--If the property is to be conveyed under subsection (c) by sale, the recipient of the property shall pay to the Secretary an amount equal to the fair market value of the conveyed property, as determined under subsection (e).
At the election of the Secretary, the consideration may be in the form of cash or other consideration, including the construction of administrative facilities for the National Forest System in Bonner County, Idaho.
Conditions on exchange.--If the property is to be conveyed under subsection (c) in exchange for the construction of administrative facilities-- (A) the construction of the administrative facilities shall be subject to any terms or conditions that the Secretary may prescribe by contract, including final building design and costs; and (B) the conveyance of the property shall be subject to-- (i) the completion of the administrative facilities in a manner satisfactory to the Secretary; (ii) the condition that the exchange be an equal value exchange, or if the value of the property and the administrative facilities are not equal, as determined under paragraph (3), that the values be equalized in accordance with paragraph (4); and (iii) any requirements of the Secretary that the entity acquiring the property assume any outstanding indebtedness on the property to the Federal Finance Bank.
Valuation.--The value of the property to be conveyed under subsection (c), and the value of any administrative facilities in exchange for the property, shall be determined by an appraisal that-- (A) is acceptable to the Secretary; and (B) conforms with the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions.
Equalization of values.--Notwithstanding section 206(b) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716(b)), the Secretary may accept a cash equalization payment in excess of 25 percent of the value of the property conveyed under subsection (c).
Deposit and Use of Proceeds.-- (1) Deposit.--The Secretary shall deposit the proceeds derived from the conveyence of the property under this section in the fund established by Public Law 90-171 (commonly known as the ``Sisk Act''; 16 United States Code 484a).
Use.--Amounts deposited under this subsection shall be available to the Secretary, without further appropriation and until expended, for-- (A) the acquisition, construction, or improvement of administrative facilities and associated land in the Northern Region of the Forest Service in the State of Idaho; and (B) the acquisition of land and interests in land for addition to the National Forest System in the Northern Region of the Forest Service in the State of Idaho.
Limitations.--Funds deposited under this subsection shall not-- (A) be paid or distributed to States or counties under any provision of law; or (B) be considered to be moneys received from units of the National Forest System for purposes of-- (i) the sixth paragraph under the heading ``Forest Service'' in the Act of May 23, 1908 (16 United States Code 500); (ii) section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (commonly known as the ``Weeks Law''; 16 United States Code 500); or (iii) the fourteenth paragraph under the heading ``Forest Service'' in the Act of March 4, 1913 (16 United States Code 501).
Management of Acquired Law.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary shall manage any land acquired under this section in accordance with the Act of March 1, 1911 (commonly known as the ``Weeks Act''; 16 United States Code 480 et sequentes) and other laws relating to the National Forest System.
Applicable Law.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the conveyance of property under this section shall be subject to the laws applicable to the conveyance of National Forest System land.
Part 1955 of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations, shall not apply to any action carried out under this section.