CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Joint Federal-State Commission on Policies and Programs Affecting Alaska Natives (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Alaska Natives Commission'') was established by the Indian Law Enforcement Act (42 United States Code 2991a note) following-- (A) the publication in 1989 of the report entitled ``Report on the Status of Alaska Natives: A Call for Action by the Alaska Federation of Natives''; and (B) extensive congressional hearings that focused on the need for the first comprehensive assessment of the social, cultural, and economic condition of 86,000 Alaska Natives since the enactment of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes).
(A) The 14-member Alaska Natives Commission held-- (i) 15 regional hearings throughout Alaska between July 1992 and October 1993; and (ii) 2 statewide hearings in Anchorage, Alaska, coinciding with the conventions of 1992 and 1993 of the Alaska Federation of Natives.
In May 1994, the Alaska Natives Commission issued a 3- volume, 440-page report.
As required by the Indian Law Enforcement Reform Act, the report referred to in paragraph (2) was formally conveyed to the Congress, the President of the United States, and the Governor of Alaska.
The Alaska Natives Commission found that many Alaska Native individuals, families, and communities were experiencing a social, cultural, and economic crisis marked by rampant unemployment, the lack of economic opportunity, alcohol abuse, depression, and morbidity and mortality rates that were described by health care professionals as staggering.
The Alaska Natives Commission found that due to the high rate of unemployment and lack of economic opportunities for Alaska Natives, government programs for the poor have become the foundation of many village economies.
Displacing traditional Alaska Native social safety nets, the programs referred to in paragraph (5) (that were developed with well-meaning intentions) have-- (A) undermined the healthy interdependence and self-sufficiency of Alaska Native tribes and families; and (B) placed Alaska Native tribes and families at risk of becoming permanent dependents of the Federal Government.
Despite the seemingly insurmountable problems referred to in the preceding paragraphs, the Alaska Natives Commission found that Alaska Natives, building on the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, had commenced a unique process of critical self-examination that, if supported by the Congress through innovative legislation and effective public administration at all levels, including traditional Native governance, could provide the basis for an Alaska Native social, cultural, economic, and spiritual renewal.
The Alaska Natives Commission recognized that the key to the future well-being of Alaska Natives resided in-- (A) the systematic resumption of responsibility by Alaska Natives for the well-being of the members of Alaska Native tribes; (B) the strengthening of the economies of Alaska Natives; (C) the strengthening, operation, and control of their systems of governance, social services, education, health care, and law enforcement; and (D) exercising rights that Alaska Natives have as a result of the special relationship of Alaska Natives with the Federal Government and as citizens of the United States and Alaska.
The Alaska Natives Commission recognized that the following 3 basic principles must be respected in addressing the myriad of problems facing Alaska Natives-- (A) self-reliance; (B) self-determination; and (C) the integrity of Native cultures.
There is a need to address the problems confronting Alaska Natives referred to in the preceding paragraphs.
The problems referred to in paragraph (10) should be addressed rapidly, with certainty, and in conformity with the real economic, social, and cultural needs of Alaska Natives.
The Congress-- (A) retains and has exercised its constitutional authority over Native affairs in Alaska subsequent to the Treaty of Cession of Alaska to the United States; and (B) through this Act, exercises that authority.
ALASKA NATIVE IMPLEMENTATION STUDY.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the Alaska Natives Commission adopted certain recommendations that raise important policy questions that-- (A) are unresolved in Alaska; and (B) require further study and review before Congress considers legislation to implement solutions to address these recommendations; and (2) the Alaska Federation of Natives is the representative body of statewide Alaska Native interests that is best suited to further investigate and report to Congress with proposals to implement the recommendations of the Alaska Natives Commission.
Grant.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior shall make a grant to the Alaska Federation of Natives to-- (A) conduct a study under this section; and (B) submit the report to the persons and entities specified in subsection (e).
Condition for grant.--The grant under paragraph (1) may only be made if the Alaska Federation of Natives enters into an agreement with the Secretary of the Interior that states that as a condition to receive the grant, the Alaska Federation of Natives will abide by the approval of requirements of this section.
Study.--Pursuant to subsection (b), the Alaska Federation of Natives shall-- (1) examine the recommendations of the Alaska Natives Commission; (2) examine initiatives in the United States, Canada, and other governments for successful approaches to addressing the issues that are similar to the issues addressed by the Alaska Natives Commission; (3) conduct hearings within the Alaska Native community on further approaches that could be used to implement the recommendations of the Alaska Natives Commission; and (4) provide recommended legislation and submit other recommendations to the Congress concerning actions the Congress should take to implement such recommendations.
Consideration of Local Control.--In developing its recommendations pursuant to subsection (c)(4), the Alaska Federation of Natives shall give specific attention to the ways in which the recommendations may be achieved at the local level with maximum local control of the implementation of the recommendations.
Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which a grant is made under subsection (b), the Alaska Federation of Natives shall submit a report on the study conducted under this section, together with the recommendations developed pursuant to subsection (c)(4), to-- (A) the President; (B) the Congress; and (C) the Governor and the legislature of the State of Alaska.
Availability.--The Alaska Federation of Natives shall make the report submitted to Congress under paragraph (1) available to Alaska Native villages and organizations and to the general public.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of the Interior, $350,000 for the grant under subsection (b).
Additional State Funding.--The Congress encourages the State of Alaska to provide the additional funding necessary for the completion of the study under this section.
Alaska Native Defined.--For purposes of the study conducted under this Act, the term ``Alaska Native'' shall have the meaning provided the term ``Native'' under section 3(b) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1602(b)).