.--For purposes of section 822(a)(2), the term `joint resolution' means only a joint resolution of the two Houses of Congress--- ``(1) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: `That the Congress hereby concurs in the determination and report of the President relating to compliance by North Korea with certain international obligations transmitted pursuant to section 822(a)(1) of the North Korea Threat Reduction Act of 1999.
'; ``(2) which does not have a preamble; and ``(3) the title of which is as follows: `Joint Resolution relating to compliance by North Korea with certain international obligations pursuant to the North Korea Threat Reduction Act of 1999.'.
Congressional Review Procedures.-- ``(1) Rulemaking.--The provisions of this section are enacted by the Congress-- ``(A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and, as such, shall be considered as part of the rules of either House and shall supersede other rules only to the extent they are inconsistent therewith; and ``(B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules so far as they relate to the procedures of that House at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Introduction and referral.-- ``(A) Introduction.--A joint resolution described in subsection (a)-- ``(i) shall be introduced in the House of Representatives by the majority leader or minority leader or by a Member of the House of Representatives designated by the majority leader or minority leader; and ``(ii) shall be introduced in the Senate by the majority leader or minority leader or a Member of the Senate designated by the majority leader or minority leader.
Referral.--The joint resolution shall be referred to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
Discharge of committees.--If a committee to which a joint resolution described in subsection (a) is referred has not reported such joint resolution by the end of 30 days beginning on the date of its introduction, such committee shall be discharged from further consideration of such joint resolution, and such joint resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Floor consideration in the house of representatives.-- ``(A) In general.--On or after the third calendar day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays, except when the House of Representatives is in session on such a day) after the date on which the committee to which a joint resolution described in subsection (a) is referred has reported, or has been discharged from further consideration of, such a joint resolution, it shall be in order for any Member of the House to move to proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution.
A Member of the House may make the motion only on the day after the calendar day on which the Member announces to the House the Member's intention to do so.
Such motion is privileged and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment or to a motion to postpone.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution is agreed to, the House shall immediately proceed to consideration of the joint resolution which shall remain the unfinished business until disposed of.
Debate.--Debate on a joint resolution described in subsection (a), and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than two hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the joint resolution.
An amendment to the joint resolution is not in order.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and is not debatable.
A motion to table, a motion to postpone, or a motion to recommit the joint resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the joint resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Appeals.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair to the procedure relating to a joint resolution described in subsection (a) shall be decided without debate.
Floor consideration in the senate.--Any joint resolution described in subsection (a) shall be considered in the Senate in accordance with the provisions of section 601(b)(4) of the International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 1976.
Consideration by the other house.--If, before the passage by one House of a joint resolution of that House described in subsection (a), that House receives from the other House a joint resolution described in subsection (a), then the following procedures shall apply: ``(A) The joint resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee and may not be considered in the House receiving it except in the case of final passage as provided in subparagraph (B)(ii).
With respect to a joint resolution described in subsection (a) of the House receiving the joint resolution-- ``(i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no joint resolution had been received from the other House; but ``(ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the joint resolution of the other House.
Upon disposition of the joint resolution received from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider the joint resolution that originated in the receiving House.
Computation of days.--In the computation of the period of 30 days referred to in paragraph (3), there shall be excluded the days on which either House of Congress is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain or because of an adjournment of the Congress sine die.''.
EXPANSION OF RESTRICTIONS ON NUCLEAR COOPERATION WITH NORTH KOREA.
Section 822(a) of the North Korea Threat Reduction Act of 1999 is amended by striking ``such agreement,'' both places it appears and inserting in both places ``such agreement (or that are controlled under the Export Trigger List of the Nuclear Suppliers Group),''.
PROHIBITION ON ASSUMPTION BY UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT OF LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR ACCIDENTS IN NORTH KOREA.
The North Korea Threat Reduction Act of 1999 is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 824 (as redesignated by section 2(b)(1)) as section 825; and (2) by inserting after section 823 (as added by section 2(b)(2)) the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITION ON ASSUMPTION BY UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT OF LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR ACCIDENTS IN NORTH KOREA.
Prohibition.--In supporting the provision of nuclear reactors to North Korea pursuant to the Agreed Framework, neither the President nor any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States Government may enter into any international agreement, contract, or other arrangement, the purpose or effect of which is to impose liability on the United States Government, or otherwise require financial indemnity by the United States Government, for nuclear accidents that may occur at nuclear reactors provided to North Korea pursuant to the Agreed Framework.
Construction.-- Except as provided in subsection (c), the prohibition of subsection (a) shall apply notwithstanding any other provision of law.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any treaty subject to approval by the Senate pursuant to article II, section 2, clause 2 of the Constitution of the United States.