The War Powers Resolution (50 United States Code 1541 et sequentes; Public Law 93- 148), relating to the exercise of war powers by the President under the Constitution, is hereby repealed.
TITLE II--EXPEDITED PROCEDURES SEC.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``resolution'' means any resolution described in subsection (a) or (b) of section 105; and (2) the term ``session days'' means days on which the respective House of Congress is in session.
Referral of Resolutions.--A resolution introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives.
A resolution introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
Discharge of Committee.--(1) If the committee to which is referred a resolution has not reported such a resolution (or an identical resolution) at the end of 7 calendar days after its introduction, such committee shall be discharged from further consideration of such resolution, and such resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House of Congress involved.
After a committee reports or is discharged from a resolution, no other resolution with respect to the same use of force may be reported by or be discharged from such committee while the first resolution is before the respective House of Congress (including remaining on the calendar), a committee of conference, or the President.
This paragraph may not be construed to prohibit concurrent consideration of a joint resolution described in section 105(a) and a concurrent resolution described in section 105(b).
Consideration of Resolutions.--(1)(A) Whenever the committee to which a resolution is referred has reported, or has been discharged under subsection (c) from further consideration of such resolution, notwithstanding any rule or precedent of the Senate, including Rule 22, it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House of Congress to move to proceed to the consideration of the resolution and, except as provided in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph or paragraph (2) of this subsection (insofar as it relates to germaneness and relevancy of amendments), all points of order against the resolution and consideration of the resolution are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to a motion to postpone.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall be in order, except that such motion may not be entered for future disposition.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution is agreed to, the resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House of Congress, to the exclusion of all other business, until disposed of, except as otherwise provided in subsection (e)(1).
Whenever a point of order is raised in the Senate against the privileged status of a resolution that has been laid before the Senate and been initially identified as privileged for consideration under this section upon its introduction pursuant to section 105, such point of order shall be submitted directly to the Senate.
The point of order, ``The resolution is not privileged under the Use of Force Act'', shall be decided by the yeas and the nays after four hours of debate, equally divided between, and controlled by, the Member raising the point of order and the manager of the resolution, except that in the event the manager is in favor of such point of order, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee.
Such point of order shall not be considered to establish precedent for determination of future cases.
(A)(i) Consideration in a House of Congress of the resolution, and all amendments and debatable motions in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 12 hours, which, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader, or by their designees.
The Majority Leader or the Minority Leader or their designees may, from the time under their control on the resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any amendment, debatable motion, or appeal.
Only amendments which are germane and relevant to the resolution are in order.
Debate on any amendment to the resolution shall be limited to 2 hours, except that debate on any amendment to an amendment shall be limited to 1 hour.
The time of debate for each amendment shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover of the amendment and the manager of the resolution, except that in the event the manager is in favor of any such amendment, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee.
One amendment by the Minority Leader is in order to be offered under a one-hour time limitation immediately following the expiration of the 12-hour time limitation if the Minority Leader has had no opportunity to offer an amendment to the resolution thereto.
One amendment may be offered to the amendment by the Minority Leader under the preceding sentence, and debate shall be limited on such amendment to one-half hour which shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover of the amendment and the manager of the resolution, except that in the event the manager is in favor of any such amendment, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee.
A motion to postpone or a motion to recommit the resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is in order, except that such motion may not be entered for future disposition, and debate on such motion shall be limited to 1 hour.
Whenever all the time for debate on a resolution has been used or yielded back, no further amendments may be proposed, except as provided in paragraph (2)(C), and the vote on the adoption of the resolution shall occur without any intervening motion or amendment, except that a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House of Congress may occur immediately before such vote.
Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a resolution shall be limited to one-half hour of debate, equally divided between, and controlled by, the Member making the appeal and the manager of the resolution, except that in the event the manager is in favor of any such appeal, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee.
Treatment of Other House's Resolution.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), if, before the passage by one House of a resolution of that House, that House receives from the other House a resolution, then the following procedures shall apply: (A) The resolution of the sending House shall not be referred to a committee in the receiving House.
With respect to a resolution of the House receiving the resolution, the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no resolution had been received from the sending House, except that the resolution of the sending House shall be considered to have been read for the third time.
If the resolutions of the sending and receiving Houses are identical, the vote on final passage shall be on the resolution of the sending House.
If such resolutions are not identical-- (i) the vote on final passage shall be on the resolution of the sending House, with the text of the resolution of the receiving House inserted in lieu of the text of the resolution of the sending House; (ii) such vote on final passage shall occur without debate or any intervening action; and (iii) the resolution shall be returned to the sending House for proceedings under subsection (g).
Upon disposition of the resolution received from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider the resolution originated in the receiving House.
If one House receives from the other House a resolution before any such resolution is introduced in the first House, then the resolution received shall be referred, in the case of the House of Representatives, to the Committee on International Relations and, in the case of the Senate, to the Committee on Foreign Relations, and the procedures in that House with respect to that resolution shall be the same under this section as if the resolution received had been introduced in that House.
Treatment of Identical Resolutions.--If one House receives from the other House a resolution after the first House has disposed of an identical resolution, it shall be in order to proceed by nondebatable motion to consideration of the resolution received by the first House, and that received resolution shall be disposed of without debate and without amendment.
Procedures Applicable to Amendments Between the Houses of Congress.--The following procedures shall apply to dispose of amendments between the Houses of Congress: (1) Upon receipt by a House of Congress of a message from the other House with respect to a resolution, it is in order for any Member of the House receiving the message to move to proceed to the consideration of the respective resolution.
Such motion shall be disposed of in the same manner as a motion under subsection (d)(1)(A).
Such a motion is not in order after conferees have been appointed.
(A) The time for debate in a House of Congress on any motion required for the disposition of an amendment by the other House to the resolution shall not exceed 2 hours, equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover of the motion and manager of the resolution at each stage of the proceedings between the two Houses, except that in the event the manager is in favor of any such motion, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee.
The time for debate for each amendment to a motion shall be limited to one-half hour.
Only motions proposing amendments which are germane and relevant are in order.
Procedures Applicable to Conference Reports and Presidential Action.--(1) Either House of Congress may disagree to an amendment or amendments made by the other House to a resolution or may insist upon its amendment or amendments to a resolution, and request a conference with the other House at anytime.
In the case of any disagreement between the two Houses of Congress with respect to an amendment or amendments to a resolution which is not resolved within 2 session days after a House of Congress first amends the resolution originated by the other House, each House shall be deemed to have requested and accepted a conference with the other House.
Upon the request or acceptance of a conference, in the case of the Senate, the President pro tempore shall appoint conferees and, in the case of the House of Representatives, the Speaker of the House shall appoint conferees.
In the event the conferees are unable to agree within 72 hours after the second House is notified that the first House has agreed to conference, or after each House is deemed to have agreed to conference, they shall report back to their respective House in disagreement.
Notwithstanding any rule in either House of Congress concerning the printing of conference reports in the Congressional Record or concerning any delay in the consideration of such reports, such report, including a report filed or returned in disagreement, shall be acted on in the House of Representatives or the Senate not later than 2 session days after the first House files the report or, in the case of the Senate acting first, the report is first made available on the desks of the Senators.
Debate in a House of Congress on a conference report or a report filed or returned in disagreement in any such resolution shall be limited to 3 hours, equally divided between the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader, and their designees.
In the case of a conference report returned to a House of Congress in disagreement, an amendment to the amendment in disagreement is only in order if it is germane and relevant.
The time for debate for such an amendment shall be limited to one-half hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover of the amendment and the manager of the resolution, except that in the event the manager is in favor of any such amendment, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee.
If a resolution is vetoed by the President, the time for debate in consideration of the veto message on such measure shall be limited to 20 hours in each House of Congress, equally divided between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader, and their designees.
Rules of the Senate and the House.--This section is enacted by the Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a resolution, and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
REPEAL OF OBSOLETE EXPEDITED PROCEDURES.
Section 1013 of the Department of State Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1984 and 1985 (50 United States Code 1546a), relating to expedited procedures for certain joint resolutions and bills, is repealed.
S 564 IS----2 S 564 IS----3