This Act may be cited as the ``Democracy in Presidential Debates Act of 1993''.
DEFINITION OF PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE DEBATE AND PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY DEBATE.
Section 9002 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(13) The term `Presidential primary debate' means a debate held prior to the first Presidential primary or caucus in which each candidate who receives primary matching funds is mandated to appear and participate in a regulated exchange of questions and answers on political, economic, and other issues.
The term `Presidential candidate debate' means, with regard to any Presidential election, a debate at which each candidate nominated for election to the office of President by a political party or as an independent candidate meeting the qualifications set forth in this title, appears and participates in a regulated exchange of questions and answers on political, economic, and other issues.''
In General.--Chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Additional Eligibility Requirements.--In addition to the requirements specified in section 9033, in order to be eligible to receive any payments under section 9037, the candidates for the office of President in a Presidential primary election shall agree in writing-- ``(1) that the Presidential candidate will participate in one Presidential primary debate with the other candidates meeting the criteria set out in this section; ``(2) to participate in such Presidential primary debate, which shall be held on or after January 15 of election year, but at least one week before the first primary or caucus of the election year; ``(3) to participate in one such Presidential primary debate as sponsored by a nonpartisan organization or organizations having no affiliation with any political party.
If on December 31 there are 6 or fewer candidates who are obligated to debate or who are eligible and wish to participate, then there should be 1 debate among the 6 or fewer candidates.
If on December 31 there are more than 6 candidates obligated or eligible and wishing to participate, then there will be 2 debates, and the candidates would be obligated to participate in exactly 1, of their choice.
If this formula should result in 1 of the debates having only 1 participant, then placement should be determined by lot.
Each debate under this subsection shall last at least 90 minutes, of which not less than 30 minutes shall be devoted to questions and answers or discussion directly between the candidates, as determined by the sponsor.
The sponsor of the debates shall announce the time, location, and format of each debate prior to the first Monday of January of the election year.
Enforceability.--If the Commission determines that a Presidential candidate who has received payments under section 9037 failed to participate in a primary debate under subsection (a) and was responsible at least in part for such failure, the candidate shall pay to the Secretary of the Treasury an amount equal to the amount of the payments made to such candidate under section 9037.
Criteria for Eligibility to Participate in Primary Debate.-- In order to be eligible to participate in primary debates, as set out in this section, a candidate must have qualified to receive payments under section 9033 and this section by January 1 of the election year.
Sponsoring Organizations.--Any sponsoring organization assuming responsibility for organizing the debates provided for in this section shall include in at least 1 debate, each primary candidate who meets the criteria in this section.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE DEBATES.
Section 9003 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Presidential and Vice Presidential Candidate Debates.-- ``(1) Agreement to debate.--In addition to meeting the requirements of subsection (a), (b), or (c), in order to be eligible to receive any payments under section 9006, the candidates for the office of President and Vice President in a Presidential election shall agree in writing-- ``(A) that the Presidential candidate will participate in not less than 2 Presidential general election debates with all other candidates meeting the criteria set out in this section; ``(B) to participate in such Presidential debates, 1 of which shall be held in the month of September before the Presidential election and 1 of which shall be held in the month of October at least 2 weeks prior to the election; ``(C) that the Vice Presidential candidate will participate in not less than 1 Vice Presidential general election debate with all other candidates meeting the criteria set out in this section; ``(D) to participate in such debate, which shall be held in the month of October between the 2 Presidential debates; and ``(E) to participate in such Presidential and Vice Presidential debates as sponsored by a nonpartisan organization or organizations having no affiliation with any political party.
Each debate under this subsection shall last at least 90 minutes, of which not less than 30 minutes shall be devoted to questions and answers or discussion directly between the candidates, as determined by the sponsor.
The sponsor of the debates shall announce the time, location, and format of each debate prior to the first Monday in September before the Presidential election.
Enforceability.--If the Commission determines that a Presidential or Vice Presidential candidate failed to participate in a general election debate under subsection (a) and was responsible at least in part for such failure, the candidate of the party involved shall pay to the Secretary of the Treasury an amount equal to the amount of the payments made to such candidate under section 9006.
Criteria for eligibility to participate in general election debates.--In order to be eligible to participate in general election debates, as set out in this section, a candidate must meet the following criteria: ``(A) Ballot qualifications.--Such candidate has qualified for the election ballot as the candidate of a political party or as an independent candidate to the office of President or Vice President in not less than 40 States.
Financial qualifications.--Such candidate-- ``(i) has qualified to receive payments under section 9033 and this section; or ``(ii) as reported under section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, has raised not less than $500,000 on or after January 1 of the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year of the Presidential election.
Sponsoring organization.--Any sponsoring organization shall include in the general election debates all candidates who meet the criteria in this section.''
Section 9032(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after ``election,'' the following: ``including, for independent or minor party candidates, initiating petition signature gathering activities to be placed on the ballot for the general election''.