This Act may be cited as the ``United States-Mexico Border Environmental Protection Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to provide for the protection of the environment within the area comprising the border region between the United States and the Republic of Mexico, as defined by the La Paz Agreement between the United States and Mexico, referred to hereafter as the ``Border Environment Zone''.
Establishment of Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States the ``United States-Mexico Border Environmental Protection Fund'' (hereinafter referred to as the ``Fund'').
The Fund shall consist of such amounts as may be appropriated or transferred to the Fund.
No moneys in the Fund shall be available for obligation or expenditure except pursuant to an environmental emergency declaration pursuant to section 4.
Purpose of the Fund.--The Fund shall be readily available for use by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter referred to as the ``Administrator'') to investigate and respond to conditions which the Administrator determines present a substantial threat to the land, air, or water resources of the area comprising the border region of the United States and the Republic of Mexico.
Uses of Fund.--(1) Moneys in the Fund shall be available, without fiscal year limitation, for use by the Administrator in carrying out field investigations and remediation of any environmental emergency declared by the Administrator under this Act.
In carrying out his authority under this Act, the Administrator is authorized to expend moneys in the Fund directly or make such moneys available through grants or contracts.
Moneys in the Fund shall be available for use by the Administrator for cost-sharing programs with the Republic of Mexico, any of the States of Arizona, California, New Mexico, or Texas, any political subdivision of any such State, any local emergency planning committee, federally recognized Indian tribes, or any other appropriate entity, for use in carrying out field investigations and remediation actions pursuant to this Act.
DECLARATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY.
Determination by Administrator.--The Administrator, whenever he determines conditions exist which present a substantial threat to the land, air, or water resources of the area comprising the Border Environment Zone, may declare the existence of an environmental emergency in such region.
In no case shall the Administrator declare a condition an emergency under this section if such condition is specifically within the sole jurisdiction of the International Boundary and Water Commission.
Consultation With Affected Parties; Authority to Respond.--In responding to emergencies, the Administrator shall consult and cooperate with affected States, counties, municipalities, Indian tribes, the Republic of Mexico, and other affected parties.
The Administrator may respond directly to an emergency declared under this section or may coordinate with appropriate State or local authorities to respond.
Petition of Governor.--In addition to the authority under subsection (a), the Administrator, upon the petition of the Governor of the State of Arizona, California, New Mexico, or Texas, or the governing body of a Federally recognized Indian tribe, may declare the existence of an environmental emergency in such region.
In no case shall the Administrator declare a condition an emergency under this section if such condition is specifically within the sole jurisdiction of the International Boundary and Water Commission.
The Administrator, in cooperation with the Secretary of State, the Governors of the States of Arizona, California, New Mexico, or Texas, and the governing bodies of Federally recognized Indian tribes located within the United States-Mexico border region, and the Republic of Mexico, is authorized to establish a system for information sharing and for early warning to the United States, each of the several States and political subdivisions thereof, and Indian tribes, of environmental problems affecting the Border Environment Zone.
The Administrator shall integrate systems and procedures authorized by this section into any existing systems and procedures established to provide information sharing and early warning regarding environmental problems affecting the Border Environment Zone.
The Administrator, after consultation with the Secretary of State, the Republic of Mexico, the Governors of the States of Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Texas, and the tribal governments of appropriate Indian tribes, shall submit an annual report to the Congress on the use of the Fund during the calendar year preceding the calendar year in which such report is filed, and the status of the environmental quality of the area comprising the Border Environment Zone.
The Administrator shall publish the availability of the report in the Federal Register, along with a brief summary.
Establishment.--The Administrator shall establish a United States-Mexico Border Environmental Protection Advisory Committee (hereinafter referred to as the ``Advisory Committee'').
Functions.--It shall be the functions of the Advisory Committee to-- (1) monitor and study environmental conditions within the Border Environment Zone; (2) plan and make recommendations for ongoing environmental protection within such border region; and (3) carry out such other functions as the Administrator may prescribe.
Composition of Advisory Committee.--The Advisory Committee shall consist of such number as the Administrator shall appoint.
At least one member shall be from the Department of State.
At least 2 of the members shall be from business, 2 from non-Government organizations, and 5 from State local or tribal governments.
The term of each member shall be for a period of not more than 5 years, specified by the Administrator at the time of appointment.
Before filling a position on the Advisory Committee, the Administrator shall publish a notice in the Federal Register soliciting nominations for membership on the Advisory Committee.
Meetings and Reports.--The Advisory Committee shall meet at least on a quarterly basis, and report to the President and Congress not less than annually, on the state of the Border Environment Zone; together with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee, if any.
The initial report shall be submitted within 12 months following the date of the enactment of this Act.
Compensation.--Members of the Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation.
When serving away from home or regular place of business, a member may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for individuals employed intermittently in the Government service.
Authority.--The Secretary of State, acting through the United States Commissioner, International Boundary and Water Commission, United States and Mexico (hereafter ``United States Commissioner'') is authorized to conclude agreements with the appropriate representative of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of Mexico for the purpose of correcting border sanitation problems in international streams that form or cross the international boundary between the United States and the Republic of Mexico, caused by the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage into such streams.
Recommendations.--Agreements concluded under subsection (a) should consist of recommendations to the Governments of the United States and the Republic of Mexico of measures to protect the health and welfare of persons along those international streams that cross the international boundary between the United States and the Republic of Mexico, and should include-- (1) facilities that should be constructed, operated, and maintained in each country; (2) estimates of the costs of plans, construction, operation, and maintenance of such facilities; (3) formulas for the division of costs between the United States and the Republic of Mexico; and (4) time schedule for the construction of facilities and other measures recommended within the agreements authorized by this section.
JOINT RESPONSES TO SANITATION EMERGENCIES.
Construction of Works.--The Secretary of State, acting through the United States Commissioner, is authorized to conclude agreements with the appropriate representative of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Mexico for the purpose of joint response through the construction of works, repair of existing infrastructure, and other such appropriate measures in the Republic of Mexico and the United States to correct border sanitation emergencies in international streams that form or cross the international boundary between the United States and the Republic of Mexico caused by the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage into such streams.
The United States Commissioner shall consult with the Governors of the States of Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Texas in developing and implementing agreements under this section.
Health and Welfare.--Agreements concluded under subsection (a) should consist of recommendations to the Governments of the United States and the Republic of Mexico establishing general response plans to protect the health and welfare of persons along those international streams that form or cross the international boundary between the United States and the Republic of Mexico, and should include, but not be limited to-- (1) description of types of border sanitation emergencies requiring response including, but not limited to, sewer line breaks, power interruptions to wastewater handling facilities, components breakdowns to wastewater handling facilities, and accidental discharge of sewage, which result in the pollution of streams that form or cross the international boundary; (2) description of types of response to emergencies including, but not limited to, acquisition, use and maintenance of joint response equipment and facilities, small scale construction, including modifications to existing infrastructure and temporary works, and the installation of emergency and standby power facilities; (3) formulas for distribution of costs of responses to emergencies under this section on a case-by-case basis; and (4) requirements for defining the beginning and end of an emergency.
CONSTRUCTION; REPAIRS; AND OTHER MEASURES.
Definition.--As used in this Act, the term ``border sanitation emergency'' means a situation in which untreated or inadequately treated sewage is discharged into surface rivers or streams that form or cross the boundary between the United States and the Republic of Mexico.
Water Pollution Emergencies.--The Secretary of State, acting through the United States Commissioner, is authorized to respond through construction, repairs and other measures in the United States to correct ``border'' sanitation emergencies in international streams that form or cross the international boundary between the United States and the Republic of Mexico, caused by the accidental discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage into such streams.
Consultation With Affected Parties; Authority to Respond.--In responding to a border sanitation emergency, the Secretary shall consult and cooperate with the Administrator, affected States, counties, municipalities, Indian tribes, the Republic of Mexico, and other affected parties.
The Secretary of State may respond to a border sanitation emergency or may coordinate with appropriate State or local authorities to respond.
Establishment.--The Secretary of State, in cooperation with the Administrator, is authorized to enter into an agreement or other arrangement with the Republic of Mexico to establish an Advisory Committee comprised of members from the Republic of Mexico and the United States.
Functions.--It shall be the functions of the Binational Advisory Committee to (1) assist EPA and SEDESOL in the monitoring and study of environmental conditions within the border region of the United States and Mexico; (2) plan and make recommendations to EPA and SEDESOL for on-going environmental protection within such border region; and (3) carry out such other functions as EPA and SEDESOL may prescribe.
Composition.--The United States Delegation shall consist of such number as the Administrator shall appoint.
At least two of the members shall be from business, two from nongovernment organizations, and five from State or local governments.
The term of each member shall be for a period of not more than five years, specified by the Administrator at the time of appointment.
Before filling a position on the Advisory Committee, the Administrator shall publish a notice in the Federal Register soliciting nominations for membership on the United States Advisory Committee.
Availability of Committee Records to the Public.--The Binational Advisory Committee shall make all reasonable efforts to make available to the public information on environmental conditions in the border region and efforts the Committee undertakes or recommends to address these conditions.
Transfer Authority.--The Secretary of State, acting through the United States Commissioner, is authorized to include as part of the agreements authorized by sections 8, 9, and 10 of this Act, the necessary arrangements to administer the transfer to another country of funds assigned to one country and obtained from Federal or non-Federal governmental or nongovernmental sources.
Cost-Sharing Agreements.--No funds of the United States shall be expended in the Republic of Mexico for emergency investigation or remediation pursuant to section 8, 9, or 10 of this Act absent a cost- sharing agreement between the United States and the Republic of Mexico unless the Secretary of State has determined and can demonstrate that the expenditure of such funds in the Republic of Mexico would be cost- effective and in the interest of the United States.
In cases where funds of the United States are expended in the Republic of Mexico without a cost-sharing agreement, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to the appropriate committees of Congress explaining why costs were not shared between the United States and the Republic of Mexico, and why the expenditure of such funds without cost-sharing was in the national interest of the United States.
Establishment of Fund.--(1) There is established in the Treasury of the United States the United States International Boundary and Water Commission Fund (hereinafter referred to as the ``Commission Fund'').
The Commission Fund shall consist of such amounts as may be appropriated or transferred to the Commission Fund.
Moneys in the Commission Fund shall be available, without fiscal year limitation, for use by the Secretary of State in carrying out the provisions of this section and sections 8, 9, 10 and 11 of this Act.
In carrying out the purposes of this section and sections 8, 9, 10 and 11 of this Act, the Secretary of State is authorized to expend moneys in the Commission Fund directly or make such moneys available to fulfill the purposes of any such section through grants or contracts.
Authorization for the Fund.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Fund $10,000,000, for use in accordance with the purposes of this Act.
Authorization for Advisory Committee.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator $500,000 for support and operation of the Advisory Committee.
Authorization for International Boundary and Water Commission Fund.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the International Boundary and Water Commission Fund $5,000,000 for carrying out sections 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 of this Act.
Availability of Funds.--All amounts appropriated pursuant to this Act shall remain available until expended.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as amending, repealing or otherwise modifying any provision of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, or any other law, treaty or international agreement of the United States.