This Act may be cited as the ``Cash Accounting for Small Business Act of 2001''.
CLARIFICATION OF CASH ACCOUNTING RULES FOR SMALL BUSINESS.
Cash Accounting Permitted.--Section 446 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to general rule for methods of accounting) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Small Business Taxpayers Permitted to Use Cash Accounting Method Without Limitation.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, an eligible taxpayer shall not be required to use an accrual method of accounting for any taxable year.
Eligible taxpayer.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--A taxpayer is an eligible taxpayer with respect to any taxable year if-- ``(i) for all prior taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999, the taxpayer (or any predecessor) met the gross receipts test of subparagraph (B), and ``(ii) the taxpayer is not a tax shelter (as defined in section 448(d)(3)).
Gross receipts test.--A taxpayer meets the gross receipts test of this subparagraph for any prior taxable year if the average annual gross receipts of the taxpayer (or any predecessor) for the 3-taxable- year period ending with such prior taxable year does not exceed $5,000,000.
The rules of paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 448(c) shall apply for purposes of the preceding sentence.
Inflation adjustment.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 2001, the dollar amount contained in subparagraph (B) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(ii) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, by substituting ``calendar year 2000'' for ``calendar year 1992'' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
If any amount as adjusted under this subparagraph is not a multiple of $100,000, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $100,000.''.
Clarification of Inventory Rules for Small Business.--Section 471 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to general rule for inventories) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Small Business Taxpayers Not Required to Use Inventories.-- ``(1) In general.--An eligible taxpayer shall not be required to use inventories under this section for a taxable year.
Treatment of taxpayers not using inventories.--If an eligible taxpayer does not use inventories with respect to any property for any taxable year beginning after December 31, 2000, such property shall be treated as a material or supply which is not incidental.
Eligible taxpayer.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `eligible taxpayer' has the meaning given such term by section 446(g)(2).''.
Indexing of Gross Receipts Test.--Section 448(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to $5,000,000 gross receipts test) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Inflation adjustment.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 2001, the dollar amount contained in paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, by substituting `calendar year 2000' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
If any amount as adjusted under this paragraph is not a multiple of $100,000, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $100,000.''.
Effective Date and Special Rules.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.
Change in method of accounting.--In the case of any taxpayer changing the taxpayer's method of accounting for any taxable year under the amendments made by this section-- (A) such change shall be treated as initiated by the taxpayer; (B) such change shall be treated as made with the consent of the Secretary of the Treasury; and (C) the net amount of the adjustments required to be taken into account by the taxpayer under section 481 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be taken into account over a period (not greater than 4 taxable years) beginning with such taxable year.