This Act may be cited as the ``Teaching Children to Save Lives Act of 2011''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States.
Sudden cardiac arrest is the leading cause of death in young athletes.
Sudden cardiac arrest kills an estimated 5,000 to 7,000 children and young people per year--nearly 20 per day.
The American Heart Association estimates that the lives of 40,000 cardiac arrest victims could be saved each year through initiating a course of action known as the chain of survival.
The chain of survival includes prompt notification of emergency services and early cardiopulmonary resuscitation (hereinafter referred to as ``CPR''), defibrillation, and advanced cardiac life support.
Only 36 States have a law or curriculum standard encouraging CPR or automated external defibrillator (hereinafter referred to as ``AED'') training in schools.
A person experiencing sudden cardiac arrest has a 90 percent chance of survival if CPR and an AED is used within the first minute after collapse.
Over 64 percent of young athletes and others have survived sudden cardiac arrest that occurred in a high school with an AED program.
An important part of school children's education is learning healthy behaviors, including proper nutrition and physical activity.
This health education should also include basic emergency life-saving skills.
Teaching school children to perform the life-saving skill of CPR, identify and respond to choking victims, and recognize the signs of stroke and heart attack can improve their confidence in responding to an emergency and encourage continued efforts to update these skills after graduation, thereby potentially reducing the rate of death from sudden cardiac arrest, choking, and stroke.
GRANTS FOR CPR TRAINING IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Education shall carry out a program under which the Secretary is authorized to award grants to eligible local educational agencies or targeted schools for implementing nationally recognized CPR and AED training courses.
Use of Funds.--A local educational agency or targeted school under this Act may use the grant for-- (1) training individuals in CPR and AED skills and instruction; (2) obtaining printed informational or instructional materials; (3) obtaining manikins; (4) obtaining AED training devices; and (5) obtaining other equipment as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Grant Eligibility.-- (1) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a local educational agency or targeted school shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information and certifications as the Secretary may reasonably require.
AED training devices.--To be eligible to use the grant to obtain an AED training device, a local agency or targeted school shall demonstrate to the Secretary that such agency or school has implemented or intends to implement an AED training program in conjunction with a CPR training program as of the date of the submission of the application for the grant.
Priority of Award.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall award such grants based on 1 or more of following priorities: (1) Demonstrated need for initiating a CPR or AED training program in a targeted school or community served by targeted schools.
Demonstrated need for continued support of an existing CPR or AED training programs in targeted schools or communities served by targeted schools.
Demonstrated need for expanding an existing CPR or AED training program by adding training in the use of an AED.
Opportunities to encourage and foster partnerships with and among community organizations, including emergency medical service providers, fire and police departments, nonprofit organizations, public health organizations, and parent-teacher associations to aid in providing CPR or AED training.
Options to maximize the use of funds provided under this section.
Report Required.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which funds are first appropriated to carry out the program, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress describing-- (1) grant amounts and recipients; (2) how the funds were used; and (3) the impact of the funds on the development of CPR and AED training programs in schools implementing the grants.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Targeted school.--The term ``targeted school'' means a public elementary school or secondary school that provides education to students in any of grades 6 through 12.
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given such term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2012 through 2017.