This Act may be cited as the ``FERS Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Buyback Act of 2000''.
In General.--Section 8411(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following: ``(6) subject to subsection (j), service as a temporary or intermittent employee for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation not otherwise creditable for purposes of this chapter, performed after December 31, 1988, and before June 30, 2000, of at least 1 year's duration (whether performed over a continuous period or otherwise), but only if the individual performing such service later becomes subject to this chapter, and such service is not credited for purposes of any benefit under any other retirement system established by a law of the United States (disregarding the Social Security Act and chapter 83 of this title).''.
Deposit Requirement.--Section 8411 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j)(1) An employee or Member shall, with respect to any service described in subsection (b)(6) performed by such employee or Member, be required to deposit to the credit of the Fund an amount equal to 1.3 percent of basic pay for such service.
Any deposit under paragraph (1) made more than 5 years after the later of-- ``(A) October 1, 2000, or ``(B) the date on which the employee or Member making the deposit first becomes an employee or Member following the period of temporary or intermittent service for which such deposit is due, shall include interest on such amount, computed in the manner described in subsection (f)(3) and compounded annually beginning on the date of the expiration of the 5-year period.
If the deposit under paragraph (1) is not made or if less than the entire amount of such deposit is made-- ``(A) service of the employee or Member described in subsection (b)(6) shall be fully creditable; but ``(B) any annuity under this chapter based on the service of such employee or Member shall be reduced in a manner similar to that described in section 8418(b).''.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO PERSONS WHO HAVE SEPARATED.
In General.--The Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations under which credit for service, as described in section 8411(b)(6) of title 5, United States Code, as added by this Act, which was performed by an individual who has separated from Government service may be obtained.
Requirements.--Under the regulations, credit shall not be given under this section unless appropriate written application is submitted, not later than December 31, 2001, in such form and manner as the regulations require.
Recomputation of Annuity.-- (1) In general.--Any annuity or survivor annuity payable as of when an application under this subsection is submitted shall be recomputed to take into account any service described in section 8411(b)(6) of title 5, United States Code (performed by the individual on whose service the annuity is based), effective with respect to amounts accruing for months beginning more than 30 days after the date on which such application is submitted.
Condition.--If the full amount of the deposit required under section 8411(j) of such title 5 is not timely made (before such deadline as the Office shall by regulation prescribe) with respect to any service as to which the application under paragraph (1) relates, an appropriate reduction shall be made in the recomputed annuity in accordance with paragraph (3) of such section 8411(j).
Interest shall not be included as part of any deposit under this subsection.
NOTIFICATION AND OTHER DUTIES OF THE OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT.
Notice.--The Office of Personnel Management shall take such action as may be necessary and appropriate to inform individuals of any rights they might have as a result of the enactment of this Act.
Assistance.--The Office shall, on request, assist any individual in obtaining from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation any information in the possession of such corporation which may be necessary to verify the entitlement of such individual to have any service credited under section 8411(b)(6) of title 5, United States Code, as added by this Act, or to have an annuity recomputed under section 3(c).
Information.--At the request of the Office, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall provide any information with respect to an individual's performance of any service described in such section 8411(b)(6) to the Office.