Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``International Dolphin Conservation Act Amendments of 1995''.
References to Marine Mammal Protection Act.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1361 et sequentes).
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To recognize the achievements of, and support continued implementation of, the International Dolphin Conservation Program administered by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission.
To modify and strengthen the embargo provisions of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 to assure compliance with that program.
To authorize participation by United States tuna fishing vessels in the yellowfin tuna fishery of the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean in accordance with that program.
To ensure a viable and ecologically sound tuna fishery in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean, including by avoidance of bycatch of nontargeted marine species, maintenance of healthy stocks of tuna, and protection of marine mammal populations.
To otherwise strengthen and improve international efforts to reduce incidental dolphin mortality to insignificant levels approaching a zero mortality and serious injury rate as required by the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972.
AMENDMENT OF INTERNATIONAL DOLPHIN CONSERVATION ACT.
Title III of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1411-1418) is amended to read as follows: ``TITLE III--INTERNATIONAL DOLPHIN CONSERVATION PROGRAM ``SEC.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: ``(1) Although in past years the yellowfin tuna fishery of the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean has resulted in excessive incidental mortality to dolphins, efforts by tuna fishermen operating under United States and international conservation programs have reduced this incidental mortality to levels that are approaching a zero mortality and serious injury rate in accordance with section 101(a)(2).
Support of the International Dolphin Conservation Program is necessary to assure that these low levels of dolphin mortality are maintained and eventually eliminated, if possible.
United States tuna fishing vessels have led the world in the development of fishing methods to reduce dolphin mortalities in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean and should be allowed to fish in that region on an equal basis with foreign fleets.
Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to-- ``(1) continue the progress made in reducing the incidental mortality of dolphins in the yellowfin tuna fishery in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean; ``(2) support the International Dolphin Conservation Program; and ``(3) authorize the participation of United States tuna fishing vessels in the yellowfin tuna fishery of the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean in a manner consistent with the International Dolphin Conservation Program and the requirements of this Act.
Regulations.--The Secretary may issue regulations to govern the incidental taking of marine mammals in the course of commercial purse seine fishing for yellowfin tuna in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean.
Any such regulations shall be consistent with the requirements of the International Dolphin Conservation Program and with the goal of reducing the incidental mortality or serious injury of marine mammals occurring in the yellowfin tuna fishery in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean to insignificant levels approaching a zero mortality and serious injury rate.
Consultations.--In developing any regulation under this section, the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of State and the United States Commissioners to the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission appointed under section 3 of the Tuna Conventions Act of 1950 (16 United States Code 952).
``All vessels subject to the jurisdiction of the United States engaged in commercial purse seine fishing for yellowfin tuna in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean shall carry an observer certified by the Secretary or by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission for the purpose of conducting research and observing fishing operations unless, for reasons beyond the control of the Secretary, an observer is not available for such purpose.
PROHIBITIONS, PENALTIES, AND CIVIL FORFEITURES.
Prohibitions.--It is unlawful-- ``(1) for any person to violate any regulation promulgated under this title; ``(2) for any person to refuse to allow any duly authorized officer to board a vessel subject to that person's control for purposes of conducting any search or inspection in connection with the enforcement of this title; ``(3) for any person to assault, resist, oppose, impede, intimidate, or interfere with any such authorized officer in the conduct of any search or inspection described in paragraph (2); and ``(4) for any person or vessel subject to the jurisdiction of the United States intentionally to set a purse seine net on or to encircle any marine mammal in the course of tuna fishing operations in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean except in accordance with the International Dolphin Conservation Program.
Penalties.-- ``(1) Civil penalty.--A person that knowingly and willfully violates subsection (a)(1), (2), or (4) shall be subject to a civil penalty under section 105(a).
Criminal penalty.--A person that knowingly and willfully violates subsection (a)(3) shall be subject to a criminal penalty under section 105(b).
Civil Forfeitures.--Any vessel (including its fishing gear, appurtenances, stores, and cargo) used, and any fish (or its fair market value) taken or retained, in any manner, in connection with or as a result of the commission of any act prohibited by this section shall be subject to forfeiture to the United States in the manner provided in section 310 of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1860).
Clerical Amendments.--The table of contents in the first section of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 is amended by striking the items relating to title III and inserting the following: ``TITLE III--INTERNATIONAL DOLPHIN CONSERVATION PROGRAM ``Sec.
Prohibitions, penalties, and civil forfeitures.''.
Section 3 (16 United States Code 1362) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(28) The term `International Dolphin Conservation Program' means-- ``(A) the international program established by the agreement signed in La Jolla, California, in June, 1992, and administered by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission; or ``(B) an equivalent successor program agreed to by the United States.''.
AMENDMENT OF EMBARGO PROVISIONS.
Section 101(a)(2)(B) (16 United States Code 1371(a)(2)(B)) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) in the case of yellowfin tuna harvested with purse seine nets in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean, and products therefrom, to be exported to the United States, shall require that the government of the exporting nation provide documentary evidence that the fishing vessels of the exporting nation participate in the International Dolphin Conservation Program.
Such participation in the International Dolphin Conservation Program shall be deemed as establishing that such nation's regulatory program is comparable to, and not in excess of, United States standards if-- ``(i) dolphin mortality under the International Dolphin Conservation Program is within the potential biological removal level for each affected stock; ``(ii) the fishing vessels of the exporting nation are subject to 100 percent observer coverage by observers approved by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission; ``(iii) the government of the exporting nation authorizes the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission to release sufficient information to the Secretary to establish participation in the International Dolphin Conservation Program; ``(iv) the government of the exporting nation complies with all reasonable requests for cooperation in carrying out the scientific research program required by section 117; and ``(v) responsible officials administering the International Dolphin Conservation Program have not determined that any fishing vessel of the exporting nation is failing to participate in such program.''.
FURTHER TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Miscellaneous Amendments to Title I.-- (1) Section 101(a)(2) (16 United States Code 1371(a)) is amended in the second sentence by striking the semicolon and all that follows through ``practicable''.
Section 104(a) (16 United States Code 1374(a)) is amended in the second sentence by striking ``, or subsection (h) of this section''.
Section 104 (16 United States Code 1374) is amended by striking subsection (h).
Section 118(a)(3) (16 United States Code 1387(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Title III, and not this section, shall govern the taking of marine mammals in the course of commercial purse seine fishing for yellowfin tuna in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean.''.
Citizens on Foreign Vessels.--Section 101 (16 United States Code 1371) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the taking of marine mammals during fishing operations by a citizen of the United States when such citizen is employed on a foreign fishing vessel that is participating in the International Dolphin Conservation Program.''.
Tuna Conventions Act.--Section 3(c) of the Tuna Conventions Act of 1950 (16 United States Code 952(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) at least one shall be either the Director, or an appropriate regional director of the National Marine Fisheries Service; and''.
REPEAL OF MARKETPLACE LABELING REQUIREMENTS.
In General.--The Dolphin Protection Consumer Information Act (16 United States Code 1385) is repealed.
Relationship to Other Law.--Nothing in this section shall in any way affect, or be construed to affect, requirements for the protection and management of marine mammals under the Driftnet Impact Monitoring, Assessment, and Control Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 1822 note), the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1361 et sequentes), or any other applicable law.