This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Agreement Compliance Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the United States has entered into numerous trade agreements with foreign country trading partners; (2) foreign country performance with respect to certain agreements has been less than contemplated, and in some cases rises to the level of noncompliance; and (3) there is a need to provide a mechanism whereby interested parties can obtain a periodic review of the performance of a foreign country under a trade agreement.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to ensure that foreign countries which have made commitments through agreements with the United States fully abide by those commitments; (2) to obtain foreign country compliance with agreements with the United States through negotiation or, in the alternative, through unilateral action in cases in which the GATT dispute settlement procedures cannot be employed; (3) to achieve a more open world trading system which provides mutually advantageous market opportunities for trade between the United States and foreign countries; (4) to facilitate the opening of foreign country markets to exports of the United States and third countries by eliminating trade barriers and increasing the access of industry of the United States and third countries to such markets; and (5) to reduce diversion of third country exports to the United States because of restricted market access in foreign countries.
REVIEW OF TRADE AGREEMENTS.
In General.--Chapter 1 of title III of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2411 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 306, the following new section: ``SEC.
REQUEST FOR REVIEW OF TRADE AGREEMENTS.
Annual Review of Trade Agreements.-- ``(1)(A) At the written request of an interested person, the Trade Representative shall commence a review to determine whether a foreign country is in compliance with any trade agreement such country has with the United States.
An interested person may file a written request for review under paragraph (1) at any time after the date which is within 30 days after the anniversary of the effective date of such agreement, but not later than 90 days before the date of the expiration of such agreement.
A written request filed under this paragraph shall-- ``(i) identify the person filing the request and the interest of that person which is affected by the noncompliance of a foreign country with a trade agreement with the United States; ``(ii) describe the rights of the United States being denied under such trade agreement; and ``(iii) include information reasonably available to the person regarding the failure of the foreign country to comply with such trade agreement.
Not later than 90 days after receipt of a request for review under paragraph (1), the Trade Representative shall determine whether any act, policy, or practice of the foreign country that is the subject of the review is in material noncompliance with the terms of such agreement.
In conducting a review under this subsection, the Trade Representative may, as the Trade Representative determines appropriate, consult with the Secretary of Commerce or the Secretary of Agriculture.
(A) For purposes of this subsection, the term `interested person' means a person who has a significant economic interest that is affected by the failure of a foreign country to comply with a trade agreement.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `trade agreement' means an agreement with the United States and is not intended to include multilateral trade agreements such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Factors To Be Taken Into Account.--In making a determination under subsection (a)(2), the Trade Representative shall take into account, among other relevant factors-- ``(1) achievement of the objectives of the agreement, ``(2) adherence to commitments given, and ``(3) any evidence of actual patterns of trade that do not reflect patterns of trade which would reasonably be anticipated to flow from the concessions or commitments of such country based on the international competitive position and export potential of a United States industry.
The Trade Representative may seek the advice of the United States International Trade Commission when considering these factors.
Further Action.-- ``(1) If, on the basis of the review carried out under subsection (a), the Trade Representative determines that a foreign country is in material noncompliance with an agreement within the meaning of subsection (a)(2), the Trade Representative shall determine what further action to take under section 301(a).
For purposes of section 301, any determination made under subsection (a) shall be treated as a determination made under section 304.
In determining what further action to take under paragraph (1), the Trade Representative shall take into account the criteria described in subsection (d) with respect to possible sanctions.
Sanctions.--In developing a list of possible sanctions to be imposed in the event a determination is made under subsection (a)(2), the Trade Representative shall seek to minimize any adverse impact on existing business relations or economic interests of United States persons, including consideration of taking action with respect to future products for which a significant volume of current trade does not exist.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of chapter 1 of title III of the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 306 the following new item: ``Sec.
Request for review of trade agreements.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall not be construed to require actions inconsistent with the international obligations of the United States, including obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.