of Disapproval.-- (1) No referral.--A joint resolution shall not be referred to a committee in either House of Congress and shall immediately be placed on the calendar.
Motion to proceed.--A motion to proceed to a joint resolution is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to a motion to postpone and all points of order against the motion are waived.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of a joint resolution is agreed to, the joint resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Expedited consideration in house of representatives.-- In the House of Representatives, a joint resolution shall be considered as read.
All points of order against a joint resolution and against its consideration are waived.
The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the joint resolution to its passage without intervening motion except 2 hours of debate equally divided and controlled by the proponent and an opponent.
A motion to reconsider the vote on passage of the joint resolution shall not be in order.
Expedited procedure in senate.-- (A) Consideration.--In the Senate, consideration of a joint resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between the majority and minority leaders or their designees.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
An amendment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the joint resolution is not in order.
Vote on passage.--If the Senate has proceeded to a joint resolution, the vote on passage of the joint resolution shall occur immediately following the conclusion of consideration of the joint resolution, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the Senate.
Rulings of the chair on procedure.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate to the procedure relating to a joint resolution shall be decided without debate.
Amendment not in order.--A joint resolution considered under this subsection shall not be subject to amendment in either the House of Representatives or the Senate.
Coordination with action by other house.--If, before passing a joint resolution, one House receives from the other House a joint resolution-- (A) the joint resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee; and (B) the procedure in the receiving House shall be the same as if no joint resolution had been received from the other House, except that the vote on final passage shall be on the joint resolution of the other House.
Period.--Subject to subsection (d)(1), Congress may not consider a joint resolution under this subsection after the date that is 7 calendar days after May 15, 2013.
Rules of house of representatives and senate.--This subsection is enacted by Congress-- (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a joint resolution, and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Consideration After Passage.-- (1) Computation of days.--If Congress passes a joint resolution, the period beginning on the date the President is presented with the joint resolution and ending on the date the President signs, allows to become law without his signature, or vetoes and returns the joint resolution (but excluding days when either House is not in session) shall be disregarded in computing the calendar day period described in subsection (c)(7).
Veto override.--Debate on a veto message in the House of Representatives and the Senate relating to a joint resolution shall be 1 hour equally divided between the majority and minority leaders or their designees.
Disapproval.--If a joint resolution is enacted under this section-- (1) the President may not carrying out the proposed cancellation of budgetary resources in the qualifying sequester replacement plan submitted under subsection (b); and (2) sequestration shall continue in accordance with the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 900 et sequentes).
Failure to Enact Disapproval.--Effective on the day after the end of the calendar day period under subsection (c)(7) (as determined in accordance with subsection (d)(1)), if the President has submitted a qualifying sequester replacement plan in accordance with subsection (b) and a joint resolution of disapproval has not been enacted under this section, the President shall-- (1) cancel any sequestration order issued under section 251A of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 901a); and (2) cancel budgetary resources in accordance with the qualifying sequester replacement plan submitted under subsection (b).