This Act may be cited as the ``Special Operations Warrior Foundation Charter Act''.
CHARTER FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS WARRIOR FOUNDATION.
Part B of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 2305 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 2306--SPECIAL OPERATIONS WARRIOR FOUNDATION ``Sec.
Definitions ``For the purposes of this chapter-- ``(1) the term `Special Operations personnel' means all military personnel from all services assigned to the United States Special Operations Command of the Department of Defense or its successor commands or organizations.
the term `State' includes the District of Columbia and the territories and possessions of the United States.
Organization ``(a) Federal Charter.--The Special Operations Warrior Foundation (in this chapter, the `corporation'), a nonprofit corporation incorporated in the District of Columbia, is a federally chartered corporation.
Expiration of Charter.--If the corporation does not comply with any provision of this chapter, the charter granted by this chapter expires.
Purposes ``The purposes of the corporation are as provided in its bylaws and articles of incorporation and include the provision of scholarship grants and family, financial, and educational counseling to the families of Special Operations personnel who have given their lives in patriotic service to their country.
Governing body ``(a) Board of Directors.--The board of directors is the governing body of the corporation.
The composition of the board -and its powers, duties, and responsibilities are as provided in the corporation's bylaws and articles of incorporation.
Officers.--The officers and the election of officers of the corporation are as provided in its bylaws and articles of incorporation.
Powers ``The corporation may-- ``(1) adopt and amend bylaws for the management of its property and the regulation of its affairs; ``(2) adopt and alter the corporate seal; ``(3) choose officers, managers, and agents as the activities of the corporation require; ``(4) solicit, accept, and use to carry out the purposes of the corporation any appropriations, grants, funds, contributions in cash or in-kind, or property from the government of the United States, State and local governments, charitable or educational organizations, foundations, public and private corporations, and individuals; ``(5) make contracts; ``(6) acquire, own, lease, encumber, and transfer property as necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of the corporation; ``(7) borrow money, issue instruments of indebtedness, and secure its obligations by granting security interests in its property; ``(8) sue and be sued; and ``(9) do any other act necessary and proper to carry out the purposes of the corporation.
Support by the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs ``(a) In General.--The Department of Defense, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and any other Federal departments or agencies as may be necessary and appropriate, may provide such assistance to the corporation as is required to accomplish the purposes of the corporation.
Information.--The Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs shall provide such information to the corporation as shall enable the corporation to provide timely benefits to the surviving families of any Special Operations personnel killed in the line of duty.
The information shall include all the data recorded on any casualty report on the decedent and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the decedent's surviving children and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the parent or legal guardians of the decedent's surviving children.
Logistics.--The Department of Defense may provide logistical support to the corporation.
Exclusive right to name, seals, emblems, and badges ``The corporation shall have the exclusive right to use the name `Special Operations Warrior Foundation' and any seals, emblems, and badges the corporation adopts.
Restrictions ``(a) Stocks and Dividends.--The corporation may not issue stock or declare or pay a dividend.
Political Activities.--The corporation, or a director or officer of the corporation, as such, may not contribute to, support, or participate in any political activity.
Distribution of Income or Assets.--The income or assets of the corporation may not inure to the benefit of, or be distributed to, a director or officer during the life of the charter granted by this chapter.
This subsection does not prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to an officer or director or reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by an officer or director in amounts approved by the board of directors.
Loans.--The corporation may not make a loan to any director, officer, or employee.
Duty to maintain corporate and tax-exempt status ``(a) Corporate Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as a corporation incorporated under the laws of the District of Columbia.
Tax-Exempt Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 1 et sequentes).
Records ``The corporation shall keep correct and complete records of account and minutes of the proceedings of its board of directors and committees having any of the authority of its board of directors.
Liability for acts of officers and agents ``The corporation is liable for the acts of its officers and agents acting within the scope of their authority.
Annual report ``The corporation shall submit an annual report to Congress on the activities of the corporation during the prior fiscal year.
The report shall be submitted at the same time as the report of the audit required by section 10101 of this title.''.
The table of chapters at the beginning of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 2305 the following new item: ``2306.
Special Operations Warrior Foundation............... 230601''.