This Act may be cited as the ``National Child Protection Volunteer Screening Assistance Act of 2000''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL CENTER ON VOLUNTEER SCREENING.
The Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5601 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE VI--NATIONAL CENTER ON VOLUNTEER SCREENING ``SEC.
``This title may be cited as the `National Child Protection Volunteer Screening Assistance Act'.
``Congress finds the following: ``(1) More than 87,000,000 children are involved each year in activities provided by child and youth organizations which depend heavily on volunteers to deliver services through such activities.
The vast majority of activities provided to children by public and nonprofit private agencies and organizations result in the delivery of much needed services in safe environments that could not be provided without the assistance of virtually millions of volunteers, but abuses of children do occur.
Estimates of the incidence of child sexual abuse in child care settings, foster care homes, and schools range from 1 to 7 percent.
Although the incidence of child abuse may be relatively small, abuse traumatizes the victims and shakes public trust in care providers and organizations serving vulnerable populations.
Congress addressed concerns about this type of abuse by enacting the National Child Protection Act of 1993 and the Violent Crime Control Act of 1994, to set forth a framework through which States could authorize screening through criminal record checks of care providers, including volunteers who work with children, the elderly, and individuals with disabilities, but problems regarding the safety of children remain.
While State screening alone is sometimes adequate to conduct volunteer background checks, more extensive national criminal history checks using fingerprints are often advisable, especially when a prospective volunteer may have lived in more than 1 State.
The high cost for fingerprint background checks is unaffordable for organizations that use a large number of volunteers and, if such cost is passed on to volunteers, often discourages their participation.
The current system of retrieving national criminal background information on volunteers through an authorized agency of the State is cumbersome and often requires months before vital results are returned.
In order to protect children, volunteer agencies must currently depend on a convoluted, disconnected, and sometimes duplicative series of checks that leave children at risk.
A national volunteer screening center is needed to protect children by providing effective, efficient, and no-cost national criminal history background checks of volunteers who provide care through public and nonprofit private agencies and organizations.
``For purposes of this title: ``(1) Public or nonprofit private qualified entity.--The term `public or nonprofit private qualified entity' means an agency or organization, whether public or nonprofit, that provides care placement services, including an organization that licenses or certifies others to provide care placement services.
Volunteer provider.--The term `volunteer provider' means an individual who provides or seeks to provide services as a volunteer to a public or nonprofit private qualified entity.
National criminal background check system.--The term `national criminal background check system' means the criminal history record system maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation based on fingerprint identification or any other method of positive identification.
Child.--The term `child' has the meaning given such term in section 5(2) of the Child Protection Act of 1993.
State.--The term `State' has the meaning given such term in section 5(11) of the Child Protection Act of 1993.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL CENTER FOR VOLUNTEER SCREENING.
``The Attorney General, by making a grant to or a contract with a public agency or a nonprofit national organization, shall-- ``(1) establish a national center for volunteer screening designed-- ``(A) to serve as a point of contact for public and nonprofit private qualified entities to request a nationwide background check for the purpose of determining whether a volunteer provider has been convicted of a crime that bears upon the provider's fitness to have responsibilities for the safety and well-being of children; ``(B) to access and to review, either directly or indirectly, State and Federal criminal history records and registries through the national criminal history background check system, and any other appropriate system of criminal history information at no cost to the public or nonprofit private qualified entity or to the volunteer provider, on an expedited basis under guidelines conforming to section 3(b) of the Child Protection Act of 1993; ``(C) to provide criminal background check results to the public or nonprofit private qualified entity requesting a nationwide background within no more than 15 business days; and ``(D) to serve as a national resource center and clearinghouse to provide State and local governments, public and nonprofit private agencies, and individuals with information regarding volunteer screening; and ``(2) establish a National Volunteer Screening Task Force to be chaired by the Attorney General, which shall-- ``(A) be composed of-- ``(i) 2 employees of the Department of Justice appointed by the Attorney General; ``(ii) 2 employees of the Department of Health and Human Services appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services; ``(iii) 2 employees of the Federal Bureau of Investigation appointed by the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and ``(iv) 6 members of national organizations that represent nonprofit private qualified entities that use volunteer providers to serve children; and ``(B) oversee the work of the national center for volunteer screening and report at least annually to the President and the Congress with regard to the work of such center for volunteer screening and the progress of the States in complying with the Child Protection Act of 1993.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $80,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005.