This Act may be cited as the ``Missouri River Valley Improvement Act of 1999''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) Lewis and Clark were pioneering naturalists that recorded dozens of species previously unknown to science while ascending the Missouri River in 1804; (2) the Missouri River, which is 2,321 miles long, drains \1/6\ of the United States, is home to approximately 10,000,000 people in 10 States and 28 Native American tribes, and is a resource of incalculable value to the United States; (3) the construction of dams, levees, and river training structures in the past 150 years has aided navigation, flood control, and water supply along the Missouri River, but has reduced habitat for native river fish and wildlife and opportunities for river-based recreation; (4) river organizations, including the Missouri River Basin Association, support habitat restoration, riverfront revitalization, and improved operational flexibility so long as these efforts do not significantly interfere with uses of the Missouri River; and (5) restoring a string of natural places by the year 2004 would aid native river fish and wildlife, reduce flood losses, enhance recreation and tourism, and celebrate the bicentennial of Lewis and Clark's voyage.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) protect, restore, and enhance the fish, wildlife, and plants, and the associated habitats on which they depend, of the Missouri River; (2) restore a string of natural places that aid native river fish and wildlife, reduce flood losses, and enhance recreation and tourism; (3) revitalize historic riverfronts to improve quality of life in riverside communities and attract recreation and tourism; (4) monitor the health of the Missouri River and measure biological, chemical, and physical responses to changes in River management; (5) allow the Army Corps of Engineers increased authority to restore and protect fish and wildlife habitat on the Missouri River; (6) protect and replenish cottonwoods, and their associated riparian woodland communities, along the upper Missouri River; and (7) educate the public about the economic, environmental, and cultural importance of the Missouri River and the scientific and cultural discoveries of Lewis and Clark.
DEFINITION OF MISSOURI RIVER.
In this Act, the term ``Missouri River'' means the Missouri River and the adjacent floodplain that extends from the mouth of the Missouri River (RM 0) to the confluence of the Jefferson, Madison, and Gallatin Rivers (RM 2341) in Montana.
AUTHORITY TO PROTECT, ENHANCE, AND RESTORE FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT.
Section 9(b) of the Act entitled ``An Act authorizing the construction of certain public works on rivers and harbors for flood control, and for other purposes'', approved December 22, 1944 (commonly known as the ``Flood Control Act of 1944'') (58 United States Statutes at Large 891), is amended-- (1) by striking ``(b) The general'' and inserting the following: ``(b) Comprehensive Plan.-- ``(1) In general.--The general''; (2) by striking ``paragraph'' and inserting ``subsection''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Fish and wildlife habitat.--In addition to carrying out the duties under the comprehensive plan described in paragraph (1), the Chief of Engineers shall, to the maximum extent practicable, protect, enhance, and restore fish and wildlife habitat on the Missouri River.''.
ACQUISITION OF LAND FOR THE NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall conduct a study of the Missouri River to examine needs and opportunities for acquisition of land and water surrounding the Missouri River as part of the National Wildlife Refuge System.
New Refuge Land.--Any planning or acquisition of new refuge land resulting from the study under subsection (a) shall be-- (1) conducted using existing acquisition authorities and procedures; and (2) purchased from willing sellers only.
MISSOURI RIVER MITIGATION PROJECT.
The matter under the heading ``missouri river mitigation, missouri, kansas, iowa, and nebraska'' of section 601(a) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (100 United States Statutes at Large 4143) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary of the Army, in consultation with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and State fish and wildlife agencies, shall submit a report to Congress outlining the feasibility and costs of acquiring and restoring up to 25 percent of lost habitat, comprising approximately 118,650 acres, in the Missouri River floodplain in the States of Nebraska, Iowa, Kansas, and Missouri.''.
UPPER MISSOURI RIVER AQUATIC AND RIPARIAN HABITAT MITIGATION PROGRAM.
In General.-- (1) Study.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army, through an interagency agreement with the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and in accordance with the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act of 1980 (16 United States Code 2901 et sequentes), shall complete a study that-- (A) analyzes any adverse effects on aquatic and riparian-dependent fish and wildlife resulting from the operation of the Missouri River Mainstem Reservoir Project in the States of Nebraska, South Dakota, North Dakota, and Montana; and (B) recommends measures appropriate to mitigate the adverse effects described in subparagraph (A).
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to Congress a report describing the results of the study under paragraph (1).
Pilot Program.--The Secretary of the Army, in consultation with the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the affected State fish and wildlife agencies, shall develop and administer a pilot mitigation program that-- (1) involves the experimental releases of warm water from the spillways at Fort Peck Dam during the appropriate spawning periods for native fish; (2) involves the monitoring of the response of fish to and the effectiveness of the preservation of native fish and wildlife habitat of the releases described in paragraph (1); and (3) shall not adversely impact a use of the reservoir existing on the date the pilot program is implemented.
Reservoir Fish Loss Study.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army, in consultation with the North Dakota Game and Fish Department and the South Dakota Department of Game, Fish and Parks, shall complete a study to analyze and recommend measures to avoid or reduce the loss of fish, including rainbow smelt, through Garrison Dam in North Dakota and Oahe Dam in South Dakota.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to Congress a report describing the results of the study under paragraph (1).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Army-- (1) to complete the study required under subsection (c), $200,000; and (2) to carry out the other provisions of this section, $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2010.
MISSOURI RIVER CHANNEL ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of the Army, acting through the Chief of Engineers and in consultation with the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, shall, in the course of ongoing operations and maintenance of the Missouri River bank stabilization and navigation project, modify and improve navigation training and bank stabilization structures to protect, enhance, and restore native river fish and wildlife habitat and support ecosystem restoration.
Navigation, Flood Control, and Water Supply.--As part of the project, the Secretary of the Army shall modify navigation training and bank stabilization structures on publicly owned property where the modifications would benefit native fish and wildlife and ecosystem restoration.
Operation and Maintenance.--The operation and maintenance of each activity under the project shall be a Federal responsibility.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Army to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2010.
Section 11(b) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1282) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Missouri river.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the Rivers and Trails Conservation Assistance Program of the National Park Service, shall, if requested, work with riverside communities to develop projects to revitalize historic riverfronts, including the communities of-- ``(i) Saint Charles, Missouri; ``(ii) Kansas City, Missouri/Kansas City, Kansas; ``(iii) Saint Joseph, Missouri; ``(iv) Omaha, Nebraska; ``(v) Council Bluffs, Iowa; ``(vi) Sioux City, Iowa; ``(vii) Yankton, South Dakota; ``(viii) Pierre, South Dakota/Ft.
Pierre, South Dakota; ``(ix) Bismarck, North Dakota; and ``(x) Fort Peck, Montana.
Funding.-- ``(i) Authorization of appropriations.-- There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this paragraph $15,000,000.
Limitation on share of costs.--The Federal share of costs associated with any single project described in this paragraph shall not exceed 25 percent of the total cost of that project.
No funds for operation or maintenance.--The Secretary shall provide no funds for the operation and maintenance of a project under this paragraph.''.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation and in consultation with the Secretary of the Army, shall complete a study to evaluate opportunities to protect and replenish cottonwoods in the associated riparian woodland communities along the Missouri River between Fort Benton and Fort Peck Reservoir, Montana, in accordance with the Water Resources Research Act of 1984 (42 United States Code 10301 et sequentes).
Evaluation.--The study shall include an evaluation of-- (1) cottonwood reproduction; (2) native fish and other river wildlife, including competition from non-native species; (3) flood losses; (4) water supply needs; (5) recreation; and (6) main stem and tributary dam operations.
Report.--Not later than July 31, 2001, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report describing the results of the study required under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section $5,000,000.
Establishment.--The Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Director of the United States Geological Survey, shall establish a program at the River Studies Center of the Biological Services Division of the United States Geological Study, located in Columbia, Missouri, to monitor the physical, biological, and chemical characteristics of the Missouri River in accordance with title I of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1997 (43 United States Code 31j).
Program.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a program to monitor and assess the biota, habitats, and water quality of the Missouri River, in consultation with-- (1) the Governors of affected States, acting through the Missouri River Natural Resources Committee and another representative of each Governor's designation; (2) the Secretary of Agriculture; (3) the Secretary of the Army; (4) the Secretary of Energy; (5) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; and (6) the Missouri River Basin Tribes.
Activities.--The program under subsection (b) shall provide scientific information to-- (1) guide operation and management of the Missouri River, including operation of dams by the Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation; and (2) measure and model the impact of management alternatives through-- (A) monitoring of biota, habitats, and water quality; (B) focused identification of cause and effect relationships; and (C) valuation of methods to conserve fish and wildlife.
Baseline.--The program under subsection (b) shall establish a baseline of conditions against which future activities can be measured.
Database.--The Secretary shall-- (1) establish a database on Missouri River biota, habitats, and water quality; and (2) make the database readily available to the public.
Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of establishment of the program under subsection (b), and not less frequently than every 3 years thereafter, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Biological Resources Division of the United States Geological Survey, shall-- (1) review the program; (2) as necessary, establish and revise the objectives of the program; and (3) submit to Congress a report on the environmental health of the Missouri River.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior to carry out this section-- (A) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2000; (B) $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; and (C) $13,600,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2014.
Nonreimbursable expenditure.--Of the costs associated with the development and implementation of this program-- (A) 90 percent shall be allocated to the United States as a nonreimbursable expenditure; and (B) 10 percent shall be allocated equally among the States of Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, Montana, North Dakota, and South Dakota.
Non-federal share.--The Secretary may accept as part of the non-Federal cost share the contribution of such in-kind services by participating States as the Secretary determines will contribute substantially toward the development and administration of the program.
Interpretative Centers.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall establish Lewis and Clark Interpretive Centers to educate the public about the economic and environmental importance of the Missouri River and the scientific and cultural discoveries of Lewis and Clark in the vicinity of Missouri River communities, including the communities of-- (A) Kansas City, Missouri; (B) Nebraska City, Nebraska; (C) Sioux City, Iowa; (D) Pierre, South Dakota/Ft.
Pierre, South Dakota; (E) Bismarck, North Dakota; and (F) Great Falls, Montana.
Spending limit.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary's share of costs associated with any single project described in this subsection shall not exceed 25 percent of the total cost of carrying out the project.
No funds for operation and maintenance.--The Secretary shall not provide funds for the operation and maintenance of the project.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior to carry out this subsection $6,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2006.
Recreation Improvements.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Army, acting through the Chief of Engineers, shall provide improvements to recreation facilities and visitor centers at the Missouri River main-stem projects to provide for increased visitor use associated with the Lewis and Clark commemoration.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Army to carry out this subsection $500,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2003.