This Act may be cited as the ``Advanced Information and Communications Technology Research Act''.
Spectrum-Sharing Plan.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Communications Commission and the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information, in coordination with other Federal agencies, shall-- (1) develop a plan to increase sharing of spectrum between Federal and non-Federal government users; and (2) establish a pilot program for implementation of the plan.
Technical Specifications.--The Commission and the Assistant Secretary-- (1) shall each identify a segment of spectrum of equal bandwidth within their respective jurisdiction for the pilot program that is approximately 10 megaHertz in width for assignment on a shared basis to Federal and non-Federal government use; and (2) may take the spectrum for the pilot program from bands currently allocated on either an exclusive or shared basis.
Report.--The Commission and the Assistant Secretary shall transmit a report to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce 2 years after the inception of the pilot program describing the results of the program and suggesting appropriate procedures for expanding the program as appropriate.
Program.--In order to accelerate the pace of innovation with respect to telecommunications services (as defined in section 3(46) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 153(46)), equipment, and technology, the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall-- (1) establish a program linked to the goals and objectives of the measurement laboratories, to be known as the ``Telecommunications Standards and Technology Acceleration Research Program'', to support and promote innovation in the United States through high-risk, high-reward telecommunications research; and (2) set aside, from funds available to the measurement laboratories, an amount equal to not less than 8 percent of the funds available to the Institute each fiscal year for such Program.
External Funding.--The Director shall ensure that at least 80 percent of the funds available for such Program shall be used to award competitive, merit-reviewed grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts to public or private entities, including businesses and universities.
In selecting entities to receive such assistance, the Director shall ensure that the project proposed by an entity has scientific and technical merit and that any resulting intellectual property shall vest in a United States entity that can commercialize the technology in a timely manner.
Each external project shall involve at least one small or medium-sized business and the Director shall give priority to joint ventures between small or medium-sized businesses and educational institutions.
Any grant shall be for a period not to exceed 3 years.
Competitions.--The Director shall solicit proposals annually to address areas of national need for high-risk, high-reward telecommunications research, as identified by the Director.
Annual Report.--Each year the Director shall issue an annual report describing the program's activities, including include a description of the metrics upon which grant funding decisions were made in the previous fiscal year, any proposed changes to those metrics, metrics for evaluating the success of ongoing and completed grants, and an evaluation of ongoing and completed grants.
The first annual report shall include best practices for management of programs to stimulate high-risk, high-reward telecommunications research.
Administrative Expenses.--No more than 5 percent of the finding available to the program may be used for administrative expenses.
High-Risk, High-Reward Telecommunications Research Defined.--In this section, the term ``high-risk, high-reward telecommunications research'' means research that-- (1) has the potential for yielding results with far-ranging or wide-ranging implications; (2) addresses critical national needs related to measurement standards and technology; and (3) is too novel or spans too diverse a range of disciplines to fare well in the traditional peer review process.
ADVANCED COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FOR ALL AMERICANS.
The Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall continue to support research and support standards development in advanced information and communications technologies focused on enhancing or facilitating the availability and affordability of advanced communications services to all Americans, in order to implement the Institute's responsibilities under section 2(c)(12) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 272(c)(12)).
The Director shall support intramural research and cooperative research with institutions of higher education (as defined in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)) and industry.
ADVANCED INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH.
Information and Communications Technology Research.--The Director of the National Science Foundation shall establish a program of basic research in advanced information and communications technologies focused on enhancing or facilitating the availability and affordability of advanced communications services to all Americans.
In developing and carrying out the program, the Director shall consult with the Board established under subsection (b).
Federal Advanced Information and Communications Technology Research Board.--There is established within the National Science Foundation a Federal Advanced Information and Communications Technology Board which shall advise the Director of the National Science Foundation in carrying out the program authorized by subsection (a).
The Board Shall be composed of individuals with expertise in information and communications technologies, including representatives from the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the Department of Defense, and representatives from industry and educational institutions.
Grant Program.--The Director, in consultation with the Board, shall award grants for basic research into advanced information and communications technologies that will contribute to enhancing or facilitating the availability and affordability of advanced communications services to all Americans.
Areas of research to be supported through these grants include-- (1) affordable broadband access, including wireless technologies; (2) network security and reliability; (3) communications interoperability; (4) networking protocols and architectures, including resilience to outages or attacks; (5) trusted software; (6) privacy; (7) nanoelectronics for communications applications; (8) low-power communications electronics; (9) such other related areas as the Director, in consultation with the Board, finds appropriate; and (10) implementation of equitable access to national advanced fiber optic research and educational networks, including access in noncontiguous States.
Centers.--The Director shall award multiyear grants, subject to the availability of appropriations, to institutions of higher education (as defined in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)), nonprofit research institutions affiliated with institutions of higher education, or consortia thereof to establish multidisciplinary Centers for Communications Research.
The purpose of the Centers shall be to generate innovative approaches to problems in communications and information technology research, including the research areas described in subsection (c).
Institutions of higher education, nonprofit research institutions affiliated with institutions of higher education, or consortia receiving such grants may partner with 1 or more government laboratories or for-profit entities, or other institutions of higher education or nonprofit research institutions.
Applications.--The Director, in consultation with the Board, shall establish criteria for the award of grants under subsections (c) and (d).
Grants shall be awarded under the program on a merit-reviewed competitive basis.
The Director shall give priority to grants that offer the potential for revolutionary rather than evolutionary breakthroughs.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the National Science Foundation to carry out this section-- (1) $40,000,000 for fiscal year 2008; (2) $45,000,000 for fiscal year 2009; (3) $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2010; (4) $55,000,000 for fiscal year 2011; and (5) $60,000,000 for fiscal year 2012.