This Act may be cited as the ``21st Century Master Teacher Act''.
Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6601 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part E as part G; and (2) by inserting after part D the following new part: ``PART E--MASTER TEACHER PROGRAM ``SEC.
``Congress makes the following findings: ``(1) The National Commission on Teaching and America's Future reports that more than 12 percent of all newly hired teachers enter the workforce with no training at all, and another 15 percent enter the workforce without having fully met State standards.
Annually, more than 50,000 people who lack the training required for their jobs have entered teaching with emergency or provisional licenses.
Only 500 of the Nation's 1,200 education schools meet common professional standards.
Fewer than 75 percent of all teachers have studied child development, and learning and teaching methods, have degrees in their subject areas, and have passed State licensing requirements.
Nearly \1/4\ of all secondary school teachers, and more than 30 percent of secondary school mathematics teachers, do not have even a college minor in their main subject area.
64 percent of urban school districts allow teachers who are not certified or licensed to teach under an emergency certification or license, and 40 percent of those districts allow the hiring of long-term substitute teachers.
``The purposes of this part are-- ``(1) to give local educational agencies the resources to establish master teacher programs; ``(2) to increase the level of student performance at elementary schools and secondary schools by improving the quality of education provided by the teachers at such schools; ``(3) to give local educational agencies the resources to fund efforts by teachers at elementary schools and secondary schools to become board certified; and ``(4) to give local educational agencies the resources to enable such agencies to provide salary incentives to teachers to become board certified.
``In this part: ``(1) Board certified.--The term `board certified' means successful completion of all requirements to be certified by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Master teacher.--The term `master teacher' means a teacher who is certified by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards and has been teaching for not less than 3 years.
Novice teacher.--The term `novice teacher' means a teacher who has been teaching for not more than 3 years at a public elementary school or secondary school.
Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants on a competitive basis to local educational agencies to establish master teacher programs as described in subsection (d).
Priority.--In awarding grants under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give priority to local educational agencies that-- ``(A) provide funding assistance to teachers to become board certified, including the provision of the board certification fee to become board certified; and ``(B) provide salary incentives to teachers who become board certified.
Geographic distribution.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall award grants under paragraph (1) so that such grants are distributed among the school districts with the highest concentration of teachers who are not certified or licensed or are provisionally certified or licensed.
Duration.--A grant under subsection (a) shall be awarded for a period of 5 years.
Amount.--The amount of a grant awarded under subsection (a), shall be determined based on-- ``(1) the total amount appropriated for a fiscal year under section 2360; and ``(2) the extent of the concentration of teachers who are not certified or licensed or are provisionally certified or licensed in the school district involved.
Authorized Activities.--The master teacher programs described in subsection (a) shall-- ``(1) provide funding assistance to teachers to become board certified, including the provision of the board certification fee; and ``(2) provide salary incentives to teachers who become board certified.
In General.--A local educational agency desiring a grant under section 2354 shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to subsection (a) shall include-- ``(1) a statement describing the program activities for which amounts received under the grant will be used; ``(2) a statement describing the goals and objectives for the program activities described in paragraph (1), including a goal of increasing the percentage of teachers who become board certified and enhancing overall student achievement; and ``(3) a statement describing the manner in which the goals and objectives described in paragraph (2) will be measured.
Approval of Application.--The Secretary shall make a determination regarding an application submitted under subsection (a) based on a recommendation of a peer review panel described in subsection (d), and any other criteria that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Peer Review Panel.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a peer review panel to review and make recommendations as to whether applications submitted pursuant to subsection (a) should be approved.
Recommendations.--In making a recommendation described in paragraph (1), the panel shall give consideration to the same factors that the Secretary is required to consider under paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 2354(a).
In General.--Grant payments shall be made under this part on an annual basis.
Administrative Costs.--Each local educational agency that receives a grant under section 2354 shall use not more than 2 percent of the amount awarded under the grant for administrative costs.
Denial of Grant.--If the Secretary determines that a local educational agency has failed to make substantial progress in attaining the performance objectives and goals described in section 2355(b)(2), such an agency shall not be eligible for a grant payment under this part in the next succeeding year.
Report by the Secretary.--Not later than 6 months after receipt of reports described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives a report of program activities funded under this part.
Report by Applicant.--Not later than March 31, 2004, each local educational agency receiving a grant under this part shall submit a report to the Secretary describing whether the program established under section 2354 was effective in increasing student achievement for all students, and in increasing the percentage of teachers who have become board certified.
``The Secretary may not award a grant to a local educational agency under section 2354 unless the local educational agency agrees that, with respect to costs to be incurred by the agency in carrying out activities for which the grant was awarded, the agency shall provide (directly or through donations from public or private entities) in non- Federal contributions an amount equal to 25 percent of the amount of the grant awarded to the agency.
In General.--In the case of any program under this part in which assistance is provided to a teacher to pay the National Board for Professional Teaching Standard board certification fee to become board certified, assistance may only be provided if the teacher makes agreements as follows: ``(1) The teacher will enter and complete the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards board certification program to become board certified.
Upon becoming board certified, the teacher will teach in the public school system for a period of not less than 5 years.
Breach of Agreements.--A teacher receiving assistance described in subsection (a) is liable to the local educational agency that provides such assistance for the amount of the certification fee described in subsection (a) if such teacher-- ``(1) voluntarily withdraws or terminates the certification program before taking the examination for board certification; ``(2) is dismissed from the certification program before becoming board certified; or ``(3) fails to comply with the agreement under subsection (a).
Waiver or Suspension of Liability.--In the case of a teacher making an agreement under subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide for the waiver or suspension of liability under subsection (b) if compliance by the teacher with the agreements involved is impossible, would involve extreme hardship to the individual, or if enforcement of the agreement with respect to the teacher would be unconscionable.
Date Certain for Recovery.--Subject to subsection (c), any amount that a local educational agency is entitled to recover under subsection (b) shall be paid to such an agency not later than the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the date the local educational agency becomes so entitled.
``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part, $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
``PART F--COMPETENCY EXAMINATION PROGRAM ``SEC.
Examination.--The Secretary shall enter into an agreement with the Center for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering of the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences, under which the Center shall develop an advanced competency examination for elementary school and secondary school teachers of mathematics and science.
Grants.--The Secretary may make grants to local educational agencies to assist the agencies in supplementing the salaries of teachers that pass the examination described in subsection (a).
A local educational agency that receives such a grant for a year shall provide an additional $2500 in salary for that year to teachers that have passed the examination, and that teach in schools served by the agency.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.''.
Title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1021 et seq.)
is amended by inserting after section 204 the following: ``SEC.
General Authority.--The Secretary may enter into contracts with appropriate entities to conduct information campaigns to broaden awareness of, and encourage mid-career professionals and other qualified individuals to consider, professional opportunities relating to elementary or secondary education.
Announcements.--Announcements distributed as part of such an information campaign shall publicize the availability of Federal assistance under this Act to obtain the necessary education, and to obtain certification or licensing, for the professional opportunities.
Requirements.--The provisions of sections 205 and 206 shall not apply to assistance provided under, and activities carried out under, this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.