This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Building Heights Act of 1994''.
LIMITATIONS ON HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS IN DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
Use of Street Width to Determine Maximum Height of Building.-- Section 5(a) of the Act entitled ``An Act to regulate the height of buildings in the District of Columbia'', approved June 1, 1910 (sec.
405(a), D.C. Code), is amended-- (1) by striking ``the course of which'' and inserting ``the alignment of which''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``For purposes of this subsection, a `street' includes any road, avenue, drive, cart way, or other route open to the public as a regular right- of-way, but does not include an alley.''.
Limitations on Size and Height of Roof Structures.--Section 5(h) of such Act (sec.
405(h), D.C. Code) is amended by striking ``Spires, towers,'' and all that follows through ``the adjacent roof:'' and inserting the following: ``Roof structures that are not constructed or used for human occupancy (including structures housing machinery or equipment) may be erected to a greater height than any limit otherwise prescribed in this Act if approved by the Mayor of the District of Columbia: Provided, That such structures when above such limit shall be fireproof: Provided further, That such a structure (other than a spire, tower, dome, minaret, pinnacle, chimney, or smokestack) shall be set back from the exterior or bounding walls of the building upon which the structure is placed at distances not less than the structure's height above the adjacent roof: Provided further, That the Mayor of the District of Columbia may not waive the requirement described in the previous proviso with respect to a structure unless the Mayor of the District of Columbia finds that the application of the requirement to the structure will be unduly restrictive or highly impractical, and that the waiver of the requirement will not materially interfere with the purpose of this Act or adversely affect the exposure of adjacent buildings to light and air: Provided further, That for purposes of this subsection, an `exterior or bounding wall' of a building is any wall having a dimension of 4 feet or more in height or horizontal depth exposed to the outside, other than a building wall that directly abuts a structure with a height equal to or greater than the height of the building, and a `roof' is the exterior surface and supporting structure on the top of a building: Provided further, That for purposes of this subsection a skylight shall not be considered a roof structure if it is less than 5 feet in height:''.
Increase in Penalties for Violations.-- (1) General penalty for violation.--Section 8 of such Act (sec.
408, D.C. Code) is amended by striking ``not less than $10 nor more than $100 per day'' and inserting ``not more than $10,000 per day''.
Penalty for violation of injunction.--Section 8 of such Act (sec.
408, D.C. Code) is amended by striking ``not less than $100 nor more than $500,'' and inserting ``not more than $100,000,''.
INCREASE IN AUTHORITY OF NATIONAL CAPITAL PLANNING COMMISSION TO ENFORCE BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
Requiring NCPC Approval for Roof Structures Exceeding General Limitations.-- (1) In general.--Section 5(h) of the Act entitled ``An Act to regulate the height of buildings in the District of Columbia'', approved June 1, 1910 (sec.
405(h), D.C. Code), as amended by section 2(b), is amended by striking ``Mayor of the District of Columbia'' each place it appears and inserting ``Mayor of the District of Columbia and the National Capital Planning Commission''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 5(c) of the Act entitled ``An Act providing for a comprehensive development of the park and playground system of the National Capital'', approved June 6, 1924 (sec.
2004(c), D.C. Code; 40 United States Code 71d(c)), is amended-- (A) by inserting after ``the Council,'' the following: ``and to include the approval of the height of any roof structure of any building in the District of Columbia (as described in section 5(h) of the Act entitled `An Act to regulate the height of buildings in the District of Columbia', approved June 1, 1910),''; and (B) by striking the period at the end and inserting the following: ``, and its approval or disapproval respecting any such height within 45 days after the day it was submitted to the Commission.''.
Permitting NCPC or Members to Request NCPC Approval of Height of Any Building in District.--Section 5(c) of the Act entitled ``An Act providing for a comprehensive development of the park and playground system of the National Capital'', approved June 6, 1924 (sec.
2004(c), D.C. Code; 40 United States Code 71d(c)), as amended by subsection (a)(2), is amended by inserting after ``June 1, 1910),'' the following: ``and, at the request of the Commission or any of its members, the determination of whether any building proposed to be constructed in the District of Columbia meets the requirements of such Act,''.
Providing Standing for NCPC or Members To Enforce Building Height Limitations.-- (1) Authority of commission and members.--Section 5 of the Act entitled ``An Act providing for a comprehensive development of the park and playground system of the National Capital'', approved June 6, 1924 (sec.
2004, D.C. Code; 40 United States Code 71d) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f)(1) The Commission and each of its members shall have standing to enforce any limitation on buildings and structures in the District of Columbia described in the Act entitled `An Act to regulate the height of buildings in the District of Columbia', approved June 1, 1910.
If a member of the Commission exercises the authority provided under paragraph (1) to enforce a limitation on buildings and structures, the member shall exercise the authority in the member's own name and at the member's own expense unless the Commission authorizes the member to exercise the authority in the name of the Commission and at the Commission's expense.''.
Conforming authority under building heights act.-- Section 8 of the Act entitled ``An Act to regulate the height of buildings in the District of Columbia'', approved June 1, 1910 (sec.
408, D.C. Code), is amended-- (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``his assistants'' and inserting ``his assistants, or by the National Capital Planning Commission or any of its members (in accordance with section 5(f) of the Act entitled `An Act providing for a comprehensive development of the park and playground system of the National Capital', approved June 6, 1924),''; and (B) in the second sentence, by inserting after ``District of Columbia'' the first place it appears the following: ``or the National Capital Planning Commission or any of its members (in accordance with section 5(f) of the Act entitled `An Act providing for a comprehensive development of the park and playground system of the National Capital', approved June 6, 1924)''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 11 of the Act of June 20, 1938 (52 United States Statutes at Large 801; sec.
427, D.C. Code) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the standing of the National Capital Planning Commission or any of its members to enforce any limitation on buildings and structures in the District of Columbia pursuant to section 5(f) of the Act entitled `An Act providing for a comprehensive development of the park and playground system of the National Capital', approved June 6, 1924.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to buildings and structures in the District of Columbia for which building permits or modifications to building permits are issued on or after March 23, 1994.