TITLE I--LEWIS AND CLARK RURAL WATER SYSTEM SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Lewis and Clark Rural Water System Act of 2000''.
In this title: (1) Feasibility study.--The term ``feasibility study'' means the study entitled ``Feasibility Level Evaluation of a Missouri River Regional Water Supply for South Dakota, Iowa and Minnesota'', dated September 1993, that includes a water conservation plan, environmental report, and environmental enhancement component.
Incremental cost.--The term ``incremental cost'' means the cost of the savings to the project were the City of Sioux Falls not to participate in the water supply system.
Member entity.--The term ``member entity'' means a rural water system or municipality that meets the requirements for membership as defined by the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System, Inc. bylaws, dated September 6, 1990.
Project construction budget.--The term ``project construction budget'' means the description of the total amount of funds needed for the construction of the water supply project, as contained in the feasibility study.
Pumping and incidental operational requirements.--The term ``pumping and incidental operational requirements'' means all power requirements that are necessary for the operation of intake facilities, pumping stations, water treatment facilities, reservoirs, and pipelines up to the point of delivery of water by the water supply system to each member entity that distributes water at retail to individual users.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Water supply project.-- (A) In general.--The term ``water supply project'' means the physical components of the Lewis and Clark Rural Water Project.
Inclusions.--The term ``water supply project'' includes-- (i) necessary pumping, treatment, and distribution facilities; (ii) pipelines; (iii) appurtenant buildings and property rights; (iv) electrical power transmission and distribution facilities necessary for services to water systems facilities; and (v) such other pipelines, pumping plants, and facilities as the Secretary considers necessary and appropriate to meet the water supply, economic, public health, and environment needs of the member entities (including water storage tanks, water lines, and other facilities for the member entities).
Water supply system.--The term ``water supply system'' means the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System, Inc., a nonprofit corporation established and operated substantially in accordance with the feasibility study.
FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to the water supply system for the planning and construction of the water supply project.
Service Area.--The water supply system shall provide for the member entities safe and adequate municipal, rural, and industrial water supplies, mitigation of wetland areas, and water conservation in-- (1) Lake County, McCook County, Minnehaha County, Turner County, Lincoln County, Clay County, and Union County, in southeastern South Dakota; (2) Rock County and Nobles County, in southwestern Minnesota; and (3) Lyon County, Sioux County, Osceola County, O'Brien County, Dickinson County, and Clay County, in northwestern Iowa.
Amount of Grants.--Grants made available under subsection (a) to the water supply system shall not exceed the amount of funds authorized under section 108.
Limitation on Availability of Construction Funds.--The Secretary shall not obligate funds for the construction of the water supply project until-- (1) the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) are met; and (2) a final engineering report and a plan for a water conservation program are prepared and submitted to the Congress not less than 90 days before the commencement of construction of the water supply project.
MITIGATION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE LOSSES.
Mitigation for fish and wildlife losses incurred as a result of the construction and operation of the water supply project shall be on an acre-for-acre basis, based on ecological equivalency, concurrent with project construction, as provided in the feasibility study.
USE OF PICK-SLOAN POWER.
In General.--From power designated for future irrigation and drainage pumping for the Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin program, the Western Area Power Administration shall make available, at the firm power rate, the capacity and energy required to meet the pumping and incidental operational requirements of the water supply project during the period beginning on May 1 and ending on October 31 of each year.
Qualification To Use Pick-Sloan Power.--For operation during the period beginning May 1 and ending October 31 of each year, for as long as the water supply system operates on a not-for-profit basis, the portions of the water supply project constructed with assistance under this title shall be eligible to receive firm power from the Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin program established by section 9 of the Act of December 22, 1944 (chapter 665; 58 United States Statutes at Large 887), popularly known as the Flood Control Act of 1944.
NO LIMITATION ON WATER PROJECTS IN STATES.
This title does not limit the authorization for water projects in the States of South Dakota, Iowa, and Minnesota under law in effect on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Nothing in this title-- (1) invalidates or preempts State water law or an interstate compact governing water; (2) alters the rights of any State to any appropriated share of the waters of any body of surface or ground water, whether determined by past or future interstate compacts or by past or future legislative or final judicial allocations; (3) preempts or modifies any Federal or State law, or interstate compact, governing water quality or disposal; or (4) confers on any non-Federal entity the ability to exercise any Federal right to the waters of any stream or to any ground water resource.
Federal Cost Share.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall provide funds equal to 80 percent of-- (A) the amount allocated in the total project construction budget for planning and construction of the water supply project under section 103; and (B) such amounts as are necessary to defray increases in development costs reflected in appropriate engineering cost indices after September 1, 1993.
Sioux falls.--The Secretary shall provide funds for the City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, in an amount equal to 50 percent of the incremental cost to the city of participation in the project.
Non-Federal Cost Share.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the non-Federal share of the costs allocated to the water supply system shall be 20 percent of the amounts described in subsection (a)(1).
Sioux falls.--The non-Federal cost-share for the City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, shall be 50 percent of the incremental cost to the city of participation in the project.
Authorization.--At the request of the water supply system, the Secretary may allow the Commissioner of Reclamation to provide project construction oversight to the water supply project for the service area of the water supply system described in section 103(b).
Project Oversight Administration.--The amount of funds used by the Commissioner of Reclamation for oversight described in subsection (a) shall not exceed the amount that is equal to 1 percent of the amount provided in the total project construction budget for the entire project construction period.
PROJECT OWNERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY.
The water supply system shall retain title to all project facilities during and after construction, and shall be responsible for all operation, maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation costs of the project.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $213,887,700, to remain available until expended.
TITLE II--SLY PARK UNIT CONVEYANCE SEC.
For the purpose of this title, the term-- (1) ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior; (2) ``Sly Park Unit'' means the Sly Park Dam and Reservoir, Camp Creek Diversion Dam and Tunnel, and conduits and canals as authorized under the American River Act of October 14, 1949 (63 United States Statutes at Large 853), including those used to convey, treat, and store water delivered from Sly Park, as well as all recreation facilities thereto; and (3) ``District'' means the El Dorado Irrigation District.
TRANSFER OF SLY PARK UNIT.
In General.--The Secretary shall, as soon as practicable after date of the enactment of this Act and in accordance with all applicable law, transfer all right, title, and interest in and to the Sly Park Unit to the District.
Sale Price.--The Secretary is authorized to receive from the District $2,000,000 to relieve payment obligations and extinguish the debt under contract number 14-06-200-949IR3, and $9,500,000 to relieve payment obligations and extinguish all debts associated with contracts numbered 14-06-200-7734, as amended by contracts numbered 14-06-200- 4282A and 14-06-200-8536A.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the District shall continue to make payments required by section 3407(c) of Public Law 102-575 through year 2029.
Credit Revenue to Project Repayment.--Upon payment authorized under subsection (b), the amount paid shall be credited toward repayment of capital costs of the Central Valley Project in an amount equal to the associated undiscounted obligation.
Upon payment, the Sly Park Unit shall no longer be a Federal reclamation project or a unit of the Central Valley Project, and the District shall not be entitled to receive any further reclamation benefits.
Except as otherwise provided by law, effective on the date of conveyance of the Sly Park Unit under this title, the United States shall not be liable for damages of any kind arising out of any act, omission, or occurrence based on its prior ownership or operation of the conveyed property.
TITLE III--TREATMENT OF PROJECT COSTS FOR SLY PARK UNIT SEC.
TREATMENT OF PROJECT COSTS.
To the extent costs associated with the Sly Park Unit are included as a reimbursable cost of the Central Valley Project, the Secretary is authorized to exclude such costs in excess of those repaid by the Sly Park Unit beneficiaries from the pooled reimbursable costs of the Central Valley Project until such time as the facility is operationally integrated into the water supply yield of the Central Valley Project.
TITLE IV--CITY OF ROSEVILLE PUMPING PLANT FACILITIES SEC.
401. CREDIT FOR INSTALLATION OF ADDITIONAL PUMPING PLANT FACILITIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH AGREEMENT.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall credit an amount up to $1,164,600, the precise amount to be determined by the Secretary through a cost allocation, to the unpaid capital obligation of the City of Roseville, California (in this section referred to as the ``City''), as such obligation is calculated in accordance with applicable Federal reclamation law and Central Valley Project rate setting policy, in recognition of future benefits to be accrued by the United States as a result of the City's purchase and funding of the installation of additional pumping plant facilities in accordance with a letter of agreement with the United States numbered 5-07-20-X0331 and dated January 26, 1995.
The Secretary shall simultaneously add an equivalent amount of costs to the capital costs of the Central Valley Project, and such added costs shall be reimbursed in accordance with reclamation law and policy.
Effective Date.--The credit under subsection (a) shall take effect upon the date on which-- (1) the City and the Secretary of the Interior have agreed that the installation of the facilities referred to in subsection (a) has been completed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the letter of agreement referred to in subsection (a); and (2) the Secretary of the Interior has issued a determination that such facilities are fully operative as intended.
Passed the House of Representatives May 23, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.