This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Medal for Outstanding Contributions in Math and Science Education Act of 2004''.
In this Act: (1) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the National Science Foundation.
Elementary school and secondary school.--The terms ``elementary school'' and ``secondary school'' have the meaning given those terms in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
The Director shall establish a Congressional Medal for Outstanding Contributions in Math and Science Education program, which shall be designed to-- (1) recognize private entities for outstanding efforts supporting elementary and secondary schools in improving student achievement in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics; (2) encourage private entities to support elementary and secondary schools to improve and underscore the importance of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education; and (3) make information about medal recipients available to schools, institutions of higher education, educators, parents, administrators, policymakers, researchers, public and private entities, and the general public.
Finalists.--Beginning not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director shall annually name as finalists for medals under this Act-- (1) not more than 20 private entities with more than 500 employees; and (2) not more than 20 private entities with 500 or fewer employees.
Each finalist shall receive a citation describing the basis for the entity achieving status as a finalist.
Medal Winners.--Beginning not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, from among finalists named under subsection (a), the Director shall annually award medals under this Act to-- (1) not more than 5 private entities with more than 500 employees; and (2) not more than 5 private entities with 500 or fewer employees.
Distribution of Information.--(1) The Director shall distribute information about the Congressional Medal for Outstanding Contributions in Math and Science Education recipients in a timely and efficient manner (including through the use of a searchable online database) to schools, institutions of higher education, educators, parents, administrators, policymakers, researchers, public and private entities, and the general public.
Any entity that is a finalist or receives a medal under this section may use such information for advertising and other publicity purposes.
Eligibility to receive medals under section 4 of this Act shall be limited to private entities that-- (1) have, whether working alone or in partnership with for- profit or nonprofit entities, assisted students, teachers, administrators, or other support staff to improve student achievement in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in a school or community; and (2) have been involved in such activities in a sustained manner for at least 2 years with at least one elementary or secondary school.
The Director shall establish a system for accepting applications from entities seeking to be considered for a medal under this Act.
Applications shall include at least two letters of support, which may come from teachers, professional support staff, administrators, professional or business organizations, local, county, or State Departments of Education, or any other category of persons as designated by the Director.
Letters of support shall describe the reasons the entity deserves the medal.
In selecting entities to receive medals under this Act, the Director shall give priority consideration to evidence of improved achievement in science, technology, engineering, or mathematics by students, including improved achievement by individuals identified in section 33 or 34 of the Science and Engineering Equal Opportunities Act (42 United States Code 1885a or 1885b).
In addition to any other criteria the Director may establish, the Director shall also consider the following: (1) Evidence of innovative approaches to increase interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics by students, including individuals identified in section 33 or 34 of the Science and Engineering Equal Opportunities Act (42 United States Code 1885a or 1885b).
One measure of such evidence may be an increase in the number of students enrolled in advanced courses related to such fields.
Evidence of employee interaction with students or teachers to support and improve science, technology, engineering, and mathematics learning.
Evidence of success in positively influencing student attitudes and promoting education and career opportunities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
Evidence of successful outreach to students, parents, and the community regarding the importance of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education to the Nation's prosperity, job creation, and standard of living, as well as future earning potential for the individual.
Evidence of a strong and sustained commitment to the students and schools.
Section 37(a) of the Science and Engineering Equal Opportunities Act (42 United States Code 1885d(a)) is amended by striking ``By January 30, 1982, and biennially thereafter'' and inserting ``By January 30 of each odd- numbered year''.
For each of fiscal years 2005 through 2007, there are authorized to be appropriated to the National Science Foundation such sums as may be necessary for carrying out this Act, to be derived from amounts authorized by the National Science Foundation Authorization Act of 2002.
Passed the House of Representatives April 21, 2004.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.