This Act may be cited as the ``Enhancing Teaching Standards and License Portability Act of 2007''.
TEACHING STANDARDS AND LICENSE PORTABILITY.
Part C of title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6671 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subpart 6--Teaching Standards and License Portability ``SEC.
``The purposes of this subpart are the following: ``(1) To support the development of rigorous kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards that incorporate 21st century learning skills.
To create incentives for States to adopt, pilot, and implement such rigorous kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards.
To create incentives for States to align the States' teacher licensing systems to such rigorous kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards.
To create incentives for States to develop policies to facilitate teacher license portability across States in order to improve the capacity of States to collaboratively address teacher shortages.
``In this subpart: ``(1) Core teaching standards.--The term `core teaching standards' means standards that all beginning teachers should know and be able to teach in order to practice responsibly, regardless of the subject matter or grade level being taught.
Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an organization representing administrators of State educational agencies in partnership with 1 or more independent professional organizations with expertise in the following areas: ``(A) Teacher preparation and licensure.
Assessment of teacher knowledge, skills, and competencies.
21st century learning skills.--The term `21st century learning skills' means the skills, knowledge, and competencies that students should master to succeed in postsecondary education and the workforce of the 21st century, including creativity and innovation skills, critical thinking and problem-solving skills, communication and collaboration skills, information and technology literacy, civic and health literacy, adaptability, social and cross-cultural skills, and leadership skills.
Authorization.--The Secretary is authorized to award a competitive grant to an eligible entity to enable such entity to carry out the following: ``(1) The development or updating of core teaching standards and content-specific kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards that are rigorous and incorporate 21st century learning skills and recent research and expert knowledge on teaching practices.
The development of teacher assessments linked to the kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards that can be used for licensing, are valid and reliable, and are performance-based.
The awarding of subgrants as described in subsection (b)(2) to State educational agencies.
The provision of technical assistance to States in the adoption, pilot testing, and implementation of kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards and teacher assessments as described in paragraph (2).
The provision of technical assistance to States to facilitate teacher license portability across States through changes in relevant State policies or the creation of new policies for such purpose.
Uses of Funds.-- ``(1) Direct activities.-- ``(A) First and second years.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use 100 percent of the funds made available through the grant for the first and second fiscal years-- ``(i) to develop or update the core teaching standards and content-specific kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards; and ``(ii) to develop and pilot test teacher performance assessments that can be used to supplement or supplant current State licensing exams.
Third year and beyond.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use not more than 40 percent of the funds made available through the grant for the third fiscal year, not more than 30 percent of the funds made available through the grant for the fourth fiscal year, and not more than 20 percent of the funds made available through the grant for the fifth fiscal year-- ``(i) to continue pilot testing and validating the teacher performance assessments; ``(ii) to disseminate the kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards, assessments, and any other materials that States may need to properly evaluate and adopt such standards, assessments, and materials; ``(iii) to provide technical assistance to States in-- ``(I) adopting the kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards; ``(II) pilot testing the teacher assessments; and ``(III) reliably and accurately administering and interpreting the teacher assessments; and ``(iv) to fund research activities that further the development of kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards and assessments.
Subgrants.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use not less than 60 percent of the funds made available through the grant for the third fiscal year, not less than 70 percent of the funds made available through the grant for the fourth fiscal year, and not less than 80 percent of the funds made available through the grant for the fifth fiscal year to award subgrants to State educational agencies to pay the Federal share of the costs of carrying out the following activities in the States: ``(A) To adopt the core teaching standards and content-specific kindergarten through grade 12 teaching standards developed or updated by the eligible entity.
To align the States' teacher licensing systems to such standards, which may include the pilot testing and use of teacher assessments developed by the eligible entity under paragraph (1)(A)(ii).
To change relevant policies or introduce new policies to facilitate teacher license portability across the States.
Grant Application.-- ``(1) In general.--An eligible entity that desires a grant under this subpart shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Contents.--In an application submitted under paragraph (1), an eligible entity shall include, at a minimum, a description of the capability of the entity to carry out section 2373(b).
Subgrant Application.-- ``(1) In general.--A State educational agency that desires a subgrant under this subpart shall submit an application to the eligible entity at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the eligible entity may require.
Contents.--In an application submitted under paragraph (1), a State educational agency shall include, at a minimum, a description of how the agency plans to carry out the activities described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 2373(b)(2).
Federal Share.--For State educational agencies receiving a subgrant under section 2371(b)(2), the Federal share of the cost of carrying out the activities described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 2371(b)(2) shall be 50 percent.
Payment of Non-Federal Share.--The non-Federal share may be paid in cash or in kind (fairly evaluated).
``Not later than 2 years after the date funds are first made available to carry out this subpart, and again 2 years thereafter, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report regarding activities assisted under this subpart.
``Funds made available to carry out this subpart shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, other Federal, State, and local funds available to carry out the [purposes described in section 2371].
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subpart-- ``(1) $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 and 2009; and ``(2) $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010, 2011, and 2012.