This Act may be cited as the ``Driver's Privacy Protection Act of 1993''.
PROHIBITION ON RELEASE OF CERTAIN PERSONAL INFORMATION BY STATES.
In General.--Title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 121 the following: ``CHAPTER 123--PROHIBITION ON RELEASE OF CERTAIN PERSONAL INFORMATION BY STATES ``Sec.
Prohibition on release of certain personal information by States.
Effect on State and local law.
Prohibition on release of certain personal information by States ``(a) In General.--It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity to disclose personal information derived from an individual's motor vehicle records to any other person or entity, other than to the individual, except as permitted under this chapter.
Exceptions.--Personal information referred to in subsection (a) of this section may be disclosed for any of the following uses: ``(1) For use by any Federal or State court in carrying out its functions.
For use by any Federal or State agency in carrying out its functions.
For use in connection with matters of automobile and driver safety, including manufacturers of motor vehicles conducting a recall of motor vehicles.
For use in the normal course of business by a legitimate business (including an insurer or insurance support organization) or its agents or employees or contractors, but only-- ``(A) to verify the accuracy of personal information submitted by the individual to the business; and ``(B) if such information as so submitted was not correct, to obtain the correct information, but only for the purpose of pursuing remedies against an individual who provided false information or presented a check or similar item that was not honored.
For use in any civil or criminal proceeding in any Federal or State court.
For use in research activities, if the motor vehicle department determines that such personal information will not be used to solicit the individual and that the individual is not identified or associated with the requested information.
For use in marketing activities, if the motor vehicle department-- ``(A) has provided in a clear and conspicuous manner to the individual an opportunity to prohibit such disclosure; ``(B) has received assurances that the information will be used, rented, or sold solely for a permissible use under this chapter, including marketing activities; and ``(C) has received assurances that each entity that sells or uses the information so obtained keeps complete records identifying each purpose for which the information is used and each organization that receives the information.
For purposes of reselling the personal information for a permissible use under paragraph (7) of this subsection, but only if each person or other entity that sells or uses the information so obtained keeps complete records identifying-- ``(A) each purpose for which the information is used; and ``(B) each person or other entity that receives the information.
For use by any insurer or insurance support organization, or its employees, agents, and contractors, but only in connection with claims investigation activities or antifraud activities.
Waiver Procedures.--(1) Each State shall establish and carry out procedures under which-- ``(A) an individual to whom the information pertains may authorize the agency to disclose such information; and ``(B) any motor vehicle department of the State may enter into an agreement with any business (including an insurer or insurance support organization) or its agents, employees, or contractors, based upon a certification that the business has obtained or will have obtained consent from the individual to whom the information pertains, to obtain requested personal information from such department.
Any State department of motor vehicles, upon receiving a request for personal information referred to in subsection (a) of this section, other than for a use referred to in subsection (b) of this section, shall, if such request is not accompanied by a waiver in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection, mail, within 10 days following the receipt of such request, a copy of that request to the individual concerning whom the personal information was requested informing such individual of the request, together with a statement to the effect that such information will not be released unless the individual waives such individual's right to confidentiality under this section.
Additional unlawful acts ``(a) Procurement for Unlawful Purpose.--It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to obtain or use personal information, derived from a motor vehicle record, for any purpose not described in section 2721(b) of this title.
False Representations; Unlawful Distribution.--It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false representation to obtain or use any personal information derived from an individual's motor vehicle record.
Penalties and remedies ``(a) Willful Violations by Non-Governmental Entities.--Any person or other entity (other than a State or agency thereof) that willfully violates this chapter shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both.
Nonwillful Violations by Non-Governmental Entities.-- Any person or other entity (other than a State or agency thereof) that violates this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $5,000.
Violation by Governmental Entities.--If a State or agency thereof willfully violates this chapter, the State shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $10,000.
Each day of continued noncompliance by the State shall constitute a separate violation.
Effect on State and local law ``A State or local government may prohibit conduct that is permitted in the exceptions set forth in section 2721(b) of this title.
Definitions ``As used in this chapter-- ``(1) the term `personal information' means an individual's name, address, telephone number, social security number, driver's identification number, medical and disability information, photograph, or other information that identifies a particular individual; ``(2) the term `State' includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and any other possession or territory of the United States; and ``(3) the term `motor vehicle record information' means-- ``(A) information about who is licensed to drive vehicles on the public highways, including any personal information about the licensed driver that is maintained as part of, or is associated with, a listing of who is so licensed; ``(B) registration information about a motor vehicle; and ``(C) information about violations of traffic laws and similar information kept about a licensed driver in connection with the operations of a governmental authority that controls such licensing.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters at the beginning of part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 121 the following new item: ``123.
Prohibition on Release of Certain Personal 2721''.