Congress finds the following: (1) Under current law (49 United States Code 40102(a)(15)), only an airline that qualifies as ``a citizen of the United States'' (commonly referred to as a United States airline) may provide service between cities in the United States or on international routes obtained by the United States through international agreements.
The law further provides that an airline will qualify as a citizen of the United States only if the airline is ``a corporation or association .
which is under the actual control of citizens of the United States''.
Throughout its 47-year history (1938-1985), the Civil Aeronautics Board interpreted the governing law as requiring that United States interests be in ``actual control'' of all operations of the airline.
The Department of Transportation continued these policies when it took over the responsibilities of the Civil Aeronautics Board in 1985.
To ensure that these long-standing policies remained in effect, Congress in 2003 passed an amendment specifically adding to the definition of ``citizen of the United States'' a requirement that the airline be ``under the actual control of citizens of the United States''.
When this ``actual control'' test was specifically added to the law, it clearly was intended to codify the policy developed by the Civil Aeronautics Board and the Department, which required that United States interests control economic and competitive decisions of the airline, as well as safety and security decisions.
Congress has repeatedly refused the Department's requests to pass legislation to allow foreign interests to gain increased control of United States airlines by changing the statutory requirements that United States citizens must own 75 percent of the voting stock of United States airlines.
The Department now seeks to accomplish increased foreign control by other means.
On November 7, 2005, the Department issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (70 Fed.
67389) that proposes to change the Department's long-standing interpretation of ``actual control''.
Under the proposed rules, United States citizens would be required to control decisions of a United States airline concerning commitments to the Civil Reserve Air Fleet, transportation security, safety, and organizational documents.
However, United States citizens would not be required to control the airline's basic economic and competitive decisions, such as the cities to be served, the fares to be charged, the aircraft to be purchased, and the nature and size of the aircraft fleet.
The proposal to review long-standing policy and law through a new interpretation of ``actual control'' is contrary to the clear intent of Congress.
The proposed new interpretation would change long- standing policies and legal interpretations that ``actual control'' means control over all operations of the airline, not only decisions concerning security, safety, the Civil Reserve Air Fleet program, and organizational documents.
The Department's rulemaking is a major impairment of the policies and legal interpretation that Congress specifically required by statute in 2003, and that have been followed for over 60 years.
Any major change in the definition of ``actual control'' should only be accomplished through the legislative process and should not be unilaterally imposed by the executive branch.
The development of an equitable ``open skies'' agreement between the United states and Europe is central to opening up markets, including access to Heathrow if commercially viable slots and facilities are available there and key rights beyond Heathrow, and both entities will benefit by moving the world's 2 largest aviation markets closer together.
LIMITATION ON CERTAIN ACTIONS.
In General.--For a period of one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall not issue a decision on the notice of proposed rulemaking referred to in section 1(a)(5), issue any final rule, or make any fitness determination under section 41102 of title 49, United States Code, that would change the Department of Transportation's long-standing interpretation concerning what constitutes ``actual control'' of an airline for purposes of section 40102(a)(15) of such title.
The Secretary may not submit a final rule to the Congress under chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, before the date that is 180 days after the date on which the Secretary submits the report required by subsection (c).
Congressional Review.--Any final rule described in subsection (a) issued by the Secretary shall be treated as a major rule for purposes of chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that assesses the impact of the proposed rules referred to in section 1(a)(5).
At a minimum, the report shall include the following: (1) An assessment of the consequences of permitting greater participation of foreign interests in the direct operations of United States airlines, including the impact on national defense, competition between foreign and United States airlines, the growth of international air services performed by United States airlines and of the United States aviation industry manufacturers, and access of United States citizens, especially those living in rural communities, to aviation service.
If the Department interprets the proposed rules as allowing foreign owners of 25 percent or less of a United States airline's stock to gain control of the airline through supermajority voting requirements or other means, or as allowing agreements under which United States shareholders will vote their shares the same way as minority foreign shareholders, an analysis of the potential effects of such supermajority voting requirements or agreements on-- (A) national defense; (B) competition between foreign and United States airlines and aviation industry manufacturers; (C) access to domestic aviation services; and (D) whether such agreements would be consistent with the statutory requirement that permits an airline to qualify as a citizen of the United States only if at least 75 percent of the voting interest in the airline is owned or controlled by persons that are citizens of the United States.
An analysis of how the Department will ensure that United States citizens maintain control over matters having an impact on issues concerning Civil Reserve Air Fleet participation, safety, and security if foreign interests are allowed to exercise control over issues concerning a United States airline's day-to-day operations, market strategy, and fleet management.
An analysis of the portion of the proposed rules that provides that the new interpretation of ``actual control'' would apply only in cases in which a foreign country grants United States interests ``reciprocal access to investments in their carriers'', and an analysis of-- (A) how the Department can adopt an interpretation that will permit a definition of ``actual control'' to vary depending on policies followed by a foreign country; (B) how the Department would define ``reciprocal access''; (C) how the Department would determine that the home country of a foreign airline does not deny United States citizens reciprocal access to investments in its own airlines; and (D) whether, as part of ``reciprocal access'', the Department would require control by United States interests over economic decisions by a foreign airline.
An analysis of whether under the proposed rule the Federal Government will have adequate ability to review the source of foreign capital.
An analysis of the effects the proposed rules would have on the wages, working conditions, and job opportunities of United States airline employees, including job opportunities in international air transportation.
An analysis of whether under the proposed rules interested parties would be notified of and have an opportunity to comment on an application submitted to the Department under which a foreign interest could gain effective control of a United States airline.