This Act may be cited as the ``Internet Tax Fairness Act of 2001''.
PERMANENT EXTENSION OF INTERNET TAX FREEDOM ACT MORATORIUM.
Permanent Extension; Internet Access Taxes.--Section 1101 of the Internet Tax Freedom Act (47 United States Code 151 note) is amended-- (1) by striking ``taxes during the period beginning on October 1, 1998, and ending 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act--'' and inserting ``taxes after September 30, 1998:''; (2) by striking paragraph (1) of subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(1) Taxes on Internet access.
'', (3) by striking ``multiple'' in paragraph (2) of subsection (a) and inserting ``Multiple''; (4) by striking subsection (d); and (5) by redesignating subsections (e) and (f) as subsections (d) and (e), respectively.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1104(10) of the Internet Tax Freedom Act (47 United States Code 151 note) is amended by striking ``unless'' and all that follows through ``1998''.
JURISDICTIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE IMPOSITION OF STATE AND LOCAL BUSINESS ACTIVITY TAXES ON INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
Title I of the Act entitled ``An Act relating to the power of the States to impose net income taxes on income derived from interstate commerce, and authorizing studies by congressional committees of matters pertaining thereto'', approved on September 14, 1959 (Public Law 86-272; 15 United States Code 381 et sequentes), is amended to read as follows: ``TITLE I--JURISDICTIONAL STANDARDS ``SEC.
IMPOSITION OF STATE AND LOCAL BUSINESS ACTIVITY TAXES ON INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
In General.--No State or subdivision thereof shall have power to impose, for any taxable year ending after the date of enactment of this title, a business activity tax on any person relating to such person's activities that affect interstate commerce, unless such person has a substantial physical presence in such State or subdivision.
A substantial physical presence is not established if the only business activities within such State or subdivision by or on behalf of such person during such taxable year are any or all of the following: ``(1) The solicitation of orders or contracts by such person or such person's representative in such State or subdivision for sales of tangible or intangible personal property or services, which orders or contracts are approved or rejected outside the State, or subdivision and, if approved, are fulfilled by shipment or delivery of such property from a point outside the State or subdivision or by the performance of such services outside the State or subdivision.
The solicitation of orders or contracts by such person or such person's representative in such State or subdivision in the name of or for the benefit of a prospective customer of such person, if orders or contracts by such customer to such person to enable such customer to fill orders or contracts resulting from such solicitation are orders or contracts described in paragraph (1).
The presence or use of intangible personal property in such State or subdivision, including patents, copyrights, trademarks, logos, securities, contracts, licenses and permits issued by any governmental agency or authority authorizing the holder to conduct any business activity, money, deposits, loans, electronic or digital signals, and web pages, whether or not subject to licenses, franchises, or other agreements.
The use of the Internet to create or maintain a World Wide Web site accessible by persons in such State or subdivision.
The use of an Internet service provider, on-line service provider, internetwork communication service provider, or other Internet access service provider, or World Wide Web hosting services to maintain or take and process orders via a web page or site on a computer that is physically located in such State or subdivision.
The use of any service provider for transmission of communications, whether by cable, satellite, radio, telecommunications, or other similar system.
The leasing or owning of substantial property in such State or subdivision for less than 30 days.
Property in such State or subdivision for purposes of being assembled, manufactured, processed, or tested by a person or persons within such State or subdivision for the benefit of the owner or lessee, or used to furnish a service by a person or persons within such State or subdivision to the owner or lessee, shall be disregarded in determining whether such 30-day limit has been exceeded.
The assigning of employees, representatives, or agents in such State or subdivision for less than 30 days.
Presence of employees, representatives or agents for purposes directly relating to the purchasing goods or services, gathering news and covering events, meeting with government officials, attending conferences, seminars and similar functions, and participating in charitable activities shall be disregarded in determining whether such 30-day limit has been exceeded.
The affiliation with another person located in the State or subdivision, unless-- ``(A) the other person located in the State or subdivision is the person's agent under the terms and conditions of subsection (d); and ``(B) the activity of the other person in the State or subdivision constitutes substantial physical presence under this subsection and is performed to establish, enhance, or maintain the market in the State or subdivision for the person.
The use of an unaffiliated representative or independent contractor in such State or subdivision for the purpose of performing warranty or repair services with respect to tangible or intangible personal property sold by a person located outside the State or subdivision.
Domestic Corporations; Persons Domiciled in or Residents of a State.--The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to the imposition of a business activity tax by any State or subdivision thereof with respect to-- ``(1) any corporation which is incorporated under the laws of such State; or ``(2) any individual who, under the laws of such State, is domiciled in, or a resident of, such State.
Sales or Solicitation of Orders or Contracts for Sales by Independent Contractors.--For purposes of subsection (a), a person shall not be considered to have engaged in business activities within a State or subdivision thereof during any taxable year merely by reason of sales of tangible or intangible personal property or services in such State or subdivision, or the solicitation of orders or contracts for such sales in such State or subdivision, on behalf of such person by one or more independent contractors, or by reason of the maintenance of an office in such State or subdivision by one or more independent contractors whose activities on behalf of such person in such State or subdivision consist solely of making such sales, or soliciting orders or contracts for such sales.
Attribution of Activities and Presence.--For purposes of this section, the substantial physical presence of any person shall not be attributed to any other person absent the establishment of an actual agency relationship between such persons that-- ``(1) results from the consent by both persons that one person act on behalf and subject to the control of the other; and ``(2) relates to the activities of the person within the State or subdivision thereof.
Definitions.--For purposes of this title: ``(1) Business activity tax.--The term `business activity tax' means a tax imposed on, or measured by, net income, a business license tax, a business and occupation tax, a franchise tax, a single business tax or a capital stock tax, or any similar tax or fee imposed by a State or subdivision thereof on a business for the right to do business within the State or subdivision or which is measured by the amount of such business or related activity.
Independent contractor.--The term `independent contractor' means a commission agent, broker, or other independent contractor who is engaged in selling, or soliciting orders or contracts for the sale of, tangible or intangible personal property or services for more than one principal and who holds himself or herself out as such in the regular course of his or her business activities.
Internet.--The term `Internet' means collectively the myriad of computer and telecommunications facilities, including equipment and operating software, which comprise the interconnected world-wide network of networks that employ the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol, or any predecessor or successor protocols to such Protocol.
Internet access.--The term `Internet access' means a service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the Internet, and may also include access to proprietary content, information, and other services as a part of a package of services offered to users.
Representative.--The term `representative' does not include an independent contractor.
Solicitation of orders or contracts.--The term `solicitation of orders or contracts' includes activities normally ancillary to such solicitation.
State.--The term `State' means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, or any territory or possession of the United States.
World wide web.--The term `World Wide Web' means a computer server-based file archive accessible, over the Internet, using a hypertext transfer protocol, file transfer protocol, or other similar protocols.
Application of Section.--This section shall not be construed to limit, in any way, constitutional restrictions otherwise existing on State or local taxing authority.
ASSESSMENT OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY TAXES.
Limitations.--No State or subdivision thereof shall have power to assess after the date of enactment of this title any business activity tax which was imposed by such State or subdivision for any taxable year ending on or before such date, on or measured by the business activity within such State that affect interstate commerce, if the imposition of such tax for a taxable year ending after such date is prohibited by section 101.
Collections.--The provisions of subsection (a) shall not be construed-- ``(1) to invalidate the collection on or before the date of enactment of this title of any business activity tax imposed for a taxable year ending on or before such date; or ``(2) to prohibit the collection after such date of any business activity tax which was assessed on or before such date for a taxable year ending on or before such date.
TERMINATION OF SUBSTANTIAL PHYSICAL PRESENCE.
``If a State or subdivision thereof has imposed a business activity tax on a person as described in section 101, and the person so obligated no longer has a substantial physical presence in that State or subdivision, the obligation to pay a business activity tax applies only for the period in which the person has a substantial physical presence.
``If any provision of this title or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this title or the application of such provision to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby.