This Act may be cited as the ``Agricultural Bioterrorism Countermeasures Act of 2001''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the events of September 11, 2001, have heightened awareness of the threat of acts of bioterrorism, including attacks directed at the domestic food supply and underlying agriculture; (2) evidence of access to and rudimentary experiments with chemical and biological agents and the reported interest in the operation of cropdusting aircraft point to possible terrorist intent to use biological or chemical weapons; (3) an attack of agricultural bioterrorism would pose serious challenges such as-- (A) hazards to human health; (B) erosion of public confidence in the safety of the domestic food supply; and (C) damage to the economy; (4) it is important to develop short- and long-term strategies and supporting technology to more effectively and efficiently protect the domestic food supply from acts of bioterrorism; (5) a program of ongoing research and development is required to reduce the vulnerability of plant and animal agriculture and the food supply; and (6) it is critical to bring Federal, academic, and private sector capacities to bear on the threat of agricultural bioterrorism.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to strengthen the research and development capacity of the United States to respond to the threat of agricultural bioterrorism; (2) to promote the collaboration between the Federal, academic, and private sectors in addressing agricultural bioterrorism; and (3) to strengthen the capacity of regulatory agencies to prepare for, respond to, and mitigate the consequences of a bioterrorist attack.
In this Act, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
INTRAMURAL AGRICULTURAL BIOTERRORISM RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.
In General.--The Secretary shall expand Agricultural Research Service programs to protect the domestic food supply by-- (1) enhancing the capability to respond immediately to the needs of regulatory agencies involved in protecting the food supply; (2) cooperating with academic and private sector partners to maximize the impact of research and development; (3) strengthening linkages with the intelligence community to better identify research needs and evaluate acquired materials; (4) expanding the involvement of the Agricultural Research Service with international organizations dealing with plant and animal disease control; and (5) taking other appropriate measures.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $140,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
CONSORTIUM FOR COUNTERMEASURES AGAINST AGRICULTURAL BIOTERRORISM.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a Consortium for Countermeasures Against Agricultural Bioterrorism to help form stable long-term programs of research, development, and evaluation of options to enhance the biosecurity of United States agriculture.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Consortium shall be comprised of institutions of higher education positioned to partner with Federal agencies to address agricultural bioterrorism.
Designation.--The Secretary shall designate for membership in the Consortium-- (A) 3 institutions of higher education that are national centers for countermeasures against agricultural bioterrorism; and (B) not more than 7 additional institutions of higher education with existing programs relating to agricultural bioterrorism.
National centers.--The national centers shall be selected using the following criteria: (A) Co-location of Department of Agriculture laboratories or training centers on member campuses.
Demonstrated expertise in the area of plant and animal diseases.
Strong linkages with animal and plant diagnostic laboratories.
Close coordination with State cooperative extension programs that work in cooperation with industry, farm and commodity organizations, and regulatory agencies.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
AGRICULTURAL BIOTERRORISM COMPETITIVE RESEARCH GRANTS.
In General.--The Secretary shall enhance the National Research Initiative of the Competitive Grants Program of the Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service by awarding grants focused on the science and technology needed to protect against and deal with acts of bioterrorism directed at the domestic food supply and agriculture.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
EXPANSION OF ANIMAL AND PLANT HEALTH INSPECTION SERVICE ACTIVITIES.
In General.--The Secretary shall enhance and expand the capacity of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service by-- (1) increasing inspection capacity at international points of origin; (2) improving surveillance at ports of entry and customs; (3) enhancing methods of protecting against introduction of plant and animal disease organisms by terrorists; (4) adopting new strategies and technology for dealing with outbreaks of plant and animal disease arising from acts of terrorism or from unintentional introduction, including-- (A) establishing cooperative agreements among Veterinary Services of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, State animal health commissions and regulatory agencies for livestock and poultry health, and private veterinary practitioners to enhance the preparedness and ability of Veterinary Services and the commissions and agencies to respond to outbreaks of such animal diseases; and (B) strengthen the planning and coordination with State and local agencies, including-- (i) State animal health commissions and regulatory agencies for livestock and poultry health; and (ii) State agriculture departments; and (5) strengthening the planning and coordination with relevant State and local agencies, including-- (A) State animal health commissions and regulatory agencies for livestock and poultry health; and (B) State agriculture departments; and (6) taking other appropriate measures.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $140,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
EXPANSION OF FOOD SAFETY INSPECTION SERVICE ACTIVITIES.
In General.--The Secretary shall enhance and expand the capacity of the Food Safety Inspection Service by-- (1) enhancing the ability to inspect and ensure the safety and wholesomeness of meat and poultry products; (2) developing new methods for rapid detection and identification of diseases and other hazardous agents; (3) applying new technologies to improve ante mortem and post mortem inspection procedures; (4) improving the capacity to inspect international meat and poultry products at points of origin and at ports of entry; and (5) strengthening collaboration among agencies within the Department of Agriculture and in other parts of Federal and State government through the sharing of information and technology.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $140,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007.