This Act may be cited as the ``Partial Hospitalization Services Integrity Act of 1999''.
LIMITATION ON LOCATION OF PROVISION OF SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1861(ff)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ff)(2)) is amended in the matter following subparagraph (I)-- (1) by striking ``and furnished'' and inserting ``furnished''; and (2) by inserting before the period the following: ``, and furnished other than in a skilled nursing facility, residential treatment facility or other residential setting (as determined by the Secretary)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) apply with respect to partial hospitalization services furnished on or after the first day of the third month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
QUALIFICATIONS FOR COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH CENTERS.
In General.--Section 1861(ff)(3)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ff)(3)(B)) is amended by striking ``entity'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``entity that-- ``(i)(I) provides the mental health services described in section 1913(c)(1) of the Public Health Service Act; or ``(II) in the case of an entity operating in a State that by law precludes the entity from providing a service described in such section itself, provides for such service by contract with an approved organization or entity (as determined by the Secretary); ``(ii) meets applicable licensing or certification requirements for community mental health centers in the State in which it is located; and ``(iii) meets such additional conditions as the Secretary shall specify to ensure (I) the health and safety of individuals being furnished such services, (II) the effective and efficient furnishing of such services, and (III) the compliance of such entity with the criteria described in such section.''.
Clarification of Criteria for Community Mental Health Centers.--Section 1913(c)(1)(E) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300x-3(c)(1)(E)) is amended to read as follows: ``(E) Determining the clinical appropriateness of admissions to any inpatient psychiatric hospitals by engaging a full-time mental health professional who is licensed or certified to make such a determination by the State involved.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply with respect to community mental health centers furnishing services under the medicare program on or after the first day of the third month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
GUIDELINES FOR ITEMS AND SERVICES COMPRISING PARTIAL HOSPITALIZATION SERVICES.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall first adopt national coverage and administrative policies for partial hospitalization services furnished under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, using a negotiated rulemaking process under subchapter III of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
REFINEMENT OF PERIODICITY OF REVIEW OF PLAN FOR PARTIAL HOSPITALIZATION SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1835(a)(2)(F)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395n(a)(2)(F)(ii)) is amended by inserting ``at a reasonable rate (as determined by the Secretary)'' after ``is reviewed periodically''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies with respect to plans for furnishing partial hospitalization services established on or after the first day of the third month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
RECERTIFICATION OF PROVIDERS OF PARTIAL HOSPITALIZATION SERVICES.
In General.--With respect to each community mental health center that furnishes partial hospitalization services for which payment is made under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for periodic recertification to ensure that the provision of such services complies with applicable requirements of such title.
Deadline for First Recertification.--The first recertification under subsection (a) shall be completed not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
CIVIL MONETARY PENALTIES FOR FALSE CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR HOSPICE CARE OR PARTIAL HOSPITALIZATION SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1128A(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7a(b)(3)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by inserting ``, hospice care, or partial hospitalization services'' after ``home health services''; and (2) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, section 1814(a)(7) in the case of hospice care, or section 1835(a)(2)(F) in the case of partial hospitalization services'' after ``in the case of home health services''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) apply with respect to certifications of eligibility for hospice care or partial hospitalization services under the medicare program made on or after the first day of the third month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
DEMONSTRATION FOR COST EFFECTIVE WRAP AROUND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall implement a demonstration project (in this section referred to as the ``project'') under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act under which community mental health centers may offer wrap around mental health services (as defined in paragraph (2)(A)) for purposes of providing for a full continuum of ambulatory behavioral health care services.
Definitions.-- (A) Wrap around mental health services defined.-- The term ``wrap around mental health services'' means comprehensive outpatient mental health services furnished to an individual pursuant to an individualized treatment plan developed by a mental health professional, in consultation with the family of the individual (if available).
Such services are furnished to the individual through a comprehensive, multidisciplinary health and social services delivery system that provides coordinated therapeutic interventions, including medical services, psychotherapy services, occupational therapy services, and social work services.
Licensed mental health professional.--The term ``mental health professional'' means any of the following individuals who are licensed by the State in which the individual furnishes services (as that term is defined in paragraphs (1), (2)(M), and (2)(N) of section 1861(s) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s))) to design and execute treatment plans described in subparagraph (A) without the supervision of another health care practitioner: (i) A physician, as defined in section 1861(r)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(r)(1)).
A clinical psychologist, as defined by the Secretary pursuant to section 1861(ii) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ii)).
A clinical social worker, as defined in section 1861(hh) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(hh)).
Selection of Centers.--For purposes of implementing such project, the Secretary shall select for participation in the project community mental health centers that serve populations in three different States, one of which predominantly serves rural populations.
Capitated Payment.--The Secretary shall establish and make prospective monthly payments of a capitation amount for individuals receiving wrap around mental health services under this project.
Evaluation and Report.-- (1) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall evaluate the project.
Such evaluation shall include an examination of-- (A) the project's effect on the health, well-being, condition, and functional level of beneficiaries receiving wrap around mental health services; (B) any savings to the medicare program by reason of capitated payments for wrap around medical services consisting of partial hospitalization services (as that term is defined in section 1861(ff) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ff)); (C) the impact of basing payment for such services on a capitated basis; and (D) the project's effect on utilization of inpatient services (including inpatient mental health services) and associated costs.
Report.--Not later than four years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report containing a statement of the findings and conclusions of the Secretary pursuant to the evaluation conducted under paragraph (1), together with any recommendations for legislation the Secretary considers appropriate with respect to-- (A) the provision of additional mental health services by community mental health centers under partial hospitalization services; and (B) payment for such services on a capitated basis.
Duration.--The project shall be conducted for a three year period.
Funding.--The Secretary shall provide for the transfer from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, established under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i), of such funds as are necessary for the costs of carrying out the demonstration project under this section.