LIMITATION OF FOREIGN TRAVEL BY CERTAIN POLITICAL APPOINTEES DURING POST PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION PERIOD.
In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
Limitation of travel of political appointees during certain post Presidential election periods ``(a) For purposes of this section the term-- ``(1) `political appointee' means any individual who serves-- ``(A) in a Senior Executive Service position and is not a career appointee as defined under section 3132(a)(4); ``(B) in a position under the Executive Schedule pursuant to subchapter II of chapter 53; or ``(C) in a position of a confidential or policy- determining character under schedule C of subpart C of part 213 of title 5 of the Code of Federal Regulations; and ``(2) `post Presidential election period' means any period beginning on the date immediately following the date of the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November on which the general election of the President occurs, and ending on the January 20 following such an election.
Subject to the provisions of subsection (c), travel by a political appointee may not be paid for under the provisions of this subchapter or any other provision of law, if such travel-- ``(1) is outside of the United States; and ``(2) occurs during a post Presidential election period after which the incumbent President shall not return for another term of office as President.
(1) The provisions of subsection (b) shall not apply to travel by the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the United States Trade Representative, or political appointees who are accompanying these individuals on affected travel.
The President may waive the provisions of subsection (b) with regard to any travel if the President makes a written determination that such travel-- ``(A) cannot reasonably be postponed until after the post Presidential election period; and ``(B) is essential to protect or promote vital national interests.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--The table of sections for chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5709 the following: ``5710.
Limitation of travel of political appointees during certain post Presidential election periods.''.
LIMITATION OF FOREIGN TRAVEL BY CERTAIN MEMBERS OF CONGRESS DURING ELECTION PERIODS.
Limitation.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no funds may be expended for travel by a Member of Congress if such travel-- (A) is outside of the United States; and (B) occurs after the date that is 180 days prior to the end of the term of service or date of retirement of the Member of Congress.
Date of retirement.--For purposes of this subsection, the date of retirement is the date on which the Member is to retire as a Member of Congress, pursuant to a public announcement by or on behalf of the Member.
Waiver.-- (1) In general.--The Speaker of the House of Representatives, with respect to Members of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate, with respect to Members of the Senate, may waive the prohibition on travel under this section if the travel is determined to be in the interest of the House of Representatives or the Senate, respectively, and the United States.
Statement.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B) and if a waiver is granted under this subsection, a statement of the waiver shall be printed in the Congressional Record as soon as practicable and shall include a detailed description of the travel involved, the purpose of travel, and an estimate of the costs of the travel.
Exception.--If the Speaker of the House of Representatives or the President pro tempore of the Senate determines that publication of such a statement would jeopardize national security, or otherwise compromise vital national interests, no statement is required.
Definition.--For purposes of this section the term ``Member of Congress'' includes any Delegate or Resident Commissioner to the Congress.