This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Preventive Health Care Act of 1996''.
REQUIRING COVERAGE OF SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY AND PAP SMEARS UNDER HEALTH PLANS.
In General.--Every policy or contract that provides health insurance coverage (as defined in subsection (h)(1)) and every group health plan (as defined in subsection (h)(2)) shall include (consistent with this section)-- (1) coverage for screening pap smears, and (2) coverage for low-dose screening mammography.
Definitions Relating to Coverage.--In this section: (1) Low-dose screening mammography.--The term ``low-dose screening mammography'' means a radiologic procedure for the early detection of breast cancer provided to an asymptomatic women using equipment dedicated specifically for mammography and at a facility which meets mammography accreditation standards established by the Secretary for coverage of screening mammography under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
Such term also includes a physician's interpretation of the results of the procedure.
Screening pap smear.--The term ``screening pap smear'' means a diagnostic laboratory test consisting of a routine exfoliative cytology test (Papanicolaou test) provided to a woman for the purpose of early detection of cervical cancer and includes the examination, the laboratory test itself, and a physician's interpretation of the results of the test.
If the Secretary establishes qualify standards for facilities furnishing screening pap smears, such term shall only include a test if the test is performed in a facility that has been determined to meet such standards.
Restrictions on Cost-Sharing.--The coverage under this section shall not provide for the application of deductibles, coinsurance, or other limitations for low-dose screening mammography or screening pap smears that are greater than the deductibles, coinsurance, and limitations that are applied to similar services under the health insurance coverage or group health plan.
Frequency of Coverage of Screening Mammography.-- (1) In general.--Coverage of low-dose screening mammography is consistent with this section only if it is provided consistent with the following periodicity schedule: (A) Coverage is made available for one baseline low-dose screening mammography for any woman between 35 and 40 years of age.
Coverage is made available for such mammography on an annual basis to any woman who is 50 years or age or older or who is determined by a physician to be at- risk of breast cancer (as defined in paragraph (2)).
Coverage is made available for such mammography for a woman at least once every other year.
At-risk of breast cancer.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), a woman is considered to be ``at-risk of breast cancer'' if any of the following is true: (A) The woman has a personal history of breast cancer.
The woman has a personal history of biopsy- proven benign breast disease.
The woman's mother, sister, or daughter has or has had breast cancer.
The woman has not given birth prior to the age of 30.
Frequency of Coverage of Screening Pap Smears.--Coverage of screening pap smears is consistent with this section only if it is provided not more often than once every year (or more frequently if recommended by a physician).
Enforcement.-- (1) Regulated insurers.--It is the responsibility of State regulators what regulate insurers that offer health insurance coverage in a State to apply the requirements of this section to such insurers and coverage.
If the Secretary determines that such regulators do not have the intent or means of enforcing such requirements with respect to such insurers in a State, the Secretary may provide such remedies (which may include civil money penalties) as may be necessary to assure compliance with the requirements of this section in such State.
Group health plans.--The requirements of this section are deemed, in relation to group health plans offered as employee welfare benefit plans under title I of Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, to be provisions of such title, for purposes of applying the enforcement related provisions of such title.
Other plans.--In the case of health coverage not described in paragraph (1) or (2), the Secretary shall develop such non-criminal enforcement mechanisms as may be necessary and appropriate to carry out this section in relation to entities offering such coverage.
Relation to State Law.--The provisions of this section do not preempt State law to the extent such State law provides greater protection to women in relation to the benefits provided under this section.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Health insurance coverage.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term ``health insurance coverage'' means benefits consisting of medical care (provided directly, through insurance or reimbursement, or otherwise) under any hospital or medical service policy or certificate, hospital or medical service plan contract, or health maintenance organization group contract offered by an insurer or a health maintenance organization.
Exception.--Such term does not include coverage under any separate policy, certificate, or contract only for one or more of any of the following: (i) Coverage for accident, credit-only, vision, disability income, long-term care, nursing home care, community-based care dental, on-site medical clinics, or employee assistance programs, or any combination thereof.
Medicare supplemental health insurance (within the meaning of section 1882(g)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ss(g)(1))) and similar supplemental coverage provided under a group health plan.
Coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance.
Liability insurance, including general liability insurance and automobile liability insurance.
Workers' compensation or similar insurance.
Coverage for a specified disease or illness.
Hospital or fixed indemnity insurance.
Short-term limited duration insurance.
Such other coverage, comparable to that described in previous clauses, as may be specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Group health plan.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the term ``group health plan'' means an employee welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) to the extent that the plan provides medical care (as defined in paragraph (5)) to employees or their dependents (as defined under the terms of the plan) directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise, and includes a group health plan (within the meaning of section 5000(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986).
Exclusion of plans with limited coverage.--An employee welfare benefit plan shall be treated as a group health plan under this section only with respect to medical care which is provided under the plan and which does not consist of coverage excluded from the definition of health insurance coverage under paragraph (1)(B).
Health maintenance organization.--The term ``health maintenance organization'' means-- (A) a Federally qualified health maintenance organization (as defined in section 1301(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300e(a))), (B) an organization recognized under State law as a health maintenance organization, or (C) a similar organization regulated under State law for solvency in the same manner and to the same extent as such a health maintenance organization, if it is subject to State law which regulates insurance (within the meaning of section 514(b)(2) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974).
Insurer.--The term ``insurer'' means an insurance company, insurance service, or insurance organization which is licensed to engage in the business of insurance in a State and which is subject to State law which regulates insurance (within the meaning of section 514(b)(2)(A) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974).
Medical care.--The term ``medical care'' means-- (A) amounts paid for, or items or services in the form of, the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, or amounts paid for, or items or services provided for, the purpose of affecting any structure or function of the body, (B) amounts paid for, or services in the form of, transportation primarily for and essential to medical care referred to in subparagraph (A), and (C) amounts paid for insurance covering medical care referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, and American Samoa.
Effective Date.--This section shall apply to health insurance coverage that is issued, renewed, or amended on or after January 1, 1997, and to group health plans for plan years beginning on or after such date.