Whenever in this Act a section or other provision is amended, such amendment shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858 et sequentes).
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Two-thirds of mothers with children under 6 years of age are in the workforce.
More than 10 percent of children under the age of 6 have a disability; children living in low-income communities have a higher incidence of disability.
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act requires early intervention services to be provided to infants and toddlers with disabilities in a natural environment, typically the child's home or a child care setting.
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act requires special education preschool services to be delivered in the least restrictive environment, with a preschooler's nondisabled peers.
The General Accounting Office reports that the ``supply of infant care, care for special needs children, and care during nonstandard hours has been more limited than the overall supply''.
There is even less care for those children who live in low-income communities.
Children with disabilities or special health care needs are barred from many child care programs due to myth, stereotype, and fear about disability and because staff lack sufficient training to meet the needs of such children.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to increase the supply of quality child care for children with disabilities.
Section 658E(c) (42 United States Code 9858c(c)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(H)-- (A) by striking ``, and families'' and inserting ``, families''; and (B) by inserting before the final period ``, and families that have children with disabilities''; and (2) in paragraph (3)(B)-- (A) by striking ``size) and to'' and inserting ``size), to''; and (B) by inserting before the final period ``, and to children with disabilities''.
ACTIVITIES TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF CHILD CARE.
Section 658G (42 United States Code 9858e) is amended-- (1) by striking ``A State'' and inserting ``(a) In General.--A State''; (2) by amending subsection (a) (as so designated by paragraph (1) of this section) by adding at the end the following: ``Such activities may include activities listed in subsection (b).
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(b) Activities for Children With Disabilities.-- ``(1) Use of funds.--A State that receives funds to carry out this subchapter for a fiscal year after fiscal year 2001, shall use not less than 5 percent of the total amount of such funds for one or more of the activities described in paragraph (2) that are designed to increase the availability of quality child care for children with disabilities.
Eligible activities.--Activities referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: ``(A) Training and technical assistance.--Ongoing comprehensive system of training and technical assistance for the following: ``(i) Training for child care providers, State licensing agencies responsible for licensing child care providers, and parents on how to collaborate with each other to help ensure appropriate implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
Technical assistance to assist family home and center child care providers to enable them to appropriately and better include children with disabilities alongside children without disabilities in child care settings.
Training for child care directors and staff on the use of assistive technology for children with special needs and children with disabilities.
Training to develop leadership skills for directors of child care facilities to operate inclusive child care programs, including leadership skills in financial development, program development, parent education, and community development.
Assistance to State and local child care resource and referral agencies on compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
Recruitment and retention of staff.--Grants for recruitment and retention of qualified staff though the following: ``(i) Grants for scholarships for child care staff who work with children with and without disabilities to obtain associate, bachelor's, or master's degrees or other training in child development.
Grants to increase salaries of child care staff who obtain associate, bachelors, or masters degrees or other training in fields of child development.
Grants to retain qualified child care providers in the child care field.
Grants and Loans for Certain Child Care Programs.--To the extent provided for in advance by Acts of appropriation, the Secretary shall make grants and low-interest loans to public agencies and nonprofit organizations (including State and local governments and community-based organizations) for projects that increase the availability of 1 or more of the following: ``(1) Inclusive child care programs.
Child care for infants.
Child care during evenings and weekends.''.
Section 658K(a)(1)(B)(iii) (42 United States Code 9858i(a)(1)(B)(iii)) is amended by striking ``and age'' and inserting ``age, and disability status''.
Section 658P (42 United States Code 9858n) is amended-- (1) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) Child with a disability.--The term `child with a disability' has the meaning given that term and the meaning given the term `infant or toddler with a disability' in section 602 and section 632 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1401).
''; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraph: ``(10) Inclusive child care program.--The term `inclusive child care program' means a child care program that serves children with disabilities and children without disabilities together in a setting where not more than 50 percent of the children enrolled are children with disabilities.