This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on the Future for America's Veterans Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on the Future for America's Veterans (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members appointed in accordance with paragraph (2) and 3 ex officio members designated in paragraph (3).
Appointed members.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed as follows: (A) The Speaker of the House of Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate, acting jointly, in consultation with the chairman of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the chairman of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives, shall appoint four members.
Eight members shall be appointed from among individuals who are not full-time officers or employees of the United States as follows: (i) The chairman of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the ranking member of that committee shall each appoint one member.
The chairman of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and the ranking member of that committee shall each appoint one member.
The chairman of the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate and the ranking member of that committee shall each appoint one member.
The chairman of the Committee on National Security of the House of Representatives and the ranking member of that committee shall each appoint one member.
Members appointed under this paragraph shall have appropriate experience and expertise on veterans, organizational, and management matters, as well as on health care services available to veterans provided by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and to the maximum extent practicable, shall be veterans.
Ex officio members.--The following shall serve as members of the Commission: (A) The Under Secretary for Health of the Department of Veterans Affairs, or the Under Secretary's designee.
The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs of the Department of Defense, or the Assistant Secretary's designee.
The Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation of the Department of Health and Human Services, or the Assistant Secretary's designee.
Designation of the Chairman.--The Speaker of the House of Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate, acting jointly, in consultation with the chairman of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the chairman of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives shall, from the members appointed under subsection (a)(1), designate the chairman of the Commission.
Time for Appointment, Designation.--The members of the Commission shall be appointed and the chairman of the Commission shall be designated not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.-- (1) Period.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairman of the Commission.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Majority Vote.--The Commission may not submit a legislative proposal or make a recommendation or report to Congress unless the proposal, recommendation or report is approved by a majority of the members of the Commission present and voting, a quorum being present.
Authority of Individuals To Act for Commission.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take under this Act.
Study.--The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive study of health care services provided by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Matters Studied.--The matters studied by the Commission shall include-- (1) legislative proposals to improve delivery of health care to veterans, including H.R.
1767 of the 104th Congress, H.R.
3117 of the 104th Congress, H.R.
3119 of the 104th Congress, and the G.I.
Bill of Health (H.R.
3950 of the 104th Congress); (2) alternative means for delivery of health care to a veteran (such as managed care); and (3) eligibility reform.
Demonstration Project Bill.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to Congress a legislative proposal in the form of a draft bill (hereinafter in this Act referred to as a ``demonstration project bill'').
Content of bill.-- (A) Authority of secretary.--A demonstration project bill shall authorize the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to implement temporary demonstration projects to improve health care services under the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Implementation at medical centers.--A demonstration project bill shall provide that the temporary demonstration projects be implemented at no fewer than 20 and no greater than 40 Department of Veterans Affairs medical centers specified in the demonstration project bill.
Selection of centers.--In selecting the centers under subparagraph (B), the chairman, in consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall assure a diversity of centers according to geographic areas, demographic characteristics of, and specialized medical services provided by individual centers.
Termination.--A demonstration project bill shall provide that the temporary demonstration projects terminate not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of the Act providing for such temporary demonstration projects.
Evaluation of Projects; Audit.--The Commission shall monitor and evaluate the temporary demonstration projects and shall arrange for audits of such projects.
Report.--Not later than 15 months after the date of the enactment of the Act providing for the temporary demonstration projects under subsection (c), the chairman of the Commission shall submit to Congress a report which contains a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission with respect to the temporary demonstration projects, together with recommendations for such legislation and administrative action as the Commission considers appropriate.
Procedure in the House of Representatives.-- (1) Introduction of demonstration project bill.--A qualified demonstration project bill is one that is introduced by the majority leader of the House of Representatives for himself and the minority leader of the House of Representatives, or by Members designated jointly by the majority leader and the minority leader of the House of Representatives, not later than the close of the 15th day after the date on which such bill is submitted to the House of Representatives under section 4(c).
Committee consideration.--If a committee to which a qualified demonstration project bill has been referred has not reported such bill at the close of the 10th day after the date of the bill's introduction, such committee shall be automatically discharged from further consideration of the bill, and the bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
Computation of days.--For purposes of this subsection, in computing the number of days, there shall be excluded any day on which the House of Representatives is not in session.
Procedure in the Senate.-- (c) Rules of the House of Representatives and Senate.--This section is enacted by the Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such it shall be considered as part of the rules of each House, respectively, or of that House to which it specifically applies, and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to such House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The chairman of the Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the Federal Government such information as the chairman of the Commission considers necessary to carry out the duties under this Act.
Upon request of the chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information expeditiously to the Commission.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies or services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Miscellaneous Administrative Support.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall, upon the request of the chairman of the Commission, furnish the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, such administrative and support services as the Commission may require.
Compensation of Members.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in performing the duties of the Commission.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel.--Members and personnel of the Commission may travel on military aircraft, military vehicles, or other military conveyances when travel is necessary in the performance of a duty of the Commission except when the cost of commercial transportation is less expensive.
Staff.-- (1) Appointment.--The chairman of the Commission may appoint, without regard to civil service laws and regulations, an executive director and such additional personnel as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
Preference to veterans.-- (A) Executive director.--The executive director of the Commission shall be a veteran.
Additional personnel.--In appointing additional personnel to the Commission, the chairman shall give preference to veterans.
Compensation of staff.--The chairman of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and additional personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and additional personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Upon request of the chairman of the Commission, the head of any department or agency of the Federal Government may detail, on a nonreimbursable basis, any personnel of the department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Of the amounts appropriated for the Department of Veterans Affairs for fiscal year 1997 or subsequent fiscal years, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall make available to the Commission such amounts as the chairman of the Commission certifies to the Secretary as necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of the termination of the temporary demonstration projects under section 4(c).